                        
                                 The Homecoming
                                      1946

     "Here they come," said Cecy, lying there flat in her bed.
     "Where are they?" cried Timothy from the doorway.
     "Some  of  them  are  over  Europe,  some  over Asia, some of them over the
Islands,  some over South America!" said Cecy, her eyes closed, the lashes long,
brown, and quivering.
     Timothy came forward upon the bare plankings of the upstairs room. "Who are
they?"
     "Uncle  Einar  and  Uncle Fry, and there's Cousin William, and I see Frulda
and  Helgar and Aunt Morgiana and Cousin Vivian, and I see Uncle Johann! They're
all coming fast!"
     "Are  they  up  in  the sky?" cried Timothy, his little gray eyes flashing.
Standing  by  the  bed, he looked no more than his fourteen years. The wind blew
outside, the house was dark and lit only by starlight.
     "They're  coming  through  the  air and traveling along the ground, in many
forms,"  said  Cecy,  in  her sleeping. She did not move on the bed; she thought
inward  on  herself and told what she saw. "I see a wolflike thing coming over a
dark  river - at the shallows - just above a waterfall, the starlight shining up
his  pelt.  I  see a brown oak leaf blowing far up in the sky. I see a small bat
flying.  I  see many other things, running through the forest trees and slipping
through the highest branches; and they're _all_ coming this way!"
     "Will they be here by tomorrow night?" Timothy clutched the bedclothes. The
spider  on  his  lapel swung like a black pendulum, excitedly dancing. He leaned
over his sister. "Will they all be here in time for the Homecoming?"
     "Yes,  yes,  Timothy, yes," sighed Cecy. She stiffened. "Ask no more of me.
Go away now. Let me travel in the places I like best."
     "Thanks,  Cecy," he said. Out in the hall, he ran to his room. He hurriedly
made  his  bed.  He  had  just awakened a few minutes ago, at sunset, and as the
first  stars  had  risen,  he had gone to let his excitement about the party run
with  Cecy. Now she slept so quietly there was not a sound. The spider hung on a
silvery  lasso  about Timothy's slender neck as he washed his face. "Just think,
Spid, tomorrow night is Allhallows Eve!"
     He  lifted  his  face  and  looked into the mirror. His was the only mirror
allowed in the house. It was his mother's concession to his illness. Oh, if only
he  were  not  so  afflicted! He opened his mouth, surveyed the poor, inadequate
teeth  nature had given him. No more than so many corn kernels - round, soft and
pale in his jaws. Some of the high spirit died in him.
     It  was  now totally dark and he lit a candle to see by. He felt exhausted.
This  past  week  the  whole family had lived in the fashion of the old country.
Sleeping  by day, rousing at sunset to move about. There were blue hollows under
his  eyes.  "Spid,  I'm  no  good," he said, quietly, to the little creature. "I
can't even get used to sleeping days like the others."
     He  took  up the candleholder. Oh, to have strong teeth, with incisors like
steel spikes. Or strong hands, even, or a strong mind. Even to have the power to
send  one's  mind out, free, as Cecy did. But, no, he was the imperfect one, the
sick  one.  He was even - he shivered and drew the candle flame closer afraid of
the dark. His brothers snorted at him. Bion and Leonard and Sam. They laughed at
him  because  he slept in a bed. With Cecy it was different; her bed was part of
her  comfort  for  the  composure necessary to send her mind abroad to hunt. But
Timothy,  did  he sleep in the wonderful polished boxes like the others'? He did
not!  Mother  let  him have his own bed, his own room, his own mirror. No wonder
the  family  skirted  him  like  a  holy man's crucifix. If only the wings would
sprout  from  his  shoulder  blades. He bared his back, stared at it. And sighed
again. No chance. Never.

     
     Downstairs  were exciting and mysterious sounds, the slithering black crape
going  up in all the halls and on the ceilings and doors. The sputter of burning
black  tapers  in  the  banistered  stair  well.  Mother's voice, high and firm.
Father's  voice, echoing from the damp cellar. Bion walking from outside the old
country house lugging vast two-gallon jugs.
     "I've  just got to go to the party, Spid," said Timothy. The spider whirled
at  the  end  of  its silk, and Timothy felt alone. He would polish cases, fetch
toadstools  and spiders, hang crape, but when the party started he'd be ignored.
The less seen or said of the imperfect son the better.
     All through the house below, Laura ran.
     "The  Homecoming!"  she  shouted  gaily.  "The  Homecoming!"  Her footsteps
everywhere at once.
     Timothy  passed  Cecy's  room  again,  and she was sleeping quietly. Once a
month  she went belowstairs. Always she stayed in bed. Lovely Cecy. He felt like
asking  her, "Where are you now, Cecy? And in who? And what's happening? Are you
beyond  the  hills?  And  what  goes  on  there?" But he went on to Ellen's room
instead.
     Ellen  sat at her desk, sorting out many kinds of blond, red and black hair
and  little  scimitars  of  fingernail  gathered  from her manicurist job at the
Mellin  Village  beauty parlor fifteen miles over. A sturdy mahogany case lay in
one corner with her name on it.
     "Go  away,"  she  said,  not  even  looking  at him. "I can't work with you
gawking."
     "Allhallows Eve, Ellen; just think!" he said, trying to be friendly.
     "Hunh!"  She  put  some fingernail clippings in a small white sack, labeled
them. "What can it mean to you? What do you know of it? It'll scare the hell out
of you. Go back to bed."
     His cheeks burned. "I'm needed to polish and work and help serve."
     "If  you  don't  go, you'll find a dozen raw oysters in your bed tomorrow,"
said Ellen, matter-of-factly. "Good-by, Timothy."
     In his anger, rushing downstairs, he bumped into Laura.
     "Watch where you're going!" she shrieked from clenched teeth.
     She  swept  away.  He  ran  to the open cellar door, smelled the channel of
moist earthy air rising from below. "Father?"
     "It's  about time," Father shouted up the steps. "Hurry down, or they'll be
here before we're ready!"
     Timothy  hesitated only long enough to hear the million other sounds in the
house.  Brothers came and went like trains in a station, talking and arguing. If
you  stood  in  one spot long enough the entire household passed with their pale
hands  full  of  things. Leonard with his little black medical case, Samuel with
his  large,  dusty ebony-bound book under his arm, bearing more black crape, and
Bion  excursioning  to  the  car  outside  and  bringing in many more gallons of
liquid.
     Father  stopped polishing to give Timothy a rag and a scowl. He thumped the
huge  mahogany  box.  "Come on, shine this up, so we can start on another. Sleep
your life away."
     While waxing the surface. Timothy looked inside.
     "Uncle Einar's a big man, isn't he, Papa?"
     "Unh."
     "How big is he?"
     "The size of the box'll tell you."
     "I was only asking. Seven feet tall?"
     "You talk a lot."
     About nine o'clock Timothy went out into the October weather. For two hours
in  the  now-warm, now-cold wind he walked the meadows collecting toadstools and
spiders. His heart began to beat with anticipation again. How many relatives had
Mother said would come? Seventy? One hundred? He passed a farmhouse. If only you
knew what was happening at our house, he said to the glowing windows. He climbed
a  hill  and  looked  at the town, miles away, settling into sleep, the townhall
clock  high  and  round white in the distance. The town did not know, either. He
brought home many jars of toadstools and spiders.
     In  the  little  chapel belowstairs a brief ceremony was celebrated. It was
like  all the other rituals over the years, with Father chanting the dark lines,
mother's  beautiful  white  ivory hands moving in the reverse blessings, and all
the  children  gathered  except  Cecy,  who  lay  upstairs  in bed. But Cecy was
present. You saw her peering, .now from Bion's eyes, now Samuel's, now Mother's,
and you felt a movement and now she was in you, fleetingly and gone.
     Timothy  prayed  to the Dark One with a tightened stomach. "Please, please,
help  me  grow  up,  help  me  be  like my sisters and brothers. Don't let me be
different.  If only I could put the hair in the plastic images as Ellen does, or
make  people  fall  in  love  with me as Laura does with people, or read strange
books  as Sam does, or work in a respected job like Leonard and Bion do. Or even
raise a family one day, as mother and father have done...."
     At  midnight  a  storm  hammered  the  house.  Lightning  struck outside in
amazing, snow-white bolts. There was a sound of an approaching, probing, sucking
tornado,  funneling  and  nuzzling  the  moist night earth. Then the front door,
blasted  half off its hinges, hung stiff and discarded, and in trooped Grandmama
and Grandpapa, all the way from the old country!
     From  then  on  people  arrived  each hour. There was a flutter at the side
window,  a  rap  on  the front porch, a knock at the back. There were fey noises
from  the  cellar,  autumn  wind piped down the chimney throat, chanting. Mother
filled  the  large  crystal punch bowl with a scarlet fluid poured tram the jugs
Bion  had  carried  home.  Father  swept from room to room lighting more tapers.
Laura  and  Ellen hammered up more wolfsbane. And Timothy stood amidst this wild
excitement,  no expression to his face, his hands trembling at his sides, gazing
now  here,  now  there. Banging or doors, laughter, the sound of liquid pouring,
darkness,  sound  or wind, the webbed thunder of wings, the padding of feet, the
welcoming  bursts  of  talk  at  the  entrances,  the  transparent  rattlings of
casements, the shadows passing, coming, going, wavering.
     "Well, well, and _this_ must be Timothy!"
     "What?"
     A  chilly  hand  took  his hand. A long hairy face leaned down over him. "A
good lad, a fine lad," said the stranger.
     "Timothy," said his mother. "This is Uncle Jason."
     "Hello, Uncle Jason."
     "And  over here -" Mother drifted Uncle Jason away. Uncle Jason peered back
at Timothy over his caped shoulder, and winked.
     Timothy stood alone.
     From  off a thousand miles in the candled darkness, he heard a high fluting
voice,  that was Ellen. "And my brothers, they _are_ clever. Can you guess their
occupations, Aunt Morgiana?"
     "I have no idea."
     "They operate the undertaking establishment in town."
     "What!" A gasp.
     "Yes!" Shrill laughter. "Isn't that priceless!"
     Timothy stood very still.
     A pause in the laughter. "They bring home sustenance for Mama, Papa and all
of us," said Laura. "Except, of course, Timothy...."
     An  uneasy  silence.  Uncle  Jason's  voice demanded. "Well? come now. What
about Timothy?"
     "Oh, Laura, your tongue," said mother.
     Laura went on with it. Timothy shut his eyes. "Timothy doesn't-well-doesn't
_like_ blood. He's delicate."
     "He'll  learn,"  said mother. "He'll learn," she said very firmly. "He's my
son, and he'll learn. He's only fourteen."
     "But  I  was raised on the stuff," said Uncle Jason, his voice passing from
one room on into another. The wind played the trees outside like harps. A little
rain spatted on the windows "raised on the stuff," passing away into faintness.
     Timothy bit his lips and opened his eyes.
     "Well,  it was all my fault." Mother was showing them into the kitchen now.
"I  tried  forcing  him.  You can't force children, you only make them sick, and
then  they  never  get  a  taste  for things. Look at Bion, now, he was thirteen
before he...."
     "I understand," murmured Uncle Jason. "Timothy will come around."
     "I'm sure he will," said mother, defiantly.
     Candle  flames  quivered  as  shadows crossed and recrossed the dozen musty
rooms.  Timothy  was  cold.  He  smelled  the  hot  tallow  in  his nostrils and
instinctively  he  grabbed  at  a candle and walked with it around and about the
house, pretending to straighten the crape.
     "_Timothy_,"  someone whisped behind a patterned wall, hissing and sizzling
and sighing the words, "_Timothy is afraid of the dark_."
     Leonard's voice. Hateful Leonard!
     "I like the candle, that's all," said Timothy in a reproachful whisper.
     More  lightning,  more  thunder. Cascades of roaring laughter. Bangings and
clickings and shouts and rustles of clothing. Clammy fog swept through the front
door. Out of the fog, settling his wings, stalked a tall man.
     "Uncle Einar!"
     Timothy propelled himself on his thin legs, straight through the fog, under
the  green  webbing  shadows. He threw himself across Einar's arms. Einar lifted
him.
     "You've  wings,  Timothy!"  He  tossed  the  boy light as thistles. "Wings,
Timothy:  fly!"  Faces  wheeled  under.  Darkness  rotated. The house blew away.
Timothy  felt  breezelike. He flapped his arms. Einar's fingers caught and threw
him once more to the ceiling. The ceiling rushed down like a charred wall. "Fly,
Timothy!" shouted Einar, loud and deep. "Fly with wings! Wings!"
     He  felt  an  exquisite  ecstasy  in his shoulder blades, as if roots grew,
burst  to  explode  and blossom into new, moist membrane. He babbled wild stuff;
again Einar hurled him high.
     The  autumn  wind  broke in a tide on the house, rain crashed down, shaking
the  beams, causing chandeliers to tilt their enraged candle lights. And the one
hundred  relatives peered out from every black, enchanted room, circling inward,
all  shapes  and  sizes,  to  where Einar balanced the child like a baton in the
roaring spaces.
     "Enough!" shouted Einar, at last.
     Timothy,  deposited  on  the  floor  timbers,  exaltedly,  exhaustedly fell
against Uncle Einar, sobbing happily. "Uncle, uncle, uncle!"
     "Was it good, flying? Eh, Timothy?" said Uncle Einar, bending down, patting
Timothy's head. "Good, good."
     It  was coming toward dawn. Most had arrived and were ready to bed down for
the  daylight, sleep motionlessly with no sound until the following sunset, when
they would shout out of their mahogany boxes for the revelry.
     Uncle  Einar, followed by dozens of others, moved toward the cellar. Mother
directed  them  downward  to  the  crowded  row on row of highly polished boxes.
Einar,  his  wings  like  sea-green  tarpaulins  tented behind him, moved with a
curious whistling down the passageway, where his wings touched they made a sound
of drumheads gently beaten.
     Upstairs,  Timothy lay wearily thinking, trying to like the darkness. There
was  so  much  you  could do in darkness that people couldn't criticize you for,
because  they  never  saw  you.  He _did_ like the night, but it was a qualified
liking: sometimes there was so much night he cried out in rebellion.
     In  the  cellar, mahogany doors sealed downward, drawn in by pale hands. In
corners,  certain  relatives  circled three times to lie, heads on paws, eyelids
shut. The sun rose. There was a sleeping.
     Sunset.  The  revel  exploded  like  a bat nest struck full, shrieking out,
fluttering,  spreading. Box doors banged wide. Steps rushed up from cellar damp.
More late guests, kicking on front and back portals, were admitted.
     It  rained, and sodden visitors laid their capes, their waterpelleted hats,
their  sprinkled  veils  upon  Timothy who bore them to a closet. The rooms were
crowd-packed.  The  laughter  of  one cousin, shot from one room, angled off the
wall of another, ricocheted, banked and returned to Timothy's ears from a fourth
room, accurate and cynical.
     A mouse ran across the floor.
     "I  know  you, Niece Liebersrouter!" exclaimed father around him but not to
him.  The dozens of towering people pressed in against him, elbowed him, ignored
him.
     Finally, he turned and slipped away up the stairs.
     He called softly. "Cecy. Where are you now, Cecy?"
     She  waited  a  long  while before answering. "In the Imperial Valley," she
murmured  faintly.  "Beside  the Salton Sea, near the mud pots and the steam and
the  quiet. I'm inside a farmer's wife. I'm sitting on a front porch. I can make
her move if I want, or do anything or think anything. The sun's going down."
     "What's it like, Cecy?"
     "You  can hear the mud pots hissing," she said, slowly, as if speaking in a
church.  "Little gray heads of steam push up the mud like bald men rising in the
thick  syrup,  head first, out in the broiling channels. The gray heads rip like
rubber fabric, collapse with noises like wet lips moving. And feathery plumes of
steam  escape  from  the  ripped tissue. And there is a smell of deep sulphurous
burning and old time. The dinosaur has been abroiling here ten million years."
     "Is he done yet, Cecy?"
     The  mouse  spiraled three women's feet and vanished into a corner. Moments
later  a beautiful woman rose up out of nothing and stood in the corner, smiling
her white smile at them all.
     Something huddled against the flooded pane of the kitchen window. It sighed
and  wept  and  tapped continually, pressed against the glass, but Timothy could
make  nothing  of  it, he saw nothing. In imagination he was outside staring in.
The  rain  was on him, the wind at him, and the taper-dotted darkness inside was
inviting.  Waltzes were being danced; tall thin figures pirouetted to outlandish
music.  Stars  of  light  flickered  off  lifted  bottles;  small clods of earth
crumbled  from  casques,  and  a  spider fell and went silently legging over the
floor.
     Timothy  shivered. He was inside the house again. Mother was calling him to
run  here,  run  there,  help,  serve, out to the kitchen now, fetch this, retch
that, bring the plates, heap the food - on and on - the party happened.
     "Yes,  he's  done.  Quite  done." Cecy's calm sleeper's lips turned up. The
languid  words  fell slowly from her shaping mouth. "Inside this woman's skull I
am,  looking  out, watching the sea that does not move, and is so quiet it makes
you  afraid.  I  sit  on  the  porch  and  wait  for  my  husband  to come home.
Occasionally,  a  fish  leaps,  falls back, starlight edging it. The valley, the
sea, the few cars, the wooden porch, my rocking chair, myself, the silence."
     "What now, Cecy?"
     "I'm getting up from my rocking chair," she said.
     "Yes?"
     "I'm  walking  off  the  porch,  toward the mud pots. Planes fly over, like
primordial birds. Then it is quiet, so quiet."
     "How long will you stay inside her, Cecy?"
     "Until  I've  listened  and  looked and felt enough: until I've changed her
life  some  way.  I'm walking off the porch and along the wooden boards. My feet
knock on the planks, tiredly, slowly."
     "And now?"
     "Now  the  sulphur  fumes are all around me. I stare at the bubbles as they
break  and  smooth.  A  bird darts by my temple, shrieking. Suddenly I am in the
bird  and  fly  away!  And as I fly, inside my new small glass-bead eyes I see a
woman  below me, on a boardwalk, take one, two, three steps forward into the mud
pots.  I hear a sound as of a boulder plunged into molten depths. I keep flying,
circle  back.  I see a white hand, like a spider, wriggle and disappear into the
gray lava pool. The lava seals over. Now I'm flying home, swift, swift, swift!"
     Something clapped hard against the window. Timothy started.
     Cecy  flicked  her  eyes  wide,  bright, full, happy, exhilarated. "Now I'm
_home_!" she said.
     After  a  pause,  Timothy  ventured,  "The Homecoming's on. And everybody's
here."
     "Then  why are you upstairs?" She took his hand. "Well, ask me." She smiled
slyly. "Ask me what you came to ask."
     "I didn't come to ask anything," he said. "Well, almost nothing. Well - oh,
Cecy!"  It  came from him in one long rapid flow. "I want to do something at the
party  to  make them look at me, something to make me good as them, something to
make  me  belong,  but  there's  nothing  I can do and I feel funny and, well, I
thought you might..."
     "I  might,"  she  said,  closing  her  eyes,  smiling  inwardly.  "Stand up
straight.  Stand very still." He obeyed. "Now, shut your eyes and blank out your
thought."
     He  stood  very  straight  and  thought  of nothing, or at least thought of
thinking nothing.
     She  sighed.  "Shall  we  go  downstairs  now, Timothy?" Like a hand into a
glove, Cecy was within him.
     "Look everybody!" Timothy held the glass of warm red liquid. He held up the
glass  so  that  the  whole  house  turned to watch him. Aunts, uncles, cousins,
brothers, sisters!
     He drank it straight down.
     He  jerked  a hand at his sister Laura. He held her gaze, whispering to her
in  a subtle voice that kept her silent, frozen. He felt tall as the trees as he
walked  to  her.  The party now slowed. It waited on all sides of him, watching.
From  all the room doors the faces peered. They were not laughing. Mother's face
was  astonished.  Dad  looked  bewildered, but pleased and getting prouder every
instant.
     He  nipped  Laura,  gently,  over  the  neck vein. The candle flames swayed
drunkenly.  The  wind  climbed  around on the roof outside. The relatives stared
from  all  the  doors. He popped toadstools into his mouth, swallowed, then beat
his  arms  against  his  flanks  and  circled. "Look, Uncle Einar! I can fly, at
last!"  Beat went his hands. Up and down pumped his feet. The faces flashed past
him.
     At  the  top  of  the  stairs  flapping,  he  heard  his mother cry, "Stop,
Timothy!" far below. "Hey!" shouted Timothy, and leaped off the top of the well,
thrashing.
     Halfway  down,  the wings he thought he owned dissolved. He screamed. Uncle
Einar caught him.
     Timothy  flailed  whitely  in  the receiving arms. A voice burst out of his
lips,  unbidden. "This is Cecy! This is Cecy! Come see me, all of you, upstairs,
first room on the left!" Followed by a long trill of high laughter Timothy tried
to cut it off with his tongue.
     Everybody  was  laughing.  Einar set him down. Running through the crowding
blackness  as  the  relatives flowed upstairs toward Cecy's room to congratulate
her, Timothy banged the front door open.
     "Cecy, I hate you, I hate you!"
     By the sycamore tree, in deep shadow, Timothy spewed out his dinner, sobbed
bitterly  and  threshed  in a pile of autumn leaves. Then he lay still. From his
blouse  pocket, from the protection of the matchbox he used for his retreat, the
spider crawled forth. Spid walked along Timothy's arm. Spid explored up his neck
to  his ear and climbed in the ear to tickle it. Timothy shook his head. "Don't,
Spid. Don't."
     The  feathery  touch  of a tentative feeler probing his eardrum set Timothy
shivering. "Don't Spid!" He sobbed somewhat less.
     The  spider  traveled  down his cheek, took a station under the boy's nose,
looked  up  into the nostrils as if to seek the brain, and then clambered softly
up over the rim of the nose to sit, to squat there peering at Timothy with green
gem eyes until Timothy filled with ridiculous laughter. "Go away, Spid!"
     Timothy  sat  up,  rustling  the  leaves. The land was very bright with the
moon.  In  the  house  he  could  hear  the faint ribaldry as Mirror, Mirror was
played.  Celebrants  shouted  dimly  muffled, as they tried to identify those of
themselves whose reflections did not, had not ever appeared in a glass.
     "Timothy." Uncle Einar's wings spread and twitched and came in with a sound
like  kettledrums.  Timothy  felt himself plucked up like a thimble and set upon
Einar's  shoulder.  "Don't  feel badly? Nephew Timothy. Each to his own, each in
his  own way. How much better things are for you. How rich. The world's dead for
us.  We've  seen  so  much  of it, believe me. Life's best to those who live the
least of it. It's worth more per ounce, Timothy, remember that."

     
     The  rest of the black morning, from midnight on. Uncle Einar led him about
the  house, from room to room, weaving and singing. A horde of late arrivals set
the  entire  hilarity  off  afresh.  Great-great-great-great and a thousand more
great-greats  Grandmother was there, wrapped in Egyptian cerements. She said not
a  word,  but  lay  straight  as a burnt ironing board against the wall, her eye
hollows cupping a distant, wise, silent glimmering. At the breakfast, at four in
the morning, one-thousand-odd-greats Grandmama was stiffly seated at the head of
the longest table.
     The  numerous young cousins caroused at the crystal punch bowl. Their shiny
olive-pit eyes, their conical, devilish faces and curly bronze hair hovered over
the drinking table, their hard-soft, half-girl half-boy bodies wrestling against
each  other  as  they got unpleasantly, sullenly drunk. The wind got higher, the
stars  burned  with fiery intensity, the noises redoubled, the dances quickened,
the  drinking became more positive. To Timothy there were thousands of things to
hear  and  watch. The many darknesses roiled, bubbled, the many faces passed and
repassed....
     "Listen!"
     The  party  held  its  breath,  far  away the town clock struck its chimes,
saying  six o'clock. The party was ending. In time to the rhythm of the striking
clock, their one hundred voices began to sing songs that were four hundred years
old,  songs Timothy could not know. Arms twined, circling slowly, they sang, and
somewhere in the cold distance of morning the town clock finished out its chimes
and quieted.
     Timothy  sang. He knew no words, no tune, yet the words and tune came round
and high and good. And he gazed at the closed door at the top of the stairs.
     "Thanks Cecy," he whispered. "You're forgiven. Thanks."
     Then  he  just relaxed and let the words move, with Cecy's voice, free from
his lips.
     Good-bys  were said, there was a great rustling. Mother and Father stood at
the door to shake hands and kiss each departing relative in turn. The sky beyond
the open door colored in the east. A cold wind entered. And Timothy felt himself
seized  and  settled  in  one body after another, felt Cecy press him into Uncle
Fry's  head so he stared from the wrinkled leather face, then leaped in a flurry
of leaves up over the house and awakening hills....
     Then,  loping  down a dirt path, he felt his red eyes burning, his fur pelt
rimed  with  morning,  as  inside  Cousin William he panted through a hollow and
dissolved away....
     Like  a  pebble  in  Uncle Einar's mouth. Timothy flew in a webbed thunder,
filling the sky. And then he was back, for all time, in his own body.
     In  the  growing  dawn, the last few were embracing and crying and thinking
how  the  world  was  becoming less a place for them. There had been a time when
they  had  met every year, but now decades passed with no reconciliation. "Don't
forget," someone cried, "we meet in Salem in 1970!"
     Salem.  Timothy's numbed mind turned the words over. Salem, 1970. And there
would  be  Uncle  Fry  and  a  thousand-times-great  Grandmother in her withered
cerements,  and Mother and Father and Ellen and Laura and Cecy and all the rest.
But would he be there? Could he be certain of staying alive until then?
     With one last withering blast, away they all went, so many scarves, so many
fluttery mammals, so many sere leaves, so many whining and clustering noises, so
many midnights and insanities and dreams.
     Mother  shut  the  door. Laura picked up a broom. "No," said Mother. "We'll
clean  tonight.  Now  we  need  sleep."  And the Family vanished down cellar and
upstairs. And Timothy moved in the crape-littered hall, his head down. Passing a
party mirror, he saw the pale mortality of his face all cold and trembling.
     "Timothy," said Mother.
     She  came  to  touch  her  hand on his face. "Son," she said, "We love you.
Remember  that.  We  all love you. No matter how different you are, no matter if
you  leave  us  one  day."  She kissed his cheek. "And if and when you die, your
bones  will  lie undisturbed, we'll see to that. You'll lie at ease forever, and
I'll come visit every Allhallows Eve and tuck you in the more secure."
     The  house  was  silent.  Far  away the wind went over a hill with its last
cargo of dark bats, echoing, chittering.
     Timothy walked up the steps, one by one, crying to himself all the way.