         
                                  The Cistern
                                      1947

     It was an afternoon of rain, and lamps lighted against the gray. For a long
while  the  two  sisters  had  been  in  the  dining-room.  One of them, Juliet,
embroidered  tablecloths;  the  younger,  Anna,  sat quietly on the window seat,
staring out at the dark street and the dark sky.
     Anna  kept  her brow pressed against the pane, but her lips moved and after
reflecting a long moment, she said, "I never thought of that before."
     "Of what?" asked Juliet.
     "It  just  came  to  me. There's actually a city under a city. A dead city,
right here, right under our feet."
     Juliet  poked her needle in and out of the white cloth. "Come away from the
window. That rain's done something to you."
     "No,  really.  Didn't  you  ever  think of the cisterns before? They're all
through the town, there's one for every street, and you can walk in them without
bumping  your head, and they go everywhere and finally go down to the sea," said
Anna,  fascinated  with  the rain on the asphalt pavement out there and the rain
falling  from  the  sky  and  vanishing  down the gratings at each corner of the
distant intersection. "Wouldn't you like to live in a cistern?"
     "I would not!"
     "But  wouldn't  it  be fun--I mean, very secret? To live in the cistern and
peek up at people through the slots and see them and them not see you? Like when
you  were  a  child  and played hide-andseek and nobody found you, and there you
were in their midst all the time, all sheltered and hidden and warm and excited.
I'd like that. That's what it must be like to live in the cistern."
     Juliet  looked  slowly  up from her work. "You _are_ my sister, aren't you,
Anna?  You _were_ born, weren't you? Sometimes, the way you talk, I think Mother
found you under a tree one day and brought you home and planted you in a pot and
grew you to this size and there you are, and you'll never change."
     Anna didn't reply, so Juliet went back to her needle. There was no color in
the  room;  neither of the two sisters added any color to it. Anna held her head
to  the  window  for five minutes. Then she looked way off into the distance and
said,  "I  guess  you'd  call it a dream. While I've been here, the last hour, I
mean. Thinking. Yes, Juliet, it was a dream."
     Now it was Juliet's turn not to answer.
     Anna  whispered. "All this water put me to sleep a while, I guess, and then
I began to think about the rain and where it came from and where it went and how
it  went  down  those  little  slots  in the curb, and then I thought about deep
under,  and  suddenly  there  _they_  were. A man. . . and a woman. Down in that
cistern, under the road."
     "What would they be doing there?" asked Juliet.
     Anna said, "Must they have a reason?"
     "No,  not if they're insane, no," said Juliet. "In that case no reasons are
necessary. There they are in their cistern, and let them stay."
     "But  they  aren't  just in the cistern," said Anna, knowingly, her head to
one  side, her eyes moving under the half-down lids. "No, they're in love, these
two."
     "For heaven's sake," said Juliet, "did love make them crawl down there?"
     "No, they've been there for years and years," said Anna.
     "You  can't  tell  me  they've  been  in  that  cistern  for  years, living
together," protested Juliet.
     "Did  I  say  they were alive?" asked Anna, surprised. "Oh, hut no. They're
dead."
     The rain scrambled in wild, pushing pellets down the window. Drops came and
joined with others and made streaks.
     "Oh," said Juliet.
     "Yes," said Anna, pleasantly. "Dead. He's dead and she's dead." This seemed
to satisfy her; it was a nice discovery, and she was proud of it. "He looks like
a very lonely man who never traveled in all his life."
     "How do you know?"
     "He  looks  like the kind of man who never traveled but wanted to. You know
by his eyes."
     "You know what he looks like, then?"
     "Yes.  Very  ill  and  very  handsome.  You  know how it is with a man made
handsome by illness? Illness brings out the bones in the face."
     "And he's dead?" asked the older sister.
     "For  five years." Anna talked softly, with her eyelids rising and falling,
as if she were about to tell a long story and knew it and wanted to work into it
slowly,  and  then  faster and then faster, until the very momentum of the story
would  carry  her  on,  with  her  eyes wide and her lips parted. But now it was
slowly,  with  only  a slight fever to the telling. "Five years ago this man was
walking  along  a  street  and he knew he'd been walking the same street on many
nights  and  he'd  go on walking it, so he came to a manhole cover, one of those
big  iron  waffles  in  the center of the street, and he heard the river rushing
under his feet, under the metal cover, rushing toward the sea." Anna put out her
right hand. "And he bent slowly and lifted up the cistern lid and looked down at
the  rushing foam and the water, and he thought of someone he wanted to love and
couldn't,  and  then  he  swung himself onto the iron rungs and walked down them
until he was all gone. . . ."
     "And what about her?" asked Juliet, busy. "When'd she die?"
     "I'm  not  sure.  She's  new.  She's  just  dead,  now.  But she _is_ dead.
Beautifully,  beautifully dead." Anna admired the image she had in her mind. "It
takes  death to make a woman really beautiful, and it takes death by drowning to
make  her most beautiful of all. Then all the stiffness is taken out of her, and
her  hair  hangs  up  on  the water like a drift of smoke." She nodded her head,
amusedly.  "All the schools and etiquettes and teachings in the world can't make
a  woman  move with this dreamy ease, supple and ripply and fine." Anna tried to
show how fine, how ripply, how graceful, with her broad, coarse hand.
     "He'd  been  waiting for her, for five years. But she hadn't known where he
was  till  now.  So there they are, and will be, from now on. . . . In the rainy
season  they'll  live.  But in the dry seasons--that's sometimes months--they'll
have long rest periods, they'll lie in little hidden niches, like those Japanese
water flowers, all dry and compact and old and quiet."
     Juliet  got  up  and turned on yet another little lamp in the corner of the
dining-room. "I wish you wouldn't talk about it."
     Anna  laughed. "But let me tell you about how it starts, how they come back
to  life.  I've  got  it all worked out." She bent forward, held onto her knees,
staring at the street and the rain and the cistern mouths. "There they are, down
under,  dry  and  quiet,  and up above the sky gets electrical and powdery." She
threw  back  her dull, graying hair with one hand. "At first all the upper world
is  pellets. Then there's lightning and then thunder and the dry season is over,
and  the  little  pellets  run  along  the gutters and get big and fall into the
drains.  They  take  gum  wrappers  and  theatre  tickets  with  them,  and  bus
transfers!"
     "Come away from that window, now."
     Anna  made  a  square with her hands and imagined things. "I know just what
it's  like  under  the  pavement, in the big square cistern. It's huge. It's all
empty  from the weeks with nothing but sunshine. It echoes if you talk. The only
sound  you  can hear standing down there is an auto passing above. Far up above.
The whole cistern is like a dry, hollow camel bone in a desert, waiting."
     She  lifted her hand, pointing, as if she herself were down in the cistern,
waiting. "Now, a little trickle. It comes down on the floor. It's like something
was  hurt  and bleeding up in the outer world. There's some thunder! Or was it a
truck going by?"
     She  spoke a little more rapidly now, but held her body relaxed against the
window, breathing out, and in the next words: "It seeps down. Then, into all the
other  hollows  come  other  seepages. Little twines and snakes. Tobacco-stained
water.  Then  it  moves.  It  joins  others.  It  makes  snakes and then one big
constrictor  which rolls along on the flat, papered floor. From everywhere, from
the  north  and  south, from other streets, other streams come and they join and
make  one  hissing and shining coil. And the water writhes into those two little
dry  niches  I told you about. It rises slowly around those two, the man and the
woman, lying there like Japanese flowers."
     She clasped her hands, slowly, working finger into finger, interlacing.
     "The  water  soaks into them. First, it lifts the woman's hand. In a little
move. Her hand's the only live part of her. Then her arm lifts and one foot. And
her  hair.  .  ." she touched her own hair as it hung about her shoulders ". . .
unloosens and opens out like a flower in the water. Her shut eyelids are blue. .
. ."
     The  room got darker, Juliet sewed on, and Anna talked and told all she saw
in  her  mind. She told how the water rose and took the woman with it, unfolding
her  out  and  loosening  her and standing her full upright in the cistern. "The
water  is  interested  in  the woman, and she lets it have its way. After a long
time  of lying still, she's ready to live again, any life the water wants her to
have."
     Somewhere  else, the man stood up in the water also. And Anna told of that,
and  how  the  water carried him slowly, drifting, and her, drifting, until they
met  each  other. "The water opens their eyes. Now they can see but not see each
other. They circle, not touching yet." Anna made a little move of her head, eyes
closed.  "They  watch  each  other. They glow with some kind of phosphorus. They
smile. . . . They--touch hands."
     At  last  Juliet, stiffening, put down her sewing and stared at her sister,
across the gray, rain-silent room.
     "Anna!"
     "The  tide--makes them touch. The tide comes and puts them together. It's a
perfect  kind of love, with no ego to it, only two bodies, moved by water, which
makes it clean and all right. It's not wicked, this way."
     "It's bad you're saying it!" cried her sister.
     "No,  it's  all right," insisted Anna, turning for an instant. "They're not
thinking, are they? They're just so deep down and quiet and not caring."
     She  took  her  right  hand  and held it over her left hand very slowly and
gently,  quavering and interweaving them. The rainy window, with the pale spring
light  penetrating,  put  a  movement of light and running water on her fingers,
made  them  seem  submerged,  fathoms  deep in gray water, running one about the
other as she finished her little dream:
     "Him,  tall  and quiet, his hands open." She showed with a gesture how tall
and how easy he was in the water. "Her, small and quiet and relaxed." She looked
at  her sister, leaving her hands just that way. "They're dead, with no place to
go,  and  no  one to tell them. So there they are, with nothing applying to them
and  no  worries,  very secret and hidden under the earth in the cistern waters.
They touch their hands and lips and when they come into a cross-street outlet of
the  cistern,  the  tide rushes them together. Then, later . . ." she disengaged
her  hands. . . "maybe they travel together, hand in hand, bobbling and floating
down  all  the streets, doing little crazy upright dances when they're caught in
sudden  swirls."  She  whirled  her hands about, a drenching of rain spatted the
window.  "And they go down to the sea, all across the town, past cross drain and
cross  drain,  street  and  street.  Genesee  Avenue,  Crenshaw,  Edmond  Place,
Washington,  Motor  City,  Ocean  Side  and then the ocean. They go anywhere the
water  wants  them, all over the earth, and come back later to the cistern inlet
and  float  back  up  under the town, under a dozen tobacco shops and four dozen
liquor  stores,  and  six  dozen  groceries  and  ten theatres, a rail junction,
Highway  101,  under  the  walking feet of thirty thousand people who don't even
know or think of the cistern."
     Anna's voice drifted and dreamed and grew quiet again.
     "And  then--the  day passes and the thunder goes away up on the street. The
rain  stops.  The  rain  season's over. The tunnels drip and stop. The tide goes
down."  She  seemed  disappointed,  sad  it was over. "The river runs out to the
ocean.  The  man  and  woman feel the water leave them slowly to the floor. They
settle."  She  lowered  her  hands in little bobblings to her lap, watching them
fixedly,  longingly.  "Their  feet  lose  the life the water has given them from
outside.  Now  the  water lays them down, side by side, and drains away, and the
tunnels  are  drying.  And there they lie. Up above, in the world, the sun comes
out.  There  they lie, in the darkness, sleeping, until the next time. Until the
next rain."
     Her hands were now upon her lap, palms up and open. "Nice man, nice woman,"
she murmured. She bowed her head over them and shut her eyes tight.
     Suddenly  Anna  sat  up  and glared at her sister. "Do you know who the man
is?" she shouted, bitterly.
     Juliet  did not reply; she had watched, stricken, for the past five minutes
while this thing went on. Her mouth was twisted and pale. Anna almost screamed:
     "The man is Frank, that's who he is! And _I'm_ the woman!"
     "Anna!"
     "Yes, it's Frank, down there!"
     "But Frank's been gone for years, and certainly not down there, Anna!"
     Now,  Anna  was  talking  to  nobody,  and  to everybody, to Juliet, to the
window,  the  wall, the street. "Poor Frank," she cried. "I know that's where he
went. He couldn't stay anywhere in the world. His mother spoiled him for all the
world! So he saw the cistern and saw how secret and fine it was. Oh, poor Frank.
And  poor  Anna,  poor me, with only a sister. Oh, Julie, why didn't I hold onto
Frank when he was here? Why didn't I fight to win him from his mother?"
     "Stop it, this minute, do you hear, this minute!"
     Anna  slumped  down  into the corner, by the window, one hand up on it, and
wept silently. A few minutes later she heard her sister say, "Are you finished?"
     "What?"
     "If you're done, come help me finish this, I'll be forever at it."
     Anna raised her head and glided over to her sister. "What do you want me to
do?" she sighed.
     "This and this," said Juliet, showing her.
     "All  right,"  said  Anna, and took it and sat by the window looking at the
rain,  moving  her  hands  with the needle and thread, but watching how dark the
street  was now, and the room, and how hard it was to see the round metal top of
the  cistern  now--there were just little midnight gleams and glitters out there
in the black black late afternoon. Lightning crackled over the sky in a web.
     Half  an  hour passed. Juliet drowsed in her chair across the room, removed
her  glasses,  placed  them  down with her work and for a moment rested her head
back  and  dozed.  Perhaps  thirty  seconds  later she heard the front door open
violently,  heard the wind come in, heard the footsteps run down the walk, turn,
and hurry along the black street.
     "What?"  asked  Juliet, sitting up, fumbling for her glasses. "Who's there?
Anna,  did  someone come in the door?" She stared at the empty window seat where
Anna had been. "Anna!" she cried. She sprang up and ran out into the hall.
     The front door stood open, rain fell through it in a fine mist.
     "She's  only gone out for a moment," said Juliet, standing there, trying to
peer  into  the  wet  blackness. "She'll be right back. Won't you be right back,
Anna dear? Anna, answer me, you _will_ be right back, won't you, sister?"
     Outside, the cistern lid rose and slammed down.
     The  rain whispered on the street and fell upon the closed lid all the rest
of the night.