                              
                                  Uncle Einar
                                      1947

     It will take only a minute," said Uncle Einar's sweet wife.

     "I refuse," he said. "And that takes but a _second_."

     "I've  worked all morning," she said, holding to her slender back, "and you
won't help? It's drumming for a rain."

     "Let  it  rain," he cried, morosely. "I'll not be pierced by lightning just
to air your clothes."

     "But you're so quick at it."

     "Again,  I  refuse."  His  vast tarpaulin wings hummed nervously behind his
indignant back.

     She  gave  him  a  slender  rope on which were tied four dozen fresh-washed
clothes.  He  turned it in his fingers with distaste. "So it's come to this," he
muttered,  bitterly.  "To this, to this, to this." He almost wept angry and acid
tears.

     "Don't  cry; you'll wet them down again," she said. "Jump up, now, run them
about."

     "Run them about." His voice was hollow, deep, and terribly wounded. "I say:
let it thunder, let it pour!"

     "If it was a nice, sunny day I wouldn't ask," she said, reasonably. "All my
washing gone for nothing if you don't. They'll hang about the house--"

     That  _did_  it. Above all, he hated clothes flagged and festooned so a man
had  to creep under on the way across a room. He jumped up. His vast green wings
boomed. "Only so far as the pasture fence!"

     Whirl:	up  he jumped, his wings chewed and loved the cool air. Before you'd
say  Uncle Einar Has Green Wings he sailed low across his farmland, trailing the
clothes  in a vast fluttering loop through the pounding concussion and back-wash
of his wings!

     "Catch!"

     Back from the trip, he sailed the clothes, dry as popcorn, down on a series
of clean blankets she'd spread for their landing.

     "Thank you!" she cried.

     "Gahh!" he shouted, and flew off under the apple tree to brood.

      

     Uncle  Einar's  beautiful  silk-like wings hung like sea-green sails behind
him,  and  whirred  and  whispered  from his shoulders when he sneezed or turned
swiftly.  He  was one of the few in the Family whose talent was visible. All his
dark  cousins  and nephews and brothers hid in small towns across the world, did
unseen  mental things or things with witch_fingers and white teeth, or blew down
the  sky  like  fire-leaves,  or loped in forests like moonsilvered wolves. They
lived  comparatively  safe  from  normal  humans.  Not so a man with great green
wings.

     Not  that  he  hated his wings. Far from it! In his youth he'd always flown
nights,  because  nights  were rare times for winged men! Daylight held dangers,
always  had, always would; but nights, ah, nights, he had sailed over islands of
cloud  and  seas  of  summer sky. With no danger to himself. It had been a rich,
full soaring, an exhilaration.

     But now he could not fly at night.

     On  his  way  home  to some high mountain pass in Europe after a Homecoming
among  Family members in Mellin Town, Illinois (some years ago) he had drunk too
much rich crimson wine. "I'll be all right," he had told himself, vaguely, as he
beat  his long way under the morning stars, over the moon-dreaming country hills
beyond Mellin Town. And then--crack out of the sky--

     A high-tension tower.

     Like a netted duck! A great sizzle! His face blown black by a blue sparkler
of  wire,  he fended off the electricity with a terrific back-jumping percussion
of his wings, and fell.

     His  hitting  the  moonlit meadow under the tower made a noise like a large
telephone book dropped from the sky.

     Early  the  next  morning, his dew-sodden wings shaking violently, he stood
up.  It  was  still dark. There was a faint bandage of dawn stretched across the
east. Soon the bandage would stain and all flight would be restricted. There was
nothing  to do but take refuge in the forest and wait out the day in the deepest
thicket until another night gave his wings a hidden motion in the sky.

     In this fashion he met his wife.

     During  the  day,  which  was  warm for November first in Illinois country,
pretty  young  Brunilla  Wexley  was  out to udder a lost cow, for she carried a
silver  pail  in one hand as she sidled through thickets and pleaded cleverly to
the  unseen  cow to please return home or burst her gut with unplucked milk. The
fact  that  the  cow  would  have most certainly come home when her teats needed
pulling   did   not   concern  Brunilla  Wexley.  It  was  a  sweet  excuse  for
forest-journeying,  thistle-blowing,  and  flower chewing; all of which Brunilla
was doing as she stumbled upon Uncle Einar.

     Asleep near a bush, he seemed a man under a green shelter.

     "Oh," said Brunilla, with a fever. "A man. In a camp-tent."

     Uncle Einar awoke. The camp-tent spread like a large green fan behind him.

     "Oh," said Brunilla, the cow-searcher. "A man with wings."

     That  was  how  she  took it. She was startled, yes, but she had never been
hurt  in  her  life, so she wasn't afraid of anyone, and it was a fancy thing to
see  a  winged  man and she was proud to meet him. She began to talk. In an hour
they  were  old  friends,  and in two hours she'd quite forgotten his wings were
there. And he somehow confessed how he happened to be in this wood.

     "Yes, I noticed you looked banged around," she said. "That right wing looks
very  bad.  You'd best let me take you home and fix it. You won't be able to fly
all  the  way  to  Europe  on  it, anyway. And who wants to live in Europe these
days?"

     He thanked her, but he didn't quite see how he could accept.

     "But I live alone," she said. "For, as you see, I'm quite ugly."

     He insisted she was not.

     "How kind of you," she said. "But I am, there's no fooling myself. My folks
are dead, I've a farm, a big one, all to myself, quite far from Mellin Town, and
I'm in need of talking company."

     But wasn't she afraid of him? he asked.

     "Proud  and  jealous  would  be more near it," she said. "_May_ I?" And she
stroked  his  large green membraned veils with careful envy. He shuddered at the
touch and put his tongue between his teeth.

     So  there  was nothing for it but that he come to her house for medicaments
and ointments, and my! what a burn across his face, beneath his eyes! "Lucky you
weren't blinded," she said. "How'd it happen?"

     "Well  .  .  ."  he said, and they were at her farm, hardly noticing they'd
walked a mile, looking at each other.

     A  day passed, and another, and he thanked her at her door and said he must
be  going,  he  much  appreciated  the  ointment,  the care, the lodging. It was
twilight  and between now, six o'clock, and five the next morning, he must cross
an  ocean and a continent. "Thank you; good-by," he said, and started to fly off
in the dusk and crashed right into a maple tree.

     "Oh!" she screamed, and ran to his unconscious body.

     When  he  waked  the  next  hour he knew he'd fly no more in the dark again
ever;  his  delicate  night-perception  was  gone. The winged telepathy that had
warned him where towers, trees, houses and hills stood across his path, the fine
clear vision and sensibility that guided him through mazes of forest, cliff, and
cloud, all were burnt forever by that strike across his face, that blue electric
fry and sizzle.

     "How?"  he moaned softly. "How can I go to Europe? If I flew by day, I'd be
seen  and--miserable  joke--maybe  shot  down! Or kept for a zoo perhaps, what a
life that'd be! Brunilla, tell me, what shall I do?"

     "Oh,"  she  whispered, looking at her hands. "We'll think of something. . .
."

      

     They were married.

     The  Family  came  for the wedding. In a great autumnal avalanche of maple,
sycamore,  oak,  elm  leaf  they  hissed  and  rustled,  fell  in  a  shower  of
horse-chestnut,  thumped like winter apples on the earth, with an over-all scent
of  farewell-summer  on  the  wind they made in their rushing. The ceremony? The
ceremony was brief as a black candle lit, blown out, and smoke left still on the
air. Its briefness, darkness, upside-down and backward quality escaped Brunilla,
who  only  listened  to  the great tide of Uncle Einar's wings faintly murmuring
above  them  as  they  finished  out the rite. And as for Uncle Einar, the wound
across  his  nose  was almost healed and, holding Brunilla's arm, he felt Europe
grow faint and melt away in the distance.

     He  didn't have to see very well to fly straight up, or come straight down.
It  was only natural that on this night of their wedding he take Brunilla in his
arms and fly right up into the sky.

     A  farmer,  five  miles over, glanced at a low cloud at midnight, saw faint
glows and crackles.

     "Heat lightning," he observed, and went to bed.

     They didn't come down till morning, with the dew.

      

     The  marriage took. She had only to look at him, and it lifted her to think
she was the only woman in the world married to a winged man. "Who else could say
it?" she asked her mirror. And the answer was: "No one!"

     He,  on  the other hand, found great beauty behind her face, great kindness
and understanding. He made some changes in his diet to fit her thinking, and was
careful with his wings about the house; knocked porcelains and broken lamps were
nerve-scrapers,  he stayed away from them. He changed his sleeping habits, since
he  couldn't  fly  nights  now anyhow. And she in turn fixed chairs so they were
comfortable  for his wings, put extra padding here or took it out there, and the
things  she said were the things he loved her for. "We're in our cocoons, all of
us.  See  how ugly I am?" she said. "But one day I'll break out, spread wings as
fine and handsome as you."

     "You broke out long ago," he said.

     She  thought  it  over.  "Yes," she had to admit. "I know just which day it
was,  too. In the woods when I looked for a cow and found a tent!" They laughed,
and  with  him  holding  her  she  felt so beautiful she knew their marriage had
slipped her from her ugliness, like a bright sword from its case.

     They had children. At first there was fear, all on his part, that they'd be
winged.

     "Nonsense, I'd love it!" she said. "Keep them out from under foot."

     "Then," he exclaimed, "they'd be in your _hair!_"

     "Ow!" she cried.

     Four  children  were  born,  three  boys and a girl, who, for their energy,
seemed  to have wings. They popped up like toadstools in a few years, and on hot
summer days asked their father to sit under the apple tree and fan them with his
cooling  wings and tell them wild starlit tales of island clouds and ocean skies
and  textures  of mist and wind and how a star tastes melting in your mouth, and
how to drink cold mountain air, and how it feels to be a pebble dropped from Mt.
Everest,  turning  to a green bloom, flowering your wings just before you strike
bottom!

     This was his marriage.

     And  today,  six  years later, here sat Uncle Einar, here he was, festering
under  the  apple  tree,  grown  impatient  and unkind; not because this was his
desire,  but  because  after  the long wait, he was still unable to fly the wild
night sky; his extra sense had never returned. Here he sat despondently, nothing
more than a summer sun-parasol, green and discarded, abandoned for the season by
the  reckless  vacationers who once sought the refuge of its translucent shadow.
Was  he to sit here forever, afraid to fly by day because someone might see him?
Was  his  only  flight  to be as a drier of clothes for his wife, or a fanner of
children on hot August noons? His one occupation had _always_ been flying Family
errands,  quicker than storms. A boomerang, he'd whickled over hills and valleys
and like a thistle, landed. He had always had money; the Family had good use for
their  winged  man!  But now? Bitterness! His wings jittered and whisked the air
and made a captive thunder.

     "Papa," said little Meg.

     The children stood looking at his thought-dark face.

     "Papa," said Ronald. "Make more thunder!"

     "It's  a cold March day, there'll soon be rain and plenty of thunder," said
Uncle Einar.

     "Will you come watch us?" asked Michael.

     "Run on, run on! Let papa brood!"

     He  was  shut  of  love, the children of love, and the love of children. He
thought  only  of  heavens, skies, horizons, infinities, by night or day, lit by
star,  moon,  or  sun,  cloudy or clear, but always it was skies and heavens and
horizons  that  ran  ahead  of  you  forever  when  you soared. Yet here he was,
sculling the pasture, kept low for fear of being seen.

     Misery in a deep well!

     "Papa,  come watch us; it's March!" cried Meg. "And we're going to the Hill
with all the kids from town!"

     Uncle Einar grunted. "What hill is that?"

     "The Kite Hill, of course!" they all sang together.

     Now he looked at them.

     Each held a large paper kite, their faces sweating with anticipation and an
animal  glowing.  In  their  small  fingers  were balls of white twine. From the
kites,  colored  red  and  blue  and yellow and green, hung caudal appendages of
cotton and silk strips.

     "We'll fly our kites!" said Ronald. "Won't you come?"

     "No," he said, sadly. "I mustn't be seen by anyone or there'd be trouble."

     "You  could  hide  and  watch from the woods." said Meg. "We made the kites
ourselves. Just because we know how."

     "How do you know?"

     "You're our father!" was the instant cry. "That's why!"

     He looked at his children for a long while. He sighed. "A kite festival, is
it?"

     "Yes, sir!"

     "I'm going to win," said Meg.

     "No, _I'm!_" Michael contradicted.

     "Me, _me!_" piped Stephen.

     "God  up  the  chimney!"  roared Uncle Einar, leaping high with a deafening
kettledrum of wings. "Children! Children, I love you dearly!"

     "Father, what's wrong?" said Michael, backing off.

     "Nothing,  nothing,  nothing!"  chanted Einar. He flexed his wings to their
greatest  propulsion  and  plundering.  Whoom!  they  slammed  like cymbals. The
children  fell  flat  in  the backwash! "I have it, I _have_ it! I'm free again!
Fire in the flue! Feather on the wind! Brunilla!" Einar called to the house. His
wife  appeared.  "I'm  free!" he called, flushed and tall, on his toes. "Listen,
Brunilla,  I  don't  need the night any more! I can fly by day! I don't need the
night!  I'll fly _every_ day and _any_ day of the year from now on!--but, God, I
waste time, talking. Look!"

     And as the worried members of his family watched, he seized the cotton tail
from  one  of  the  little  kites, tied it to his belt behind, grabbed the twine
ball,  held one end in his teeth, gave the other end to his children, and up, up
into the air he flew, away into the March wind!

     And  across  the  meadows  and over the farms his children ran, letting out
string to the daylit sky, bubbling and stumbling, and Brunilla stood back in the
farmyard  and  waved  and  laughed  to  see what was happening; and her children
marched  to  the far Kite Hill and stood, the four of them, holding the twine in
their  eager,  proud  fingers,  each  tugging and directing and pulling. And the
children  from  Mellin Town came running with their small kites to let up on the
wind,  and  they  saw  the  great  green  kite  leap  and  hover  in the sky and
exclaimed:

     "Oh,  oh, what a kite! What a kite! Oh, I wish I'd a kite like that! Where,
where did you _get_ it!"

     "Our  father  made  it!"  cried Meg and Michael and Stephen and Ronald, and
gave  an  exultant pull on the twine and the humming, thundering kite in the sky
dipped and soared and made a great and magical exclamation mark across a cloud!