
                                    The Lake
                                      1944

     The  wave  shut  me  off  from  the  world,  from the birds in the sky, the
children  on  the  beach,  my  mother  on the shore. There was a moment of green
silence.  Then the wave gave me back to the sky, the sand, the children yelling.
I  came  out  of  the lake and the world was waiting for me, having hardly moved
since I went away.

     I ran up on the beach.

     Mama swabbed me with a furry towel. "Stand there and dry," she said.

     I  stood  there,  watching  the sun take away the water beads on my arms. I
replaced them with goose-pimples.

     "My, there's a wind," said Mama. "Put on your sweater."

     "Wait'll I watch my goose-bumps," I said.

     "Harold," said Mama.

     I  put  the  sweater  on and watched the waves come up and fall down on the
beach.  But  not  clumsily.  On  purpose,  with a green sort of elegance. Even a
drunken man could not collapse with such elegance as those waves.

     It  was  September.  In  the  last  days when things are getting sad for no
reason.  The  beach was so long and lonely with only about six people on it. The
kids  quit  bouncing  the  ball  because  somehow  the  wind made them sad, too,
whistling  the  way it did, and the kids sat down and felt autumn come along the
endless shore.

     All  of  the hot-dog stands were boarded up with strips of golden planking,
sealing in all the mustard, onion, meat odors of the long, joyful summer. It was
like  nailing  summer  into  a  series of coffins. One by one the places slammed
their  covers  down,  padlocked  their  doors, and the wind came and touched the
sand,  blowing  away all of the million footprints of July and August. It got so
that now, in September, there was nothing but the mark of my rubber tennis shoes
and Donald and Delaus Arnold's feet, down by the water curve.

     Sand blew up in curtains on the sidewalks, and the merry-goround was hidden
with  canvas,  all of the horses frozen in mid-air on their brass poles, showing
teeth, galloping on. With only the wind for music, slipping through canvas.

     I  stood there. Everyone else was in school. I was not. Tomorrow I would be
on  my  way  west across the United States on a train. Mom and I had come to the
beach for one last brief moment.

     There  was  something about the loneliness that made me want to get away by
myself. "Mama, I want to run up the beach aways," I said.

     "All right, but hurry back, and don't go near the water."

     I  ran.  Sand  spun  under  me  and the wind lifted me. You know how it is,
running,  arms  out  so  you  feel veils from your fingers, caused by wind. Like
wings.

     Mama  withdrew  into the distance, sitting. Soon she was only a brown speck
and I was all alone.

     Being  alone  is  a  newness  to  a twelve-year-old child. He is so used to
people  about.  The  only  way he can be alone is in his mind. There are so many
real  people  around, telling children what and how to do, that a boy has to run
off  down  a  beach, even if it's only in his head, to get by himself in his own
world.

     So now I was really alone.

     I  went  down to the water and let it cool up to my stomach. Always before,
with  the  crowd, I hadn't dared to look, to come to this spot and search around
in the water and call a certain name. But now--.

     Water  is  like a magician. Sawing you in half. It feels as if you were cut
in  two,  part  of  you,  the  lower part, sugar, melting, dissolving away. Cool
water,  and  once  in  a  while a very elegantly stumbling wave that fell with a
flourish of lace.

     I called her name. A dozen times I called it.

     "Tally! Tally! Oh, Tally!"

     You really expect answers to your calling when you are young. You feel that
whatever you may think can be real. And sometimes maybe that is not so wrong.

     I thought of Tally, swimming out into the water last May, with her pigtails
trailing, blond. She went laughing, and the sun was on her small twelve-year-old
shoulders. I thought of the water settling quiet, of the life guard leaping into
it, of Tally's mother screaming, and of how Tally never came out. . . .

     The  life guard tried to persuade her to come out, but she did not. He came
back  with  only  bits  of  water-weed in his bigknuckled fingers, and Tally was
gone.  She  would  not  sit across from me at school any longer, or chase indoor
balls  on  the brick streets on summer nights. She had gone too far out, and the
lake would not let her return.

     And  now  in the lonely autumn when the sky was huge and the water was huge
and the beach was so very long, I had come down for the last time, alone.

     I called her name again and again. Tally, oh, Tally!

     The  wind  blew  so  very  softly over my ears, the way wind blows over the
mouths of sea-shells to set them whispering. The water rose, embracing my chest,
then my knees, up and down, one way and another, sucking under my heels.

     "Tally! Come back, Tally!"

     I  was  only twelve. But I know how much I loved her. It was that love that
comes  before  all  significance of body and morals. It was that love that is no
more  bad  than wind and sea and sand lying side by side forever. It was made of
all  the  warm  long  days  together at the beach, and the humming quiet days of
droning education at the school. All the long autumn days of the years past when
I had carried her books home from school.

     Tally!

     I  called  her  name for the last time. I shivered. I felt water on my face
and did not know how it got there. The waves had not splashed that high.

     Turning,  I  retreated to the sand and stood there for half an hour, hoping
for  one  glimpse,  one sign, one little bit of Tally to remember. Then, I knelt
and  built  a sand castle, shaping it fine, building it as Tally and I had often
built so many of them. But this time, I only built half of it. Then I got up.

     "Tally, if you hear me, come in and build the rest."

     I  walked  off toward that far-away speck that was Mama. The water came in,
blended  the sand-castle circle by circle, mashing it down little by little into
the original smoothness.

     Silently, I walked along the shore.

     Far away, a merry-go-round jangled, but it was only the wind.

      

     The next day, I went away on the train.

     A  train  has  a  poor  memory;  it soon puts all behind it. It forgets the
cornlands  of  Illinois,  the  rivers  of childhood, the bridges, the lakes, the
valleys,  the  cottages,  the hurts and the joys. It spreads them out behind and
they drop back of a horizon.

     I  lengthened  my  bones,  put  flesh on them, changed my young mind for an
older  one, threw away clothes as they no longer fitted, shifted from grammar to
high-school,  to college. And then there was a young woman in Sacramento. I knew
her  for a time, and we were married. By the time I was twenty-two, I had almost
forgotten what the East was like.

     Margaret  suggested  that  our  delayed  honeymoon  be  taken  back in that
direction.

     Like  a memory, a train works both ways. A train can bring rushing back all
those things you left behind so many years before.

     Lake  Bluff,  population  io,ooo,  came up over the sky. Margaret looked so
handsome  in  her fine new clothes. She watched me as I felt my old world gather
me  back  into  its living. She held my arm as the train slid into Bluff Station
and our baggage was escorted out.

     So many years, and the things they do to people's faces and bodies. When we
walked  through  the  town  together I saw no one I recognized. There were faces
with echoes in them. Echoes of hikes on ravine trails. Faces with small laughter
in  them  from  closed  grammar  schools and swinging on metal-linked swings and
going up and down on teeter-totters. But I didn't speak. I walked and looked and
filled  up  inside  with  all  those  memories,  like  leaves stacked for autumn
burning.

     We stayed on two weeks in all, revisiting all the places together. The days
were happy. I thought I loved Margaret well. At least I thought I did.

     It was on one of the last days that we walked down by the shore. It was not
quite  as  late  in  the  year  as  that day so many years before, but the first
evidences  of  desertion  were  coming upon the beach. People were thinning out,
several  of  the  hot-dog stands had been shuttered and nailed, and the wind, as
always, waited there to sing for us.

     I  almost  saw  Mama  sitting  on  the  sand as she used to sit. I had that
feeling  again  of wanting to be alone. But I could not force myself to speak of
this to Margaret. I only held onto her and waited.

     It  got  late in the day. Most of the children had gone home and only a few
men and women remained basking in the windy sun.

     The  life-guard  boat pulled up on the shore. The life guard stepped out of
it, slowly, with something in his arms.

     I  froze  there.  I held my breath and I felt small, only twelve years old,
very  little,  very  infinitesimal  and afraid. The wind howled. I could not see
Margaret.  I  could  see only the beach, the life guard slowly emerging from the
boat  with a gray sack in his hands, not very heavy, and his face almost as gray
and lined.

     "Stay here, Margaret," I said. I don't know why I said it.

     "But, why?"

     "Just stay here, that's all--"

     I  walked  slowly down the sand to where the life guard stood. He looked at
me.

     "What is it?"I asked.

     The life guard kept looking at me for a long time and he couldn't speak. He
put  the  gray  sack  on the sand, and water whispered wet up around it and went
back.

     "What is it?" I insisted.

     "Strange," said the life guard, quietly.

     I waited.

     "Strange,"  he said, softly. "Strangest thing I ever saw. She's been dead a
long time."

     I repeated his words.

     He  nodded.  "Ten  years,  I'd say. There haven't been any children drowned
here this year. There were twelve children drowned here since 1933, but we found
all of them before a few hours had passed. All except one, I remember. This body
here, why it must be ten years in the water. It's not--pleasant."

     I  stared at the gray sack in his arms. "Open it," I said. I don't know why
I said it. The wind was louder.

     He fumbled with the sack.

     "Hurry, man, open it!" I cried.

     "I  better  not do that," he said. Then perhaps he saw the way my face must
have looked. "She was such a _little_ girl--"

     He opened it only part way. That was enough.

     The  beach  was deserted. There was only the sky and the wind and the water
and the autumn coming on lonely. I looked down at her there.

     I said something over and over. A name. The life guard looked at me. "Where
did you find her?" I asked.

     "Down the beach, that way, in the shallow water. It's a long, long time for
her, isn't it?"

     I shook my head.

     "Yes, it is. Oh God, yes it is."

     I thought: people grow. I have grown. But she has not changed. She is still
small. She is still young. Death does not permit growth or change. She still has
golden  hair. She will be forever young and and I will love her forever, oh God,
I will love her forever.

     The life guard tied up the sack again.

     Down  the  beach,  a  few moments later, I walked by myself. I stopped, and
looked  down  at  something.  This  is where the life guard found her, I said to
myself.

     There,  at  the water's edge, lay a sand castle, only half-built. Just like
Tally and I used to build them. She half and I half.

     I  looked at it. I knelt beside the sand castle and saw the small prints of
feet  coming  in  from  the  lake  and  going back out to the lake again and not
returning.

     Then--I knew.

     "I'll help you finish it," I said.

     I  did. I built the rest of it up very slowly, then I arose and turned away
and  walked  off,  so  as  not  to  watch it crumble in the waves, as all things
crumble.

     I  walked  back  up  the  beach to where a strange woman named Margaret was
waiting for me, smiling...