 
                             There Was an Old Woman
                                      1944

     "No,  there's  no  lief  arguin'.  I got my mind fixed. Run along with your
silly  wicker  basket. Land, where you ever get notions like that? You just skit
out  of here; don't bother me, I got my tattin' and knittin' to do, and no never
minds about tall, dark gentlemen with fangled ideas."
     The  tall,  dark young man stood quietly, not moving. Aunt Tildy hurried on
with her talk.
     "You  _heard_  what  I said! If you got a mind to talk to me, well, you can
talk,  but  meantime  I  hope  you don't mind if I pour myself coffee. There. If
you'd been more polite, I'd offer you some, but you jump in here high and mighty
and you never rapped on the door or nothin'. You think you own the place."
     Aunt  Tildy  fussed  with her lap. "Now, you made me lose count! i'm makin'
myself  a comforter. These winters get on mighty chill, and it ain't fittin' for
a  lady  with  bones like rice-paper to be settin' in a drafty old house without
warmin' herself."
     The tall, dark man sat down.
     "That's  an  antique chair, so be gentle," warned Aunt Tildy. "Start again,
tell  me  things you got to tell, I'll listen respectful. But keep your voice in
your shoes and stop starin' at me with funny lights in your eyes. Land, it gives
me the collywobbles."
     The  bone-porcelain,  flowered  clock on the mantel finished chiming three.
Out  in the hail, grouped around the wicker basket, four men waited, quietly, as
if they were frozen.
     "Now, about that wicker basket," said Aunt Tildy. "It's past six feet long,
and  by  the  look, it ain't laundry. And those four men you walked in with, you
don't need them to carry that basket-- why, it's light as thistles. Eh?"
     The  dark  young man was leaning forward on the antique chair. Something in
his face suggested the basket wouldn't be so light after a while.
     "Pshaw,"  Aunt  Tildy  mused.  "Where've  I seen a wicker like that before?
Seems  it  was only a couple years ago. Seems to me-- oh! Now I remember. It was
when Mrs. Dwyer passed away next door."
     Aunt  Tildy  set  her coffee cup down, sternly. "So _that's_ what you're up
to? I thought you were workin' to sell me somethin'. You just set there until my
little  Emily trounces home from college this afternoon! I wrote her a note last
week.  Not  admittin', of course, that I wasn't feelin' quite ripe and pert, but
sort of hintin' I want to see her again, it's been a good many weeks. Her livin'
in New York and all. Almost like my own daughter, Emily is.
     "Now, she'll take care of you, young man. She'll shoo you out'n this parlor
so quick it'll--"
     The dark young man looked at Aunt Tildy as if she were tired.
     "No, I'm _not!_" she snapped.
     He  weaved  back  and  forth  on the chair, half-shutting his eyes, resting
himself.  O,  wouldn't  she  like to rest, too? he seemed to murmur. Rest, rest,
nice rest. . . ."
     "Great sons of Goshen on the Gilberry Dike! I got a hunderd comforters, two
hundred  sweaters and six hundred potholders in these fingers, no matter they're
skinny!  You  run  off,  come  back when I'm done, maybe I'll talk to you." Aunt
Tildy shifted subjects. "Let me tell you about Emily, my sweet, fair child."
     Aunt  Tildy nodded thoughtfully. Emily, with hair like yellow corn tassels,
just as soft and fine.
     "I  well  remember the day her mother died, twenty years ago, leavin' Emily
to  my house. That's why I'm mad at you and your wickers and such goings-on. Who
ever  heard of people dyin' for any good cause? Young man, I don't like it. Why,
I remember--"
     Aunt  Tildy  paused;  a brief pain of memory touched her heart. Twenty-five
years back, her father's voice trembled in the late afternoon:
     "Tildy,"  he  whispered,  "what you goin' to _do_ in life? The way you act,
men don't walk much with you. You kiss and skedaddle. Why don't you settle down,
marry, raise children?"
     "Papa,"  Tildy  shouted  back  at  him,  "I  like  laughin' and playin' and
singin'.  I'm  not  the  marryin'  kind.  I can't find a man with my philosophy,
Papa."
     "What 'philosophy's' that?"
     "That  death  is  ridiculous! It run off with Mama when we needed her most.
You call that intelligent?"
     Papa's  eyes  got  wet and gray and bleak. "You're always right, Tildy. But
what can we do? Death comes to everybody."
     "Fight!" she cried. "Strike it below the belt! Don't _believe_ in it!"
     "Can't he done," said Papa sadly. "We all stand alone in the world."
     "There's  got to be a change sometime, Papa. I'm startin' my own philosophy
here and now! Why, it's silly people live a couple years and are shoved like wet
seeds  in a hole; but nothin' sprouts. What good do they do? Lay there a million
years,  helpin'  no  one.  Most  of  them  fine,  nice, neat people, or at least
tryin'."
     But  Papa  wasn't listening. He bleached out, faded away, like a photo left
lying in the sun. She tried to talk him out of it, hut he passed on, anyway. She
spun  about  and  ran.  She  couldn't stay on once he was cold, for his coldness
denied  her philosophy. She didn't attend his burial. She didn't do anything but
set  up this antique shop on the front of an old house and live alone for years,
that  is,  until Emily came. Tildy didn't want to take the girl in. Why? Because
Emily believed in dying. But her mother was an old friend and Tildy had promised
help.
     "Emily,"  continued Aunt Tildy, to the man in black, "was the first to live
in  this  house with me in all the years. I never got married. I feared the idea
of  livin'  with  a  man twenty-thirty years and then have him up and die on me.
It'd  shake  my convictions like a house of cards. I shied off from the world. I
screamed at people if they so much as mentioned death."
     The  young  man  listened  patiently, politely. Then he lifted his hand. He
seemed  to  know everything, with the dark, cold shining of his eyes, before she
opened  her  mouth.  He  knew  about her and World War II, when she shut off her
radio forever and stopped the newspapers and beat a man's head with an umbrella,
driving  him  from  her shop when he insisted on describing the invasion beaches
and  the  long,  slow tides of the dead drifting under the silent urgings of the
moon.
     Yes,  the  dark  young man smiled from the antique rocker, he knew how Aunt
Tildy  had  stuck  to  her  nice  old  phonograph  records. Harry Lauder singing
"Roamin'  in  the  Gloamin',"  Madame  Schumann-Heink  and  lullabies.  With  no
interruptions,  no  foreign  calamities,  murders,  poisonings,  auto accidents,
suicides.  Music  stayed  the  same each day, every day. So the years ran, while
Aunt  Tildy  tried  to teach Emily her philosophy. But Emily's mind was fixed on
mortality.  She  respected  Aunt  Tildy's  way  of  thinking, however, and never
mentioned--eternity.
     All this the young man knew.
     Aunt  Tildy  sniffed. "How do you know all those things? Well, if you think
you  can  talk me into that silly wicker basket, you're way off the trestle. You
lay hands on me, I'll spit right _in_ your face!"
     The young man smiled. Aunt Tildy sniffed again.
     "Don't  simper  like a sick dog. I'm too old to be made love at. That's all
twisted dry, like an old tube of paint, and left behind in the years."
     There  was  a  noise. The mantel clock chimed three. Aunt Tildy flashed her
eyes  to  it. Strange. Hadn't it chimed three o'clock just five minutes ago? She
liked  the  bone-white clock with gold angels dangling naked about its numeraled
face and its tone like cathedral bells, soft and far away.
     "Are you just goin' to sit there, young man?"
     He was.
     "Then,  you  won't mind if I take a little cat nap. Now, don't you stir off
that  chair.  Don't  come  creepin' around me. Just goin' to close my eyes for a
spell. That's right. That's right. . . ."
     Nice  and  quiet  and  restful time of day. Silence. Just the clock ticking
away,  busy as termites in wood. Just the old room smelling of polished mahogany
and  oiled  leather in the Morris chair, and hooks sitting stiff on the shelves.
So nice. Nice. .
     "You  aren't  gettin' up from the chair, are you, mister? Better not. I got
one eye open for you. Yes, indeed I have. Yes, I have. Oh. Ah, hmmmm."
     So feathery. So drowsy. So deep. Under water, almost. Oh, so nice.
     Who's  that  movin'  around  in  the  dark  with my eyes closed? Who's that
kissin'  my  cheek? You, Emily? No. No. Guess it was my thoughts. Only_dreamin'.
Land, yes, that's it. Driftin' off, off, off.
      
     AH? WHAT SAY? OH!
     "Wait while I put on my glasses. There!"
     The  clock  chimed  three again. Shame, old clock, now, shame. Have to have
you fixed.
     The young man in the dark suit stood near the door. Aunt Tildy nodded.
     "You  leavin'  so  soon,  young  man?  Had to give up, didn't you? Couldn't
convince  me;  no,  I'm mule-stubborn. Never get me free of this house, so don't
bother comin' back to try!"
     The young man bowed with slow dignity.
     He had no intention of coming again, ever.
     "Fine," declared Aunt Tildy. "I always told Papa I'd win! Why, I'll knit in
this window the next thousand years. They'll have to chew the boards down around
me to get me out."
     The dark young man twinkled his eyes.
     "Quit  lookin' like the cat that ate the bird," cried Aunt Tildy. "Get that
old fool wicker away!"
     The  four  men  trod heavily out the front door. Tildy studied the way they
handled an empty basket, yet staggered with its weight.
     "Here, now!" She rose in tremulous indignation. "Did you steal my antiques?
My books? The clocks? What you got in that wicker?"
     The  dark  young  man  whistled  jauntily, turning his back to her, walking
along  behind  the  four  staggering  men. At the door he pointed to the wicker,
offered  its  lid  to  Aunt Tildy. In pantomime he wondered if she would like to
open it and gaze inside.
     "Curious? Me? Pshaw, no. Get out!" cried Aunt Tildy.
     The dark young man tapped a hat onto his head, saluted her crisply.
     "Good-by!" Aunt Tildy slammed the door.
     There,  there.  That  was  better. Gone. Darned fool men with their maggoty
ideas.  No  never  minds  about  the wicker. If they stole something, she didn't
care, long as they let her alone.
     "Look."  Aunt  Tildy  smiled.  "Here  comes Emily, home from college. About
time. Lovely girl. See how she walks. But, land, she looks pale and funny today,
walkin' so slow. I wonder why. Looks worried, she does. Poor girl. I'll just fix
some coffee and a tray of cakes."
     Emily  tapped  up  the front steps. Aunt Tildy, rustling around, could hear
the  slow, deliberate steps. What _ailed_ the girl? Didn't sound like she had no
more  spunk  than  a  flue-lizard. The front door swung wide. Emily stood in the
hall, holding to the brass doorknob.
     "Emily?" called Aunt Tildy.
     Emily shuffled into the parlor, head down.
     "Emily! I been waitin' for you! There was the darndest fool men here with a
wicker.  Tryin'  to  sell me something I didn't want. Glad you're home. Makes it
right cozy--"
     Aunt Tildy realized that for a full minute Emily had been staring.
     "Emily,  what's  wrong? Stop starin'. Here, I'll bring you a cup of coffee.
There! -
     "Emily, why you backin' away from me?
     "Emily,  stop  screamin',  child.  Don't  scream,  Emily!  Don't!  You keep
screamin'  that  way,  you  go crazy. Emily, get up off the floor, get away from
that wall! Emily! Stop cringin', child. I won't hurt you!
     "Land, if it ain't one thing it's another.
     "Emily, what's _wrong_, child . . ."
     Emily groaned through her hands over her face.
     "Child, child," whispered Aunt Tildy. "Here, sip this water. Sip it, Emily,
that's it."
     Emily  widened  her eyes, saw something, then shut them, quivering, pulling
into herself. "Aunt Tildy, Aunt Tildy, Aunt--"
     "Stop that!" Tildy slapped her. "What _ails_ you?"
     Emily forced herself to look up again.
     She thrust her fingers out. They vanished inside Aunt Tildy.
     "What fool notion!" cried Tildy. "Take your hand away! Take it, I say!"
     Emily  dropped  aside,  jerked her head, the golden hair shaking into shiny
temblors. "You're not here, Aunt Tildy. I'm dreaming. You're dead!"
     "Hush, baby."
     "You _can't_ be here."
     "Land of Goshen, Emily--"
     She  took  Emily's hand. It passed clean through her. Instantly, Aunt Tildy
raised straight up, stomping her foot.
     "Why,  why!"  she  cried angrily. "That--fibber! That sneakthief!" Her thin
hands knotted to wiry, hard, pale fists. "That dark, dark fiend; He stole it! He
toted  it  away,  he did, oh he did, he did! Why, I--" Wrath steamed in her. Her
pale  blue  eyes  were  fire.  She sputtered into an indignant silence. Then she
turned to Emily. "Child, get up! I need you!"
     Emily lay, quivering.
     "Part  of  me's here!" declared Aunt Tildy. "By the Lord Harry, what's left
will have to do, for a bit. Fetch my bonnet!"
     Emily confessed. "I'm scared."
     "Certainly, oh, certainly not of _me?_"
     "Yes."
     "Why,  I'm  no  spook!  You  known  me  most of your life! Now's no time to
snivel-sop. Fetch up on your heels or I'll slap you crack across your nose!"
     Emily  rose, in sobs, stood like something cornered, trying to decide which
direction to bolt in.
     "Where's your car, Emily?"
     "Down at the garage--ma'am."
     "Good!"  Aunt  Tildy  hustled her through the front door. "Now--" Her sharp
eyes poked up and down the streets. "Which way's the mortuary?"
     Emily  held to the step rail, fumbling down. "What're you going to do, Aunt
Tildy?"
     "Do?"  cried Aunt Tildy, tottering after her, jowls shaking in a thin, pale
fury. "Why, get my body back, of course! Get my body back! Go on!"
      
     The  car  roared,  Emily  clenched  to the steering wheel, staring straight
ahead at the curved, rain-wet streets. Aunt Tildy shook her parasol.
     "Hurry,  child,  hurry,  before  they squirt juices in my body and dice and
cube  it the way them persnickety morticians have a habit of doin'. They cut and
sew it so it ain't no good to no one!"
     "Oh,  Auntie, Auntie, let me go, don't make me drive! It won't do any good,
no good at all," sighed the girl.
     "Here  we are." Emily pulled to the curb, and collapsed over the wheel, but
Aunt Tildy had already popped from the car and trotted with mincing skirt up the
mortuary  drive,  around  behind to where the shiny black hearse was unloading a
wicker basket.
     "You!" she directed her attack at one of the four men with the wicker. "Put
that down!"
     The four men looked up.
     One said, "Step aside, lady. We're doing our job."
     "That's my body tucked in there!" She brandished the parasol.
     "That  I  wouldn't  know  anything about," said a second man. "Please don't
block traffic, madam. This thing is heavy."
     "Sir!" she cried, wounded. "I'll have you know I weigh only one hundred and
ten pounds."
     He  looked at her casually. "I'm not interested in your heft, lady. I'm due
home for supper. My wife'll kill me if I'm late."
     The  four  of  them  moved  on,  Aunt Tildy in pursuit, down a hall, into a
preparations room.
     A  white-smocked  man  awaited  the  wicker's arrival with a rather pleased
smile on his long, eager_looking face. Aunt Tildy didn't care for the avidity of
that  face,  or the entire personality of the man. The basket was deposited, the
four men wandered off.
     The man in the white smock glanced at Auntie and said:
     "Madam, this is no fit place for a gentlewoman."
     "Well,"  she  said, gratified, "glad you feel that way. It's exactly what I
tried to tell that dark-clothed young man!"
     The mortician puzzled. "What dark-clothed young man is that?"
     "The one that came puddlin' around my house, that's who."
     "No one of that description works for us."
     "No  matter.  As  you  just so intelligently stated, this is no place for a
lady. I don't want me here. I want me home cookin' ham for Sunday visitors, it's
near Easter. I got Emily to feed, sweaters to knit, clocks to wind--"
     "You  are  quite philosophical, and philanthropical, no doubt of it, madam,
but  I  have work. A body has arrived." This last, he said with apparent relish,
and a winnowing of his knives, tubes, jars, and instruments.
     Tildy bristled. "You put so much as a fingerprint on that body, and I'll--"
     He  laid her aside like a little old moth. "George," he called with a suave
gentleness, "escort this lady out, please."
     Aunt Tildy glared at the approaching George.
     "Show me your backside, goin' the other way!"
     George took her wrists. "This way, please."
     Tildy  extricated  herself.  Easily.  Her  flesh  sort of--slipped. It even
amazed Tildy. Such an unexpected talent to develop at this late day.
     "See?"  she  said, pleased with her ability. "You can't budge me. I want my
body back!"
     The  mortician  opened the wicker lid casually. Then, in a recurrent series
of scrutinies he realized the body inside was . . . it seemed . . . could it be?
.  . . maybe. . . yes. . . no.. . no. . . it just _couldn't_ be, but . . . "Ah,"
he exhaled, abruptly. He turned. His eyes were wide, then they narrowed.
     "Madam," he said, cautiously. "This lady here is--a--relative-- of yours?"
     "A very dear relation. Be careful of her."
     "A sister, perhaps?" He grasped at a straw of dwindling logic, hopefully.
     "No, you fool. Me, do you hear? _Me!_"
     The  mortician  considered the idea. "No," he said. "Things like this don't
happen."  He  fumbled with his tools. "George, get help from the others. I can't
work with a crank present."
     The  four  men  returned.  Aunt  Tildy crossed her arms in defiance. "Won't
budge!"  she  cried,  as  she  was  moved  like  a  pawn  on  a chessboard, from
preparations  room  to  slumber  room,  to  hall, to waiting chamber, to funeral
parlor,  where  she  threw  herself  down  on  a chair in the very center of the
vestibule. There were pews going back into gray silence, and a smell of flowers.
     "Please,  ma'am," said one of the men. "That's where the body rests for the
service tomorrow."
     "I'm sittin' right plumb here until I get what I want."
     She  sat,  pale  fingers  fussing with the lace at her throat, jaw set, one
high-buttoned  shoe  tapping with irritation. If a man got in whopping distance,
she  gave  him  a  parasol  whop. And when they touched her, now, she remembered
to--slip away.
     Mr. Carrington, Mortuary President, heard the disturbance in his office and
came  toddling  down  the  aisle  to  investigate. "Here, here," he whispered to
everyone, finger to mouth. "More respect, more respect. What is this? Oh, madam,
may I help you?"
     She looked him up and down. "You may."
     "How may I be of service, please?"
     "Go in that room back there," directed Aunt Tildy.
     "Yee--ess."
     "And  tell that eager young investigator to quit fiddlin' with my body. I'm
a maiden lady. My moles, birthmarks, scars, and other bric-a-brac, including the
turn  of  my  ankle,  are  my  own  secret. I don't want him pryin' and probin',
cuttin', or hurtin' it any way."
     This  was  vague  to  Mr.  Carrington, who hadn't correlated bodies yet. He
looked at her in blank helplessness.
     "He's  got  me  in  there on his table, like a pigeon ready to be drawn and
stuffed!" she told him.
     Mr.  Carrington  hustled  off  to  check.  After fifteen minutes of waiting
silence  and horrified arguing, comparing notes with the mortician behind closed
doors, Carrington returned, three shades whiter.
     Carrington dropped his glasses, picked them up. "You're making it difficult
for us."
     "_I_ am?" raged Aunt Tildy. "Saint Vitus in the mornin'! Looky here, Mister
Blood and Bones or whatever, you tell that--"
     "We're already draining the blood from the--"
     "What!"
     "Yes, yes, I assure you, yes. So, you just go away, now; there's nothing to
be  done."  He  laughed  nervously.  "Our  mortician  is also performing a brief
autopsy to determine cause of death."
     Auntie jumped to her feet, burning.
     "He can't do that! Only coroners are allowed to do that!"
     "Well, we sometimes allow a little--"
     "March  straight  in  and  tell  that  Cut-'em-up to pump all that fine New
England  blue  blood  right  back into that fine-skinned body, and if he's taken
anything  out,  for  him to attach it back in so it'll function proper, and then
turn that body, fresh as paint, into my keepin'. You hear!"
     "There's nothing I can do. Nothing."
     "Tell  you  _what_.  I'm  settin'  here for the next two hundred years. You
listenin'?  And  every  time  any of your customers come by, I'll spit ectoplasm
right squirt up their nostrils!"
     Carrington  groped  that  thought  around  his weakening mind and emitted a
groan. "You'd ruin our business. You wouldn't do that."
     Auntie smiled. "_Wouldn't_ I?"
     Carrington  ran  up  the  dark  aisle.  In  the distance you could hear him
dialing  a phone over and over again. Half an hour later cars roared up in front
of  the mortuary. Three vice-presidents of the mortuary came down the aisle with
their hysterical president.
     "What seems to be the trouble?"
     Auntie told them with a few well-chosen infernalities.
     They  held  a  conference, meanwhile notifying the mortician to discontinue
his  homework,  at  least until such time as an agreement was reached. . . . The
mortician walked from his chamber and stood smiling amiably, smoking a big black
cigar.
     Auntie stared at the cigar.
     "Where'd you put the _ashes?_" she cried, in horror.
     The mortician only grinned imperturbably and puffed.
     The conference broke up.
     "Madam,  in  all  fairness,  you  wouldn't  force  us  out on the street to
continue our services, would you?"
     Auntie scanned the vultures. "Oh, I wouldn't mind at all."
     Carrington wiped sweat from his jowls. "You can have your body back."
     "Ha!" shouted Auntie. Then, with caution: "Intact?"
     "Intact."
     "No formaldehyde?"
     "No formaldehyde."
     "Blood in it?"
     "Blood, my God, yes, blood, if only you'll take it and go!"
     A prim nod. "Fair enough. Fix 'er up. It's a deal."
     Carrington  snapped his fingers at the mortician. "Don't _stand_ there, you
mental incompetent. Fix it up!"
     "And be careful with that cigar!" said the old woman.
      
     "Easy,  easy,"  said  Aunt Tildy. "Put the wicker on the floor  where I can
step in it."
     She  didn't look at the body much. Her only comment was, "Natural-lookin'."
She let herself fall back into the wicker.
     A  biting sensation of arctic coldness gripped her, followed by an unlikely
nausea and a giddy whorling. She was two drops of matter fusing, water trying to
seep  into  concrete.  Slow  to do. Hard. Like a butterfly trying to squirm back
into a discarded husk of flinty chrysalis!
     The  vice-presidents  watched  Aunt Tildy with apprehension. Mr. Carrington
wrung  his  fingers  and  tried to assist with boosting and pushing moves of his
hands  and  arms.  The  mortician,  frankly skeptical, watched with idle, amused
eyes.
     Seeping  into cold, long granite. Seeping into a frozen and ancient statue.
Squeezing all the way.
     "Come alive, damn ye!" shouted Aunt Tildy to herself. "Raise up a bit."
     The body half-rose, rustling in the dry wicker.
     "Fold your legs, woman!"
     The body grabbled up, blindly groping.
     "See!" shouted Aunt Tildy.
     Light entered the webbed blind eyes.
     "Feel!" urged Aunt Tildy.
     The  body  felt  the  warmth  of  the  room,  the  sudden  reality  of  the
preparations table on which to lean, panting.
     "Move!"
     The body took a creaking, slow step.
     "Hear!" she snapped.
     The  noises  of  the  place  came  into the dull ears. The harsh, expectant
breath  of  the  mortician,  shaken;  the  whimpering  Mr.  Carrington;  her own
crackling voice.
     "Walk!" she said.
     The body walked.
     "Think!" she said.
     The old brain thought.
     "Speak!" she said.
     The body spoke, bowing to the morticians:
     "Much obliged. Thank you."
     "Now," she said, finally, "cry!"
     And she began to cry tears of utter happiness.
      
     And  now,  any  afternoon  about four, if you want to visit Aunt Tildy, you
just  walk  around  to  her  antique  shop and rap. There's a big, black funeral
wreath  on  the  door. Don't mind that! Aunt Tildy left it there; that's how her
humor  runs. You rap on the door. It's double-barred and triple-locked, and when
you rap her voice shrills out at you.
     "Is that the man in black?"
     And you laugh and say no, no, it's only me, Aunt Tildy.
     And  she  laughs and says, "Come on in, quick!" and she whips the door open
and slams it shut behind, so no man in black can ever slip in with you. Then she
sets  you  down  and pours your coffee and shows you her latest knitted sweater.
She's not as fast as she used to be, and can't see as good, but she gets on.
     "And  if  you're  'specially good," Aunt Tildy declares, setting her coffee
cup to one side, "I'll give you a little treat."
     "What's that?" visitors will ask.
     "This," says Auntie, pleased with her little uniqueness, her little joke.
     Then  with  modest moves of her fingers she will unfasten the white lace at
her neck and chest and for a brief moment show what lies beneath.
     The long blue scar where the autopsy was neatly sewn together.
     "Not bad sewin' for a man," she allows. "Oh, some more coffee? _There!_"