                             
                                Tomorrow's Child
                                      1948

     He did not want to be the father of a small blue pyramid. Peter Horn hadn't
planned  it  that way at all. Neither he nor his wife imagined that such a thing
could  happen to them. They had talked quietly for days about the birth of their
coming  child,  they  had eaten normal foods, slept a great deal, taken in a few
shows,  and,  when it was time for her to fly in the helicopter to the hospital,
her husband held her and kissed her.

     "Honey,  you'll be home in six hours," he said. "These new birth-mechanisms
do everything but father the child for you."

     She  remembered  an  old-time song. "No, no, they can't take that away from
me!"  and sang it, and they laughed as the helicopter lifted them over the green
way from country to city.

     The doctor, a quiet gentleman named Wolcott, was very confident. Polly Ann,
the  wife,  was  made ready for the task ahead and the father was put, as usual,
out in the waiting room where he could suck on cigarettes or take highballs from
a  convenient  mixer.  He was. feeling pretty good. This was the first baby, but
there was not a thing to worry about. Polly Ann was in good hands.

     Dr. Wolcott; came into the waiting room an hour later. He looked like a man
who  has  seen  death. Peter Horn, on his third highball, did not move. His hand
tightened on the glass and he whispered:

     "She's dead."

     "No," said Wolcott, quietly. "No, no, she's fine. It's the baby."

     "The baby's dead, then."

     "The  baby's  alive, too, but—drink the rest of that drink and come along
after me. Something's happened."

     Yes,  indeed, something had happened. The "something" that had happened had
brought the entire hospital out into the corridors. People were going and coming
from  one  room  to  another.  As  Peter  Horn  was  led through a hallway where
attendants  in  white  uniforms  were  standing around peering into each other's
faces and whispering, he became quite ill.

     "Hey, looky looky!" "The child of Peter Horn! Incredible!"

     They  entered  a  small  clean room. There was a crowd in the room, looking
down at a low table. There was something on the table.

     A small blue pyramid.

     "Why've you brought me here?" said Horn, turning to the doctor.

     The small blue pyramid moved. It began to cry.

     Peter  Horn pushed forward and looked down wildly. He was very white and he
was breathing rapidly. "You don't mean that's it?"

     The doctor named Wolcott nodded.

     The  blue  pyramid  had  six  blue snakelike appendages and three eyes that
blinked from the tips of projecting structures.

     Horn didn't move.

     "It weighs seven pounds, eight ounces," someone said.

     Horn  thought  to  himself,  they're kidding me. This is some joke. Charlie
Ruscoll is behind all this. He'll pop in a door any moment and cry "April Fool!"
and everybody'll laugh. That's not my child. Oh, horrible! They're kidding me.

     Horn stood there, and the sweat rolled down his face.

     "Get me away from here." Horn turned and his hands were opening and closing
without purpose, his eyes were flickering.

     Wolcott  held  his  elbow,  talking calmly. "This is your child. Understand
that, Mr. Horn."

     "No.  No,  it's not." His mind wouldn't touch the thing. "It's a nightmare.
Destroy it!"

     "You can't kill a human being."

     "Human?"  Horn  blinked  tears.  "That's  not human! That's a crime against
God!"

     The  doctor  went  on,  quickly.  "We've  examined this—child—and we've
decided  that it is not a mutant, a result of gene destruction or rearrangement.
It's not a freak. Nor is it sick. Please listen to everything I say to you."

     Horn  stared  at  the  wall,  his eyes wide and sick. He swayed. The doctor
talked distantly, with assurance.

     "The  child  was  somehow  affected  by  the  birth  pressure.  There was a
dimensional   distructure  caused  by  the  simultaneous  short-circuitings  and
malfunctionings  of  the  new  birth  and  hypnosis machines. Well, anyway," the
doctor ended lamely, "your baby was born into—another dimension."

     Horn did not even nod. He stood there, waiting.

     Dr.  Wolcott made it emphatic. "Your child is alive, well, and happy. It is
lying there, on the table. But because it was born into another dimension it has
a  shape  alien to us. Our eyes, adjusted to a three-dimensional concept, cannot
recognize  it  as  a  baby.  But  it is. Underneath that camouflage, the strange
pyramidal shape and appendages, it is your child."

     Horn closed his mouth and shut his eyes. "Can. I have a drink?"

     "Certainly." A drink was thrust into Horn's hands.

     "Now, let me just sit down, sit down somewhere a moment." Horn sank wearily
into  a chair. It was coming clear. Everything shifted slowly into place. It was
his  child,  no  matter what. He shuddered. No matter how horrible it looked, it
was his first child.

     At  last he looked up and tried to see the doctor. "What'll we tell Polly?"
His voice was hardly a whisper.

     "We'll work that out this morning, as soon as you feel up to it."

     "What happens after that? Is there any way to—change it back?"

     "We'll try. That is, if you give us permission to try. After all, it's your
child. You can do anything with him you want to do."

     "Him?"  Horn laughed ironically, shutting his eyes. "How do you know it's a
him?" He sank down into darkness. His ears roared.

     Wolcott  was  visibly  upset. "Why, we—that is—well, we don't know, for
sure."

     Horn drank more of his drink. "What if you can't change him back?"

     "I  realize  what a shock it is to you, Mr. Horn. If you can't bear to look
upon the child, we'll be glad to raise him here, at the Institute, for you."

     Horn  thought  it over. "Thanks. But he still belongs to me and Polly. I'll
give  him a home. Raise him like I'd raise any kid. Give him a normal home life.
Try  to  learn  to  love  him. Treat him right." His lips were numb, he couldn't
think.

     "You  realize  what  a  job you're taking on, Mr. Horn? This child can't be
allowed to have normal playmates; why, they'd pester it to death in no time. You
know  how  children are. If you decide to raise the child at home, his life will
be strictly regimented, he must never be seen by anyone. Is that clear?"

     "Yes. Yes, it's clear. Doc. Doc, is he all right mentally?"

     "Yes.  We've  tested  his  reactions.  He's  a fine healthy child as far as
nervous response and such things go."

     "I just wanted to be sure. Now, the only problem is Polly."

     Wolcott  frowned. "I confess that one has me stumped. You know it is pretty
hard  on  a woman to hear that her child has been born dead. But this, telling a
woman  she's  given  birth  to  something not recognizable as human. It's not as
clean  as  death. There's too much chance for shock. And yet I must tell her the
truth. A doctor gets nowhere by lying to his patient."

     Horn  put his glass down. "I don't want to lose Polly, too. I'd be prepared
now,  if  you  destroyed the child, to take it. But I don't want Polly killed by
the shock of this whole thing."

     "I  think  we  may be able to change the child back. That's the point which
makes me hesitate. If I thought the case was hopeless I'd make out a certificate
of euthanasia immediately. But it's at least worth a chance."

     Horn  was very tired. He was shivering quietly, deeply. "All right, doctor.
It  needs  food,  milk, and love until you can fix it up. It's had a raw deal so
far, no reason for it to go on getting a raw deal. When will we tell Polly?"

     "Tomorrow afternoon, when she wakes up."

     Horn got up and walked to the table which was warmed by a soft illumination
from overhead. The blue pyramid sat upon the table as Horn held out his hand.

     "Hello, Baby," said Horn.

     The  blue pyramid looked up at Horn with three bright blue eyes. It shifted
a tiny blue tendril, touching Horn's fingers with it.

     Horn shivered.

     "Hello, Baby."

     The  doctor  produced a special feeding bottle. "This is woman's milk. Here
we go."

     

     Baby  looked upward through clearing mists. Baby saw the shapes moving over
him and knew them to be friendly. Baby was newborn, but already alert, strangely
alert. Baby was aware.

     There  were moving objects above and around Baby. Six cubes of a gray-white
color,  bending down. Six cubes with hexagonal appendages and three eyes to each
cube.  Then there were two other cubes coming from a distance over a crystalline
plateau. One of the cubes was white. It had three eyes, too. There was something
about  this  White Cube that Baby liked. There was an attraction. Some relation.
There was an odor to the White Cube that reminded Baby of itself.

     Shrill  sounds  came  from the six bending-down gray-white cubes. Sounds of
curiosity and wonder. It was like a kind of piccolo music, all playing at once.

     Now  the  two  newly  arrived cubes, the White Cube and the Gray Cube, were
whistling. After a while the White Cube extended one of its hexagonal appendages
to  touch  Baby.  Baby  responded  by  putting  out one of its tendrils from its
pyramidal  body.  Baby  liked  the White Cube. Baby liked. Baby was hungry. Baby
liked. Maybe the White Cube would give it food … 

     The Gray Cube produced a pink globe for Baby. Baby was now to be fed. Good.
Good. Baby accepted food eagerly.

     Food was good. All the gray-white cubes drifted away, leaving only the nice
White Cube standing over Baby looking down and whistling over and over. Over and
over.

     

     They  told  Polly  the  next day. Not everything. Just enough. Just a hint.
They  told  her the baby was not well, in a certain way. They talked slowly, and
in  ever-tightening circles, in upon Polly. Then Dr. Wolcott gave a long lecture
on  the  birth-mechanisms,  how  they helped a woman in her labor, and how, this
time,  they  short-circuited.  There was another man of scientific means present
and  he  gave  her  a dry little talk on dimensions, holding up his fingers, so!
one,  two,  three,  and  four.  Still  another  man talked of energy and matter.
Another spoke of underprivileged children.

     Polly  finally  sat  up  in  bed and said, "What's all the talk for? What's
wrong with my baby that you should all be talking so long?"

     Wolcott told her.

     "Of course, you can wait a week and see it," he said. "Or you can sign over
guardianship of the child to the Institute."

     "There's only one thing I want to know," said Polly.

     Dr. Wolcott raised his brows.

     "Did I make the child that way?" asked Polly.

     "You most certainly did not!"

     "The child isn't a monster, genetically?" asked Polly.

     "The  child  was  thrust into another continuum. Otherwise, it is perfectly
normal."

     Polly's  tight,  lined  mouth  relaxed. She said, simply, "Then bring me my
baby. I want to see him. Please. Now."

     They brought the "child."

     The  Horns  left the hospital the next day. Polly walked out on her own two
good legs, with Peter Horn following her, looking at her in quiet amazement.

     They  did  not  have the baby with them. That would come later. Horn helped
his wife into their helicopter and sat beside her. He lifted the ship, whirring,
into the warm air.

     "You're a wonder," he said.

     "Am I?" she said, lighting a cigarette.

     "You are. You didn't cry. You didn't do anything."

     "He's  not  so  bad,  you know," she said. "Once you get to know him. I can
even—hold  him  in  my  arms.  He's  warm  and  he cries and he even needs his
triangular diapers." Here she laughed. He noticed a nervous tremor in the laugh,
however.  "No,  I  didn't  cry,  Pete, because that's my baby. Or he will be. He
isn't  dead,  I  thank  God for that. He's—I don't know how to explain—still
unborn.  I  like to think he hasn't been born yet. We're waiting for him to show
up. I have confidence in Dr. Wolcott. Haven't you?"

     "You're  right. You're right." He reached over and held her hand. "You know
something? You're a peach."

     "I can hold on," she said, sitting there looking ahead as the green country
swung  under them. "As long as I know something good will happen, I won't let it
hurt or shock me. I'll wait six months, and then maybe I'll kill myself."

     "Polly!"

     She  looked at him as if he'd just come in. "Pete, I'm sorry. But this sort
of  thing  doesn't  happen.  Once  it's over and the baby is finally 'born' I'll
forget  it  so quick it'll never have occurred. But if the doctor can't help us,
then  a mind can't take it, a mind can only tell the body to climb out on a roof
and jump."

     "Things'll  be  all right," he said, holding to the guide-wheel. "They have
to be."

     She  said nothing, but let the cigarette smoke blow out of her mouth in the
pounding concussion of the helicopter fan.

     Three  weeks passed. Every day they flew in to the Institute to visit "Py."
For  that  was the quiet calm name that Polly Horn gave to the blue pyramid that
lay  on  the warm sleeping-table and blinked up at them. Dr. Wolcott was careful
to  point  out  that  the habits of the "child" were as normal as any others; so
many hours sleep, so many awake, so much attentiveness, so much boredom, so much
food,  so  much  elimination. Polly Horn listened, and her face softened and her
eyes warmed.

     At the end of the third week, Dr. Wolcott said, "Feel up to taking him home
now?  You live in the country, don't you? All right, you have an enclosed patio,
he  can  be  out  there  in the sunlight, on occasion. He needs a mother's love.
That's trite, but nevertheless true. He should be suckled. We have an arangement
where he's been fed by the new feed-mech; cooing voice, warmth, hands, and all."
Dr.  Wolcott's voice was dry. "But still I feel you are familiar enough with him
now to know he's a pretty healthy child. Are you game, Mrs. Horn?"

     "Yes, I'm game."'

     "Good.  Bring  him  in  every  third day for a checkup. Here's his formula.
We're  working  on several solutions now, Mrs. Horn. We should have some results
for  you  by  the  end of the year. I don't want to say anything definite, but I
have  reason  to  believe we'll pull that boy right out of the fourth dimension,
like a rabbit out of a hat."

     The  doctor  was  mildly  surprised and pleased when Polly Horn kissed him,
then and there.

     

     Pete  Horn took the copter home over the smooth rolling greens of Griffith.
From time to time he looked at the pyramid lying in Polly's arms. She was making
cooing noises at it, it was replying in approximately the same way.

     "I wonder," said Polly.

     "What?"

     "How do we look to it?" asked his wife.

     "I  asked  Wolcott about that. He said we probably look funny to him, also.
He's in one dimension, we're in another."

     "You mean we don't look like men and women to him?"

     "If we could see ourselves, no. But remember, the baby knows nothing of men
or  women.  To the baby whatever shape we're in, we are natural. It's accustomed
to  seeing  us  shaped like cubes or squares or pyramids, as it sees us from its
separate dimension. The baby's had no other experience, no other norm with which
to  compare  what  it  sees.  We are its norm. On the other hand, the baby seems
weird to us because we compare it to our accustomed shapes and sizes."

     "Yes, I see. I see."

     Baby was conscious of movement. One White Cube held him in warm appendages.
Another  White  Cube  sat  further  over, within an oblong of purple. The oblong
moved  in  the  air  over  a  vast  bright plain of pyramids, hexagons, oblongs,
pillars, bubbles, and multi-colored cubes.

     One  White Cube made a whistling noise. The other White Cube replied with a
whistling.  The  White  Cube  that  held him shifted about. Baby watched die two
White Cubes, and watched the fleeing world outside the traveling bubble.

     Baby  felt—sleepy.  Baby closed his eyes, settled his pyramidal youngness
upon the lap of the White Cube, and made faint little noises … 

     "He's asleep," said Polly Horn.

     

     Summer  came,  Peter Horn himself was busy with his export-import business.
But he made certain he was home every night. Polly was all right during the day,
but,  at  night, when she had to be alone with the child, she got to smoking too
much,  and  one  night he found her passed out on the davenport, an empty sherry
bottle  on the table beside her. From then on, he took care of the child himself
nights.  When  it cried it made a weird whistling noise, like some jungle animal
lost and wailing. It wasn't the sound of a child.

     Peter Horn had the nursery soundproofed.

     "So your wife won't hear your baby crying?" asked the workman.

     "Yes," said Peter Horn. "So she won't hear."

     They  had  few visitors. They were afraid that someone might stumble on Py,
dear sweet pyramid little Py.

     "What's  that  noise?"  asked  a  visitor  one  evening, over his cocktail.
"Sounds like some sort of bird. You didn't tell me you had an aviary. Peter?"

     "Oh,  yes," said Horn, closing the nursery door. "Have another drink. Let's
drink, everyone."

     It  was  like having a dog or a cat in the house. At least that's how Polly
looked  upon  it. Peter Horn watched her and observed exactly how she talked and
petted  the small Py. It was Py this and Py that, but somehow with some reserve,
and  sometimes  she  would look around the room and touch herself, and her hands
would  clench,  and  she  would look lost and afraid, as if she were waiting for
someone to arrive.

     In  September,  Polly  reported  to her husband: "He can say Father. Yes he
can. Come on, Py. Say, Father!"

     She held the blue warm pyramid up.

     "Wheelly," whistled the tittle warm blue pyramid.

     "Again," repeated Polly.

     "Wheelly!" whistled the pyramid.

     "For  God's sake, stop!" said Pete Horn. He took the child from her and put
it  in  the  nursery  where it whistled over and over that name, that name, that
name.  Horn  came  out  and  poured  himself  a  stiff drink. Polly was laughing
quietly.

     "Isn't  that  terrific?"  she  said.  "Even  his  voice  is  in  the fourth
dimension.  Won't  it  be  nice  when  he  learns  to talk later? We'll give him
Hamlet's  soliloquy  to  memorize  and  he'll  say  it  but  it'll come out like
something from James Joyce! Aren't we lucky? Give me a drink."

     "You've had enough," he said.

     "Thanks, I'll help myself," she said and did.

     October,  and  then  November. Py was learning to talk now. He whistled and
squealed  and  made  a  bell-like  tone when he was hungry. Dr. Wolcott visited.
"When  his  color  is a constant bright blue," said the doctor, "that means he's
healthy.  When  the  color  fades,  dull—the child is feeling poorly. Remember
that."

     "Oh,  yes,  I will, I will," said Polly. "Robin's-egg blue for health, dull
cobalt for illness."

     "Young  lady," said Wolcott. "You'd better take a couple of these pills and
come  see  me  tomorrow  for a little chat. I don't like the way you're talking.
Stick  out  your  tongue.  Ah-hmm. You been drinking? Look at the stains on your
fingers. Cut the cigarettes in half, See you tomorrow."

     "You  don't  give  me  much to go on," said Polly. "It's been almost a year
now."

     "My  dear  Mrs.  Horn, I don't want to excite you continually. When we have
our  mechs  ready  we'll  let  you know. We're working every day. There'll be an
experiment  soon.  Take those pills now and shut that nice mouth." He chucked Py
under the "chin." "Good healthy baby, by God! Twenty pounds if he's an ounce!"

     

     Baby  was  conscious  of the goings and comings of the two nice White Cubes
who were with him during all of his waking hours. There was another cube, a gray
one,  who  visited  on  certain  days. But mostly it was the two White Cubes who
cared  for  and  loved  him. He looked up at the one warm, rounder, softer White
Cube  and  made  the  low warbling soft sound of contentment. The White Cube fed
him. He was content. He grew. All was familiar and good.

     The New Year, the year 1989, arrived.

     Rocket ships flashed on the sky, and helicopters whirred and flourished the
warm California winds.

     

     Peter  Horn  carted  home  large  plates  of specially poured blue and gray
polarized glass, secretly. Through these, he peered at his "child." Nothing. The
pyramid  remained  a  pyramid, no matter if he viewed it through X-ray or yellow
cellophane. The barrier was unbreakable. Horn returned quietly to his drinking.

     The  big  thing  happened  early  in  February.  Horn, arriving home in his
helicopter, was appalled to see a crowd of neighbors gathered on the lawn of his
home.  Some of them were sitting, others were standing, still others were moving
away, with frightened expressions on their faces.

     Polly was walking the "child" in the yard.

     Polly  was  quite  drunk.  She  held the small blue pyramid by the hand and
walked  him  up  and  down. She did not see the helicopter land, nor did she pay
much attention as Horn came running up.

     One  of the neighbors turned. "Oh, Mr. Horn, it's the cutest thing. Where'd
you find it?"

     One  of the others cried, "Hey, you're quite the traveler, Horn. Pick it up
in South America?"

     Polly  held the pyramid up. "Say Father!" she cried, trying to focus on her
husband.

     "Wheel!" cried the pyramid.

     "Polly!" Peter Horn said.

     "He's  friendly  as  a dog or a cat," said Polly moving the child with her.
"Oh,  no,  he's  not  dangerous. He's friendly as a baby. My husband brought him
from Afghanistan."

     The neighbors began to move off.

     "Come  back!" Polly waved at them. "Don't you want to see my baby? Isn't he
simply beautiful!"

     He slapped her face.

     "My baby," she said, brokenly.

     He  slapped  her again and again until she quit saying it and collapsed. He
picked  her  up and took her into the house. Then he came out and took Py in and
then he sat down and phoned the Institute.

     "Dr.  Wolcott,  this  is  Horn.  You'd  better  have your stuff ready. It's
tonight or not at all."

     There was a hesitation. Finally Wolcott sighed. "All right. Bring your wife
and the child. We'll try to have things in shape."

     They hung up.

     Horn sat there studying the pyramid.

     "The  neighbors  thought  he was grand," said his wife, lying on the couch,
her eyes shut, her lips trembling … 

     The  Institute  hall smelled clean, neat, sterile. Dr. Wolcott walked along
it,  followed  by Peter Horn and his wife Polly, who was holding Py in her arms.
They turned in at a doorway and stood in a large room. In the center of the room
were two tables with large black hoods suspended over them.

     Behind  the tables were a number of machines with dials and levers on them.
There  was  the  faintest perceptible hum in the room. Pete Horn looked at Polly
for a moment.

     Wolcott  gave  her a glass of liquid. "Drink this." She drank it. "Now. Sit
down." They both sat. The doctor put his hands together and looked at them for a
moment.

     "I  want to tell you what I've been doing in the last few months," he said.
"I've  tried to bring the baby out of whatever hell dimension, fourth, fifth, or
sixth, that it is in. Each time you left the baby for a checkup we worked on the
problem.  Now,  we  have  a solution, but it has nothing to do with bringing the
baby out of the dimension in which it exists."

     Polly  sank  back. Horn simply watched the doctor carefully for anything he
might say. Wolcott leaned forward.

     "I  can't  bring Py out, but I can put you people in. That's it." He spread
his hands.

     Horn  looked  at  the machine in the corner. "You mean you can send us into
Py's dimension?"

     "If you want to go badly enough."

     Polly said nothing. She held Py quietly and looked at him.

     Dr. Wolcott explained. "We know what series of malfunctions, mechanical and
electrical,  forced  Py into his present state. We can reproduce those accidents
and  stresses.  But bringing him back is something else. It might take a million
trials  and  failures before we got the combination. The combination that jammed
him  into  another  space  was  an  accident,  but luckily we saw, observed, and
recorded  it. There are no records for bringing one back. We have to work in the
dark.  Therefore,  it  will be easier to put you in the fourth dimension than to
bring Py into ours."

     Polly  asked, simply and earnestly, "Will I see my baby as he really is, if
I go into his dimension?"

     Wolcott nodded.

     Polly said, "Then, I want to go."

     "Hold  on,"  said  Peter Horn. "We've only been in this office five minutes
and already you're promising away the rest of your life."

     ."I'll be with my real baby. I won't care."

     "Dr. Wolcott, what will it be like, in that dimension on the other side?"

     "There  will be no change that you will notice. You will both seem the same
size and shape to one another. The pyramid will become a baby, however. You will
have  added  an  extra  sense,  you  will  be  able  to  interpret  what you see
differently."

     "But  won't  we  turn  into  oblongs  or pyramids ourselves? And won't you,
doctor, look like some geometrical form instead of a human?"

     "Does  a  blind man who sees for the first time give up his ability to hear
or taste?"

     "No."

     "All  right, then. Stop thinking in terms of subtraction. Think in terms of
addition.  You're  gaining  something.  You  lose nothing. You know what a human
looks  like,  which  is  an  advantage  Py  doesn't  have,  looking out from his
dimension.  When you arrive 'over there' you can see Dr. Wolcott as both things,
a  geometrical abstract or a human, as you choose. It will probably make quite a
philosopher out of you. There's one other thing, however."

     "And that?"

     "To  everyone else in the world you, your wife and the child will look like
abstract  forms.  The  baby  a triangle. Your wife an oblong perhaps. Yourself a
hexagonal solid. The world will be shocked, not you."

     "We'll be freaks."

     "You'll  be  freaks.  But you won't know it. You'll have to lead a secluded
life."

     "Until you find a way to bring all three of us out together."

     "That's  right.  It  may be ten years, twenty. I won't recommend it to you,
you  may both go quite mad as a result of feeling apart, different. If there's a
grain of paranoia in you, it'll come out. It's up to you, naturally."

     Peter Horn looked at his wife, she looked back gravely.

     "We'll go," said Peter Horn.

     "Into Py's dimension?" said Wolcott.

     "Into Py's dimension."

     They  stood  up  from  their  chairs.  "We'll  lose  no other sense, you're
certain,  doctor?  Will  you  be able to understand us when we talk to you? Py's
talk is incomprehensible."

     "Py  talks  that  way  because that's what he thinks we sound like when our
talk  comes  through  the dimensions to him. He imitates the sound. When you are
over  there  and talk to me, you'll be talking perfect English, because you know
how. Dimensions have to do with senses and time and knowledge."

     "And what: about Py? When we come into his strata of existence. Will he see
us  as  humans,  immediately,  and  won't  that  be a shock to him? Won't: it be
dangerous?"

     "He's  awfully  young.  Things  haven't  got too set for him, There'll be a
slight  shock,  but  your  odors will be the same, and your voices will have the
same  timber  and  pitch  and  you'll  be just as warm and loving, which is most
important of all. You'll get on with him well."

     Horn scratched his head slowly. "This seems such a long way around to where
we  want  to  go."  He  sighed. "I wish we could have another kid and forget all
about this one."

     "This  baby is the one that counts. I dare say Polly here wouldn't want any
other, would you, Polly?"

     "This baby, this baby," said Polly.

     Wolcott  gave  Peter Horn a meaningful look. Horn interpreted it correctly.
This  baby  or  no more Polly ever again. This baby or Polly would be in a quiet
room somewhere staring into space for the rest of her life.

     They  moved  toward  the  machine together. "I guess I can stand it, if she
can,"  said  Horn, taking her hand. "I've worked hard for a good many years now,
it might be fun retiring and being an abstract for a change."

     "I  envy  you  the  journey,  to  be honest with you," said Wolcott, making
adjustments  on  the  large  dark  machine.  "I don't mind telling you that as a
result of your being 'over there' you may very well write a volume of philosophy
that will set Dewey, Bergson, Hegel, or any of the others on their ears. I might
'come over' to visit you one day."

     "You'll be welcome. What do we need for the trip?"

     "Nothing. Just lie on these tables and be still."

     A humming filled the room. A sound of power and energy and warmth.

     They lay on the tables, holding hands, Polly and Peter Horn. A double black
hood  came down over them. They were both in darkness. From somewhere far off in
the  hospital,  a  voice-clock sang, "Tick tock, seven o'clock. Tick tock, seven
o'clock … " fading away in a little soft gong.

     The  low  humming grew louder. The machine glittered with hidden, shifting,
compressed power.

     "Is there any danger?" cried Peter Horn.

     "None!"

     The  power screamed. The very atoms of the room divided against each other,
into  alien  and enemy camps. The two sides fought for supremacy. Horn gaped his
mouth  to  shout.  His  insides  became pyramidal, oblong with terrific electric
seizures.  He  felt  a  pulling,  sucking, demanding power claw at his body. The
power  yearned  and  nuzzled and pressed through the room. The dimensions of the
black   hood  over  his  torso  were  stretched,  pulled  into  wild  planes  of
incomprehension.  Sweat,  pouring  down  his  face,  was  not  sweat, but a pure
dimensional essence! His limbs were wrenched, flung, jabbed, suddenly Caught. He
began to melt like running wax.

     A clicking sliding noise.

     Horn  thought  swiftly, but calmly. How will it be in the future with Polly
and  me  and Py at home and people coming over for a cocktail party? How will it
be?

     Suddenly  he  knew  how it would be and the thought of it filled him with a
great  awe  and a sense of credulous faith and time. They would live in the same
white  house  on the same quiet, green hill, with a high fence around it to keep
out  the merely curious. And Dr. Wolcott would come to visit, park his beetle in
the  yard  below,  come  up the steps and at the door would be a tall slim White
Rectangle to meet him with a dry martini in its snakelike hand.

     And  in  an easy chair across the room would sit a Salt White Oblong with a
copy  of  Nietzsche open, reading, smoking a pipe. And on the floor would be Py,
running  about.  And  there would be talk and more friends would come in and the
White  Oblong  and  the  White  Rectangle  would laugh and joke and offer little
finger  sandwiches  and  more  drinks and it would be a good evening of talk and
laughter. That's how it would be. Click.

     The humming noise stopped. The hood lifted from Horn. It was all over.

     They  were  in  another  dimension.  He heard Polly cry out. There was much
light.  Then  he  slipped from the table, stood blinking. Polly was running. She
stopped and picked up something from the floor.

     It  was Peter Horn's son. A living, pink-faced, blue-eyed boy, lying in her
arms, gasping and blinking and crying.

     The pyramidal shape was gone. Polly was crying with happiness.

     Peter  Horn  walked across the room, trembling, trying to smile himself, to
hold on to Polly and the child, both at the same time, and weep with them.

     "Well!"  said  Wolcott, standing back. He did not move for a long while. He
only  watched  the  White  Oblong  and the slim White Rectangle holding the Blue
Pyramid on the opposite side of the room. An assistant came in the door.

     "Shhh,"  said  Wolcott, hand to his lips. "They'll want to be alone awhile.
Come  along."  He took the assistant by the arm and tiptoed across the room. The
White Rectangle and the White Oblong didn't even look up when the door closed.
