                            
                               The Small Assassin
                                      1946

     Just  when  the  idea occurred to her that she was being murdered she could
not  tell.  There  had  been little subtle signs, little suspicions for the past
month;  things  as  deep  as  sea tides in her, like looking at a perfectly calm
stretch  of  tropic  water, wanting to bathe in it and finding, just as the tide
takes  your  body,  that  monsters  dwell just under the surface, things unseen,
bloated, many-armed, sharp-finned, malignant and inescapable.

     A  room  floated  around her in an effiuvium of hysteria. Sharp instruments
hovered and there were voices, and people in sterile white masks.

     My name, she thought, what is it?

     Alice  Leiber.  It  came  to  her.  David Leiber's wife. But it gave her no
comfort.  She was alone with these silent, whispering white people and there was
great pain and nausea and death-fear in her.

     I  am  being  murdered before their eyes. These doctors, these nurses don't
realize  what  hidden thing has happened to me. David doesn't know. Nobody knows
except me and--the killer, the little murderer, the small assassin.

     I  am  dying  and  I  can't  tell them now. They'd laugh and call me one in
delirium.  They'll see the murderer and hold him and never think him responsible
for  my  death. But here I am, in front of God and man, dying, no one to believe
my  story,  everyone  to  doubt  me, comfort me with lies, bury me in ignorance,
mourn me and salvage my destroyer.

     Where  is  David?  she wondered. In the waiting room, smoking one cigarette
after another, listening to the long tickings of the very slow clock?

     Sweat  exploded  from all of her body at once, and with it an agonized cry.
Now. Now! Try and kill me, she screamed. Try, try, but I won't die! I won't!

     There  was a hollowness. A vacuum. Suddenly the pain fell away. Exhaustion,
and  dusk  came  around.  It  was over. Oh, God! She plummeted down and struck a
black  nothingness which gave way to nothingness and nothingness and another and
still another. . . .

      

     Footsteps. Gentle, approaching footsteps.

     Far away, a voice said, "She's asleep. Don't disturb her."

     An  odor  of  tweeds,  a pipe, a certain shaving lotion. David was standing
over her. And beyond him the immaculate smell of Dr. J effers.

     She  did  not  open  her  eyes.  "I'm  awake,"  she said, quietly. It was a
surprise, a relief to be able to speak, to not be dead.

     "Alice," someone said, and it was David beyond her closed eyes, holding her
tired hands.

     Would  you like to meet the murderer, David? she thought. I hear your voice
asking to see him, so there's nothing but for me to point him out to you.

     David stood over her. She opened her eyes. The room came into focus. Moving
a weak hand, she pulled aside a coverlet.

     The  murderer  looked  up at David Leiber with a small, redfaced, blue-eyed
calm. Its eyes were deep and sparkling.

     "Why!" cried David Leiber, smiling. "He's a _fine_ baby!"

      

     Dr.  Jeffers  was waiting for David Leiber the day he came to take his wife
and  new  child  home.  He  motioned Leiber to a chair in his office, gave him a
cigar,  lit one for himself, sat on the edge of his desk, puffing solemnly for a
long  moment.  Then  he  cleared his throat, looked David Leiber straight on and
said, "Your wife doesn't like her child, Dave."

     "What!"

     "It's  been a hard thing for her. She'll need a lot of love this next year.
I  didn't say much at the time, but she was hysterical in the delivery room. The
strange  things  she  said--I  won't repeat them. All I'll say is that she feels
alien  to the child. Now, this may simply be a thing we can clear up with one or
two questions." He sucked on his cigar another moment, then said, "Is this child
a 'wanted' child, Dave?"

     "Why do you ask?"

     "It's vital."

     "Yes.  Yes,  it  is  a 'wanted' child. We planned it together. Alice was so
happy, a year ago, when--"

     "Mmmm--that makes it more difficult. Because if the child was unplanned, it
would  be  a  simple case of a woman hating the idea of motherhood. That doesn't
fit Alice." Dr. Jeffers took his cigar from his lips, rubbed his hand across his
jaw. "It must be something else, then. Perhaps something buried in her childhood
that's coming out now. Or it might be the simple temporary doubt and distrust of
any mother who's gone through the unusual pain and near-death that Alice has. If
so,  then  a little time should heal that. I thought I'd tell you, though, Dave.
It'll   help   you   be  easy  and  tolerant  with  her  if  she  says  anything
about--well--about  wishing the child had been born dead. And if things don't go
well,  the  three  of you drop in on me. I'm always glad to see old friends, eh?
Here, take another cigar along for--ah--for the baby."

      

     It  was  a bright spring afternoon. Their car hummed along wide, tree-lined
boulevards.  Blue  sky,  flowers, a warm wind. Dave talked a lot, lit his cigar,
talked  some  more.  Alice answered directly, softly, relaxing a bit more as the
trip  progressed. But she held the baby not tightly or warmly or motherly enough
to  satisfy  the  queer  ache in Dave's mind. She seemed to be merely carrying a
porcelain figurine.

     "Well," he said, at last, smiling. "What'll we name him?"

     Alice  Leiber  watched  green  trees  slide  by. "Let's not decide yet. I'd
rather  wait  until  we get an exceptional name for him. Don't blow smoke in his
face."  Her  sentences  ran  together with no change of tone. The last statement
held no motherly reproof, no interest, no irritation. She just mouthed it and it
was said.

     The  husband,  disquieted,  dropped  the cigar from the window. "Sorry," he
said.

     The  baby  rested in the crook of his mother's arm, shadows of sun and tree
changing  his  face.  His blue eyes opened like fresh blue spring flowers. Moist
noises came from the tiny, pink, elastic mouth.

     Alice  gave  her  baby  a quick glance. Her husband felt her shiver against
him.

     "Cold?" he asked.

     "A chill. Better raise the window, David."

     It was more than a chill. He rolled the window slowly up.

      

     Suppertime.

     Dave  had  brought  the  child  from  the  nursery,  propped him at a tiny,
bewildered angle, supported by many pillows, in a newly purchased high chair.

     Alice  watched  her  knife  and  fork move. "He's not high-chair size," she
said.

     "Fun  having him here, anyway," said Dave, feeling fine. "Everything's fun.
At  the  office,  too.  Orders  up to my nose. If I don't watch myself I'll make
another  fifteen thousand this year. Hey, look at Junior, will you? Drooling all
down  his  chin!" He reached over to wipe the baby's mouth with his napkin. From
the  corner  of his eye he realized that Alice wasn't even watching. He finished
the job.

     "I guess it wasn't very interesting," he said, back again at his food. "But
one would think a mother'd take some interest in her own child!"

     Alice  jerked  her  chin  up.  "Don't  speak that way! Not in front of him!
Later, if you must."

     "Later?"  he  cried.  "In  front of, in back of, what's the difference?" He
quieted suddenly, swallowed, was sorry. "All right. Okay. I know how it is."

     After  dinner  she let him carry the baby upstairs. She didn't tell him to;
she _let_ him.

     Coming  down,  he  found  her standing by the radio, listening to music she
didn't  hear.  Her  eyes  were  closed,  her  whole  attitude  one of wondering,
self-questioning. She started when he appeared.

     Suddenly,  she  was  at  him,  against him, soft, quick; the same. Her lips
found  him,  kept him. He was stunned. Now that the baby was gone, upstairs, out
of  the  room,  she  began  to  breathe again, live again. She was free. She was
whispering, rapidly, endlessly.

     "Thank  you, thank you, darling. For being yourself, always. Dependable, so
very dependable!"

     He had to laugh. "My father told me, 'Son, provide for your family!'

     Wearily,  she  rested  her  dark,  shining  hair  against his neck. "You've
overdone  it.  Sometimes  I wish we were just the way we were when we were first
married. No responsibilities, nothing but ourselves. No--no babies."

     She crushed his hand in hers, a supernatural whiteness in her face.

     "Oh, Dave, once it was just you and me. We protected each other, and now we
protect the baby, but get no protection from it. Do you understand? Lying in the
hospital I had time to think a lot of things. The world is evil--"

     "Is it?"

     "Yes.  It is. But laws protect us from it. And when there aren't laws, then
love  does  the  protecting.  You're  protected from my hurting you, by my love.
You're  vulnerable to me, of all people, hut love shields you. I feel no fear of
you,  because  love  cushions all your irritations, unnatural instincts, hatreds
and  immaturities.  But--what  about the baby? It's too young to know love, or a
law  of  love, or anything, until we teach it. And in the meantime be vulnerable
to it."

     "Vulnerable to a baby?" He held her away and laughed gently.

     "Does a baby know the difference between right and wrong?" she asked.

     "No. But it'll learn."

     "But  a  baby  is  so new, so amoral, so conscience-free." She stopped. Her
arms dropped from him and she turned swiftly. "That noise? What was it?"

     Leiber looked around the room. "I didn't hear--"

     She stared at the library door. "In there," she said, slowly.

     Leiber crossed the room, opened the door and switched the library lights on
and  off.  "Not  a  thing."  He  came back to her. "You're worn out. To bed with
you--right now."

     Turning  out  the lights together, they walked slowly up the soundless hall
stairs, not speaking. At the top she apologized. "My wild talk, darling. Forgive
me. I'm exhausted."

     He understood, and said so.

     She  paused,  undecided,  by  the nursery door. Then she fingered the brass
knob  sharply,  walked  in. He watched her approach the crib much too carefully,
look down, and stiffen as if she'd been struck in the face. "David!"

     Leiber stepped forward, reached the crib.

     The  baby's face was bright red and very moist; his small pink mouth opened
and  shut, opened and shut; his eyes were a fiery blue. His hands leapt about on
the air.

     "Oh," said Dave, "he's just been crying."

     "Has  he?"  Alice  Leiber  seized  the  crib-railing to balance herself. "I
didn't hear him."

     "The door was closed."

     "Is that why he breathes so hard, why his face is red?"

     "Sure.  Poor  little guy. Crying all alone in the dark. He can sleep in our
room tonight, just in case he cries."

     "You'll spoil him," his wife said.

     Leiber  felt  her  eyes follow as he rolled the crib into their bedroom. He
undressed  silently,  sat  on  the edge of the bed. Suddenly he lifted his head,
swore  under  his  breath,  snapped his fingers. "Damn it! Forgot to tell you. I
must fly to Chicago Friday."

     "Oh, David." Her voice was lost in the room.

     "I've  put  this  trip  off for two months, and now it's so critical I just
_have_ to go."

     "I'm afraid to be alone."

     "We'll  have the new cook by Friday. She'll be here all the time. I'll only
be gone a few days."

     "I'm afraid. I don't know of what. You wouldn't believe me if I told you. I
guess I'm crazy."

     He was in bed now. She darkened the room; he heard her walk around the bed,
throw  back  the cover, slide in. He smelled the warm woman-smell of her next to
him. He said, "If you want me to wait a few days, perhaps I could--"

     "No," she said, unconvinced. "You go. I know it's important. It's just that
I  keep  thinking  about  what  I  told  you. Laws and love and protection. Love
protects you from me. But, thebaby--" She took a breath. "What protects you from
him, David?"

     Before he could answer, before he could tell her how silly it was, speaking
of infants, she switched on the bed light, abruptly.

     "Look," she said, pointing.

     The  baby  lay  wide-awake in its crib, staring straight at him, with deep,
sharp blue eyes.

     The lights went out again. She trembled against him.

     "It's not nice being afraid of the thing you birthed." Her whisper lowered,
became  harsh, fierce, swift. "He tried to kill me! He lies there, listens to us
talking, waiting for you to go away so he can try to kill me again! I swear it!"
Sobs broke from her.

     "Please," he kept saying, soothing her. "Stop it, stop it. Please."

     She  cried  in  the dark for a long time. Very late she relaxed, shakingly,
against  him. Her breathing came soft, warm, regular, her body twitched its worn
reflexes and she slept.

     He drowsed.

     And  just  before his eyes lidded wearily down, sinking him into deeper and
yet  deeper tides, he heard a strange little sound of awareness and awakeness in
the room.

     The sound of small, moist, pinkly elastic lips.

     The baby.

     And then--sleep.

      

     In the morning, the sun blazed. Alice smiled.

     David Leiber dangled his watch over the crib. "See, baby? Something bright.
Something pretty. Sure. Sure. Something bright. Something pretty."

     Alice  smiled.  She  told  him  to  go ahead, fly to Chicago, she'd be very
brave,  no  need  to worry. She'd take care of baby. Oh, yes, she'd take care of
him, all right.

     The airplane went east. There was a lot of sky, a lot of sun and clouds and
Chicago  running  over  the horizon. Dave was dropped into the rush of ordering,
planning,  banqueting,  telephoning, arguing in conference. But he wrote letters
each day and sent telegrams to Alice and the baby.

     On   the  evening  of  his  sixth  day  away  from  home  he  received  the
long-distance phone call. Los Angeles.

     "Alice?"

     "No, Dave. This is Jeff ers speaking."

     "Doctor!"

     "Hold  onto  yourself,  son. Alice is sick. You'd better get the next plane
home.  It's  pneumonia. I'll do everything I can, boy. If only it wasn't so soon
after the baby. She needs strength."

     Leiber  dropped  the  phone  into its cradle. He got up, with no feet under
him, and no hands and no body. The hotel room blurred and fell apart.

     "Alice," he said, blindly, starting for the door.

      

     The propellers spun about, whirled, fluttered, stopped; time and space were
put  behind.  Under  his  hand, David felt the doorknob turn; under his feet the
floor  assumed  reality,  around  him  flowed the walls of a bedroom, and in the
late-afternoon  sunlight  Dr. Jeffers stood, turning from a window, as Alice lay
waiting  in  her  bed,  something  carved  from  a fall of winter snow. Then Dr.
Jeffers  was talking, talking continuously, gently, the sound rising and falling
through the lamplight, a soft flutter, a white murmur of voice.

     "Your  wife's too good a mother, Dave. She worried more about the baby than
herself. . . ."

     Somewhere  in the paleness of Alice's face, there was a sudden constriction
which  smoothed  itself  out before it was realized. Then, slowly, half-smiling,
she  began  to  talk  and she talked as a mother should about this, that and the
other thing, the telling detail, the minute-by-minute and hour-by-hour report of
a  mother concerned with a dollhouse world and the miniature life of that world.
But  she  could not stop; the spring was wound tight, and her voice rushed on to
anger,  fear  and  the  faintest  touch  of  revulsion, which did not change Dr.
Jeffers'  expression,  but  caused Dave's heart to match the rhythm of this talk
that quickened and could not stop:

     "The  baby  wouldn't sleep. I thought he was sick. He just lay, staring, in
his  crib, and late at night he'd cry. So loud, he'd cry, and he'd cry all night
and all night. I couldn't quiet him, and I couldn't rest."

     Dr.  Jeffers'  head  nodded  slowly,  slowly.  "Tired  herself  right  into
pneumonia.  But  she's  full of sulfa now and on the safe side of the whole damn
thing."

     David felt ill. "The baby, what about the baby?"

     "Fit as a fiddle; cock of the walk!"

     "Thanks, Doctor."

     The  doctor  walked  off  away  and  down the stairs, opened the front door
faintly, and was gone.

     "David!"

     He turned to her frightened whisper.

     "It was the baby again." She clutched his hand. "I try to lie to myself and
say that I'm a fool, but the baby knew I was weak from the hospital, so he cried
all  night every night, and when he wasn't crying he'd be much too quiet. I knew
if I switched on the light he'd be there, staring up at me."

     David  felt  his  body close in on itself like a fist. He remembered seeing
the  baby,  feeling  the  baby, awake in the dark, awake very late at night when
babies  should  be asleep. Awake and lying there, silent as thought, not crying,
but watching from its crib. He thrust the thought aside. It was insane.

     Alice  went  on. "I was going to kill the baby. Yes, I was. When you'd been
gone only a day on your trip I went to his room and put my hands about his neck;
and  I  stood there, for a long time, thinking, afraid. Then I put the covers up
over  his face and turned him over on his face and pressed him down and left him
that way and ran out of the room."

     He tried to stop her.

     "No,  let me finish," she said, hoarsely, looking at the wall. "When I left
his  room I thought, It's simple. Babies smother every day. No one'll ever know.
But  when  I  came back to see him dead, David, he was alive! Yes, alive, turned
over  on  his  back,  alive  and smiling and breathing. And I couldn't touch him
again  after  that.  I left him there and I didn't come back, not to feed him or
look  at him or do anything. Perhaps the cook tended to him. I don't know. All I
know  is that his crying kept me awake, and I thought all through the night, and
walked  around  the  rooms  and now I'm sick." She was almost finished now. "The
baby  lies  there and thinks of ways to kill me. Simple ways. Because he knows I
know  so  much about him. I have no love for him; there is no protection between
us; there never will be."

     She  was  through. She collapsed inward on herself and finally slept. David
Leiber stood for a long time over her, not able to move. His blood was frozen in
his body, not a cell stirred anywhere, anywhere at all.

      

     The  next morning there was only one thing to do. He did it. He walked into
Dr.  Jeff  ers'  office  and told him the whole thing, and listened to Jeff ers'
tolerant replies:

     "Let's  take this thing slowly, son. It's quite natural for mothers to hate
their  children,  sometimes. We have a label for it--ambivalence. The ability to
hate,  while  loving.  Lovers hate each other, frequently. Children detest their
mothers--"

     Leiber interrupted. "I never hated my mother."

     "You  won't  admit  it,  naturally. People don't enjoy admitting hatred for
their loved ones."

     "So Alice hates her baby."

     "Better  say  she  has  an obsession. She's gone a step further than plain,
ordinary ambivalence. A Caesarian operation brought the child into the world and
almost  took  Alice  out  of it. She blames the child for her near-death and her
pneumonia.  She's  projecting  her troubles, blaming them on the handiest object
she  can  use  as a source of blame. We _all_ do it. We stumble into a chair and
curse  the furniture, not our own clumsiness. We miss a golf-stroke and damn the
turf  or our club, or the make of ball. If our business fails we blame the gods,
the  weather,  our luck. All I can tell you is what I told you before. Love her.
Finest  medicine  in the world. Find little ways of showing your affection, give
her  security.  Find ways of showing her how harmless and innocent the child is.
Make  her  feel  that  the  baby was worth the risk. After awhile, she'll settle
down,  forget  about  death,  and  begin  to love the child. If she doesn't come
around  in  the next month or so, ask me. I'll recommend a good psychiatrist. Go
on along now, and take that look off your face."

      

     When  summer  came,  things  seemed  to settle, become easier. Dave worked,
immersed  himself  in  office  detail, but found much time for his wife. She, in
turn,  took  long  walks,  gained  strength,  played an occasional light game of
badminton.  She rarely burst out any more. She seemed to have rid herself of her
fears.

     Except  on  one certain midnight when a sudden summer wind swept around the
house, warm and swift, shaking the trees like so many shining tambourines. Alice
wakened,  trembling,  and slid over into her husband's arms, and let him console
her, and ask her what was wrong.

     She said, "Something's here in the room, watching us."

     He  switched  on  the  light.  "Dreaming  again,"  he said. "You're better,
though. Haven't been troubled for a long time."

     She  sighed  as  he clicked off the light again, and suddenly she slept. He
held  her,  considering  what a sweet, weird creature she was, for about half an
hour.

     He heard the bedroom door sway open a few inches.

     There  was  nobody at the door. No reason for it to come open. The wind had
died.

     He waited. It seemed like an hour he lay silently, in the dark.

     Then,  far away, wailing like some small meteor dying in the vast inky gulf
of space, the baby began to cry in his nursery.

     It  was  a  small, lonely sound in the middle of the stars and the dark and
the  breathing of this woman in his arms and the wind beginning to sweep through
the trees again.

     Leiber counted to one hundred, slowly. The crying continued.

     Carefully disengaging Alice's arm he slipped from bed, put on his slippers,
robe, and moved quietly from the room.

     He'd go downstairs, he thought, fix some warm milk, bring it up, and--.

     The  blackness  dropped  out  from under him. His foot slipped and plunged.
Slipped on something soft. Plunged into nothingness.

     He  thrust  his  hands  out,  caught  frantically  at the railing. His body
stopped falling. He held. He cursed.

     The  "something soft" that had caused his feet to slip, rustled and thumped
down  a  few steps. His head rang. His heart hammered at the base of his throat,
thick and shot with pain.

     Why  do  careless  people  leave  things  strewn  about  a house? He groped
carefully  with  his fingers for the object that had almost spilled him headlong
down the stairs.

     His  hand  froze,  startled.  His breath went in. His heart held one or two
beats.

     The thing he held in his hand was a toy. A large cumbersome, patchwork doll
he had bought as a joke, for--.

     _For the baby_.

      

     Alice drove him to work the next day.

     She  slowed  the  car  halfway downtown; pulled to the curb and stopped it.
Then she turned on the seat and looked at her husband.

     "I  want  to  go  away  on a vacation. I don't know if you can make it now,
darling,  but if not, please let me go alone. We can get someone to take care of
the  baby, I'm sure. But I just have to get away. I thought I was growing out of
this--this  _feeling_.  But I haven't. I can't stand being in the room with him.
He  looks  up  at  me as if he hates me, too. I can't put my finger on it; all I
know is I want to get away before something happens."

     He  got  out  on  his side of the car, came around, motioned to her to move
over, got in. "The only thing you're going to do is see a good psychiatrist. And
if  he  suggests  a  vacation, well, okay. But this can't go on; my stomach's in
knots all the time." He started the car. "I'll drive the rest of the way."

     Her  head  was  down; she was trying to keep back tears. She looked up when
they reached his office building. "All right. Make the appointment. I'll go talk
to anyone you want, David."

     He  kissed  her. "Now, you're talking sense, lady. Think you can drive home
okay?"

     "Of course, silly."

     "See you at supper, then. Drive carefully."

     "Don't I always? 'Bye."

     He  stood  on the curb, watching her drive off, the wind taking hold of her
long,  dark,  shining  hair.  Upstairs,  a  minute  later, he phoned Jeffers and
arranged an appointment with a reliable neuropsychiatrist.

     The  day's  work  went uneasily. Things fogged over; and in the fog he kept
seeing  Alice  lost  and  calling his name. So much of her fear had come over to
him.  She  actually  had him convinced that the child was in some ways not quite
natural.

     He dictated long, uninspired letters. He checked some shipments downstairs.
Assistants  had  to  be questioned, and kept going. At the end of the day he was
exhausted, his head throbbed, and he was very glad to go home.

     On the way down in the elevator he wondered, What if I told Alice about the
top--that  patchwork doll--I slipped on on the stairs last night? Lord, wouldn't
_that_  back  her  off?  No,  I  won't  ever tell her. Accidents are, after all,
accidents.

     Daylight  lingered  in  the sky as he drove home in a taxi. In front of the
house  he  paid  the  driver  and walked slowly up the cement walk, enjoying the
light  that  was still in the sky and the trees. The white colonial front of the
house   looked  unnaturally  silent  and  uninhabited,  and  then,  quietly,  he
remembered  this  was Thursday, and the hired help they were able to obtain from
time to time were all gone for the day.

     He  took  a deep breath of air. A bird sang behind the house. Traffic moved
on  the  boulevard a block away. He twisted the key in the door. The knob turned
under his fingers, oiled, silent.

     The  door  opened.  He  stepped  in,  put  his  hat  on  the chair with his
briefcase, started to shrug out of his coat, when he looked up.

     Late  sunlight  streamed down the stairwell from the window near the top of
the  hall.  Where  the  sunlight  touched  it  took  on  the bright color of the
patchwork doll sprawled at the bottom of the stairs.

     But he paid no attention to the toy.

     He could only look, and not move, and look again at Alice.

     Alice  lay in a broken, grotesque, pallid gesturing and angling of her thin
body,  at  the  bottom  of the stairs, like a crumpled doll that doesn't want to
play any more, ever.

     Alice was dead.

     The house remained quiet, except for the sound of his heart.

     She was dead.

     He  held  her head in his hands, he felt her fingers. He held her body. But
she  wouldn't  live.  She wouldn't even try to live. He said her name, out loud,
many  times,  and  he tried, once again, by holding her to him, to give her back
some of the warmth she had lost, but that didn't help.

     He  stood  up. He must have made a phone call. He didn't remember. He found
himself,  suddenly,  upstairs.  He opened the nursery door and walked inside and
stared blankly at the crib. His stomach was sick. He couldn't see very well.

     The baby's eyes were closed, but his face was red, moist with perspiration,
as if he'd been crying long and hard.

     "She's dead," said Leiber to the baby. "She's dead."

     Then  he  started  laughing  low  and soft and continuously for a long time
until  Dr.  Jeff  ers walked in out of the night and slapped him again and again
across his face.

     "Snap out of it! Pull yourself together!"

     "She  fell  down  the  stairs,  Doctor. She tripped on a patchwork doll and
fell. I almost slipped on it the other night, myself. And now--"

     The doctor shook him.

     "Doc,  Doc,  Doc,"  said  Dave,  hazily.  "Funny thing. Funny. I--I finally
thought of a name for the baby."

     The doctor said nothing.

     Leiber  put  his head back in his trembling hands and spoke the words. "I'm
going  to  have  him  christened next Sunday. Know what name I'm giving him? I'm
going to call him Lucifer."

      

     It  was  eleven at night. A lot of strange people had come and gone through
the house, taking the essential flame with them--Alice.

     David Leiber sat across from the doctor in the library.

     "Alice  wasn't  crazy,"  he  said, slowly. "She had good reason to fear the
baby."

     Jeffers  exhaled.  "Don't  follow  after  her! She blamed the child for her
sickness,  now you blame it for her death. She stumbled on a toy, remember that.
You can't blame the child."

     "You mean Lucifer?"

     "Stop calling him that!"

     Leiber  shook  his head. "Alice heard things at night, moving in the halls.
You  want  to  know  what made those noises, Doctor? They were made by the baby.
Four  months  old,  moving in the dark, listening to us talk. Listening to every
word!" He held to the sides of the chair. "And if I turned the lights on, a baby
is  so  small.  It  can  hide  behind  furniture,  a door, against a wall--below
eye-level."

     "I want you to stop this!" said Jeffers.

     "Let  me say what I think or I'll go crazy. When I went to Chicago, who was
it  kept Alice awake, tiring her into pneumonia? The baby! And when Alice didn't
die,  then he tried killing me. It was simple; leave a toy on the stairs, cry in
the  night until your father goes downstairs to fetch your milk, and stumbles. A
crude trick, but effective. It didn't get me. But it killed Alice dead."

     David  Leiber  stopped  long  enough  to  light a cigarette. "I should have
caught  on.  I'd turn on the lights in the middle of the night, many nights, and
the  baby'd  be lying there, eyes wide. Most babies sleep all the time. Not this
one. He stayed awake, thinking."

     "Babies don't think."

     "He stayed awake doing whatever he _could_ do with his brain, then. What in
hell  do  we  know  about  a baby's mind? He had every reason to hate Alice; she
suspected    him    for   what   he   was--certainly   not   a   normal   child.
Something--different.  What do you know of babies, Doctor? The general run, yes.
You  know,  of  course, how babies kill their mothers at birth. Why? Could it be
resentment at being forced into a lousy world like this one?"

     Leiber  leaned  toward the doctor, tiredly. "It all ties up. Suppose that a
few  babies  out of all the millions born are instantaneously able to move, see,
hear,   think,   like   many   animals   and   insects  can.  Insects  are  born
self-sufficient. In a few weeks most mammals and birds adjust. But children take
years to speak and learn to stumble around on their weak legs.

     "But suppose one child in a billion is--strange? Born perfectly aware, able
to  think,  instinctively.  Wouldn't  it be a perfect setup, a perfect blind for
anything  the  baby  might  want  to  do? He could pretend to be ordinary, weak,
crying,  ignorant.  With  just  a  _little_ expenditure of energy he could crawl
about a darkened house, listening. And how easy to place obstacles at the top of
stairs.  How  easy  to cry all night and tire a mother into pneumonia. How easy,
right  at  birth,  to be so close to the mother that _a few deft maneuvers might
cause peritonitis!_"

     "For  God's  sake!"  Jeffers  was on his feet. "That's a repulsive thing to
say!"

     "It's  a repulsive thing I'm speaking of. How many mothers have died at the
birth  of  their  children? How many have suckled strange little improbabilities
who  cause  death  one way or another? Strange, red little creatures with brains
that  work in a bloody darkness we can't even guess at. Elemental little brains,
as  warm  with racial memory, hatred, and raw cruelty, with no more thought than
selfpreservation.  And self-preservation in this case consisted of eliminating a
mother  who  realized  what a horror she had birthed. I ask you, doctor, what is
there in the world more selfish than a baby? Nothing!"

     Jeffers scowled and shook his head, helplessly.

     Leiber dropped his cigarette down. "I'm not claiming any great strength for
the child. Just enough to crawl around a little, a few months ahead of schedule.
Just  enough  to  listen  all the time. Just enough to cry late at night. That's
enough, more than enough."

     Jeffers  tried  ridicule.  "Call  it  murder,  then.  But  murder  must  be
motivated. What motive had the child?"

     Leiber  was  ready with the answer. "What is more at peace, more dreamfully
content,  at  ease,  at  rest, fed, comforted, unbothered, than an unborn child?
Nothing.  It  floats  in  a  sleepy, timeless wonder of nourishment and silence.
Then,  suddenly,  it  is asked to give up its berth, is forced to vacate, rushed
out into a noisy, uncaring, selfish world where it is asked to shift for itself,
to  hunt, to feed from the hunting, to seek after a vanishing love that once was
its  unquestionable  right,  to  meet  confusion  instead  of  inner silence and
conservative slumber! And the child _resents_ it! Resents the cold air, the huge
spaces,  the  sudden departure from familiar things. And in the tiny filament of
brain the only thing the child knows is selfishness and hatred because the spell
has been rudely shattered. Who is responsible for this disenchantment, this rude
breaking  of  the  spell?  The mother. So here the new child has someone to hate
with  all its unreasoning mind. The mother has cast it out, rejected it. And the
father is no better, kill him, too! He's responsible in _his_ way!"

     Jeffers  interrupted.  "If  what  you  say is true, then every woman in the
world  would have to look on her baby as something to dread, something to wonder
about."

     "And  why  not?  Hasn't  the  child  a  perfect  alibi? A thousand years of
accepted  medical  belief  protects him. By all natural accounts he is helpless,
not  responsible.  The  child  is born hating. And things grow worse, instead of
better.  At first the baby gets a certain amount of attention and mothering. But
then  as time passes, things change. When very new, a baby has the power to make
parents do silly things when it cries or sneezes, jump when it makes a noise. As
the years pass, the baby feels even that small power slip rapidly, forever away,
never to return. Why shouldn't it grasp all the power it can have? Why shouldn't
it  jockey for position while it has all the advantages? In later years it would
be too late to express its hatred. _Now_ would be the time to strike."

     Leiber's voice was very soft, very low.

     "My  little  boy baby, lying in his crib nights, his face moist and red and
out  of  breath.  From  crying?  No.  From climbing slowly out of his crib, from
crawling long distances through darkened hallways. My little boy baby. I want to
kill him."

     The  doctor  handed  him  a water glass and some pills. "You're not killing
anyone.  You're going to sleep for twenty-four hours. Sleep'll change your mind.
Take this."

     Leiber drank down the pills and let himself be led upstairs to his bedroom,
crying, and felt himself being put to bed. The doctor waited until he was moving
deep into sleep, then left the house.

     Leiber, alone, drifted down, down.

     He heard a noise. "What's--what's _that?_" he demanded, feebly.

     Something moved in the hall.

     David Leiber slept.

      

     Very  early  the  next morning, Dr. Jeffers drove up to the house. It was a
good  morning, and he was here to drive Leiber to the country for a rest. Leiber
would  still  be asleep upstairs. Jeffers had given him enough sedative to knock
him out for at least fifteen hours.

     He rang the doorbell. No answer. The servants were probably not up. Jeffers
tried  the  front door, found it open, stepped in. He put his medical kit on the
nearest chair.

     Something  white  moved  out  of  sight  at  the  top of the stairs. Just a
suggestion of a movement. Jeff ers hardly noticed it.

     The smell of gas was in the house.

     Jeffers ran upstairs, crashed into Leiber's bedroom.

     Leiber  lay  motionless  on  the bed, and the room billowed with gas, which
hissed  from  a  released  jet  at  the  base of the wall near the door. Jeffers
twisted it off, then forced up all the windows and ran back to Leiber's body.

     The body was cold. It had been dead quite a few hours.

     Coughing violently, the doctor hurried from the room, eyes watering. Leiber
hadn't  turned  on  the  gas  himself.  He  _couldn't_ have. Those sedatives had
knocked  him out, he wouldn't have wakened until noon. It wasn't suicide. Or was
there the faintest possibility?

     Jeffers  stood  in the hall for five minutes. Then he walked to the door of
the nursery. It was shut. He opened it. He walked inside and to the crib.

     The crib was empty.

     He  stood  swaying by the crib for half a minute, then he said something to
nobody in particular.

     "The  nursery door blew shut. You couldn't get back into your crib where it
was  safe.  You  didn't  plan  on  the  door blowing shut. A little thing like a
slammed  door  can ruin the best of plans. I'll find you somewhere in the house,
hiding, pretending to be something you are not." The doctor looked dazed. He put
his  hand  to  his head and smiled palely. "Now I'm talking like Alice and David
talked.  But,  I  can't  take any chances. I'm not sure of anything, but I can't
take chances."

     He  walked  downstairs, opened his medical bag on the chair, took something
out of it and held it in his hands.

     Something  rustled  down  the  hall.  Something  very small and very quiet.
Jeffers turned rapidly.

     I  had  to  operate to bring you into this world, he thought. Now I guess I
can operate to take you out of it.

     He  took half-a-dozen slow, sure steps forward into the hail. He raised his
hand into the sunlight.

     "See, baby! Something bright--something pretty!"

     A scalpel.