                        Pendulum (co-authored with Henry Hasse)
                                      1941

      

     _Prisoner of Time was he, 
     outlawed from Life and Death alike the strange, 
     brooding creature who watched the ages roll by
      and waited half fearfully for - eternity?_

     
     
     "I  THINK," shrilled Erjas, "that this is our most intriguing discovery on
any of the worlds we have yet visited!"
     His  wide,  green-shimmering  wings  fluttered, his beady bird eyes flashed
excitement.  His  several  companions  bobbed  their  heads  in  agreement,  the
greenish-gold  down on their slender necks ruffling softly. They were perched on
what  had  once  been  amoving  sidewalk  but  was  now only a twisted ribbon of
wreckage overlooking the vast expanse of a ruined city.
     "Yes,"  Erjas continued, "it’s baffling, fantastic! It--it has no reason
for  being." He pointed unnecessarily to the object of their attention, resting
on  the high stone plaza a short distance away. "Look at it! Just a huge tubular
pendulum  hanging  from  that  towering framework! And the machinery, the codger
which  must  have  once  sent  it  swinging . . . I flew up there a while ago to
examine it, but it’s hopelessly corroded."
     "But the head of the pendulum!" another of the bird creatures said awedly.
"A  hollow  chamber--transparent,  glassite--and that awful thing staring out of
it...."
     Pressed  close  to  the  inner side of the pendulum head was a single human
skeleton.  The  whitened  skull seemed to stare out over the desolate, crumbling
city  as  though  regarding  with amusement the heaps of powdery masonry and the
bare steel girders that drooped to the ground, giving the effect of huge spiders
poised to spring.
     "It’s  enough  to  make  one  shudder-the way that thing grins! Almost as
though-"
     "The  grin  means nothing!" Erjas interrupted annoyedly. "That is only the
skeletal remains of one of the mammal creatures who once, undoubtedly, inhabited
this  world."  He  shifted  nervously  from one spindly leg to the other, as he
glanced   again   at   the  grinning  skull.  "And  yet,  it  does  seem  to  be
almost-triumphant!  And why are there no more of them around? Why is he the only
one . . . and why is he encased in that fantastic pendulum head?"
     "Wes  hall  soon  know,"  another  of  the  bird creatures trilled softly,
glancing  at  their  spaceship  which  rested amidst the ruins, a short distance
away.  "Or  fleew  is  even  now  deciphering the strange writing in the book he
salvaged from the pendulumhead. We must not disturb him."
     "How did he get the book? I see no opening in that transparent chamber."
     "The  long  pendulum  arm  is hollow, apparently in order to vacuum out the
cell.  The  book  was  crumbling with age when Or fleew got it out, but he saved
most of it."
     "I wish he would hurry! Why must he--"
     "Shh!  Give  him time. Orfleew will decipher the writing he has an amazing
genius for alien languages."
     "Yes.   I   remember   the   metal   tablets  on  that  tiny  planetin  the
constellation--"
     "Here he comes now!"
     "He’s finished already!"
     "We shall soon know the story...."
     The  bird creatures fairly quivered as Orfleew appeared in the open doorway
of  their  spaceship,  carefully carrying as heaf of yellowed pages. He waved to
them,  spread his wings and soared outward. Amoment later he alighted beside his
companions on their narrow perch.
     "The  language is simple," Orfleew told them, "and the story is a sad one.
I  will readit to you and then we must depart, for there is nothing we can do on
this world."
     They  edged  closer  to him there on the metal strand, eagerly awaiting the
first words. The pendulum hung very straight and very still on a windless world,
the  transparent  head only a few feet above the plaza floor. The grinning skull
still  peered  out as though hugely amused or hugely satisfied. Orfleew took one
more  fleeting  look at it . . . then he opened the crumbling notebook and began
to read.

     
     MY  NAME  John  Layeville.  I  am known as "The Prisoner of Time." People,
tourists  from  all  over the world, come to look at me in my swinging pendulum.
School  children,  on  the  electrically moving sidewalks surrounding the plaza,
stare  at me in childish awe. Scientists, studying me, stand out there and train
their  instruments  on  the  swinging  pendulum  head.  Oh,  they could stop the
swinging, they could release me--but now I know that will never happen. This all
began  as  a  punishment for me, but now I am an enigma to science. I seem to be
immortal. It is ironic.
     A  punishment  for  me! Now, as through a mist, my memory spins back to the
day  when all this started. I remember I had found a way to bridge time gaps and
travel  into futurity. I remember the time device I built. No, it did not in any
way  resemble  this  pendulum--my  device  was  merely a huge box-like affair of
specially treated metal and glassite, with a series of electric rotors of my own
design  which set up conflicting, but orderly, fields of stress. I had tested it
to perfection no less than three times, but none of the others in the Council of
Scientists  would  believe  me.  They all laughed. And Leske laughed. Especially
Leske, for he has always hated me.
     I  offered  to  demonstrate,  to  prove.  I  invited  the  Council to bring
others--all the greatest minds in the scientific world. At last, anticipating an
amusing evening at my expense, they agreed.
     I  shall never forget that evening when a hundred of the world’s greatest
scientists  gathered  in  the main Council laboratory. Butthey had come to jeer,
not  to  cheer.  I  did not care, as I stood on the platform beside my ponderous
machine  and  listened  to  the  amused  murmur  of  voices. Nor did I care that
millions  of  other  unbelieving  eyes were watching by television, Leske having
indulged  in a campaign of mockery against the possibility of time travel. I did
not  care,  because  I  knew  that  in a few minutes Leske’s campaign would be
turned  into  victory  for  me.  I would set my rotors humming, I would pull the
control  switch--and  my machine would flash away into a time dimension and back
again, as I had already seen it do three times. Later we would send a man out in
the machine.
     The  moment  arrived.  But fate had decreed it was to be my moment of doom.
Something went wrong, even now I do not know what or why. Perhaps the television
concentration  in  the room affected the stress of the time-fields my rotors set
up.  The  last  thing  I  remember seeing, as I reached out and touched the main
control  switch,  were the neat rows of smiling white faces of the important men
seated in the laboratory. My hand came down on the switch....
     Even  now  I  shudder,  remembering  the  vast  mind-numbing horror of that
moment.  A  terrific sheet of electrical flame, greenish and writhing and alien,
leaped  across  the laboratory from wall to wall, blasting into ashes everything
in its path!
     Before  millions of television witnesses I had slain the world’s greatest
scientists!
     No,  not all. Leske and myself and a few others who were behind the machine
escaped  with severe burns. I was least injured of all, which seemed to increase
the fury of the populace against me. I was swept to a hasty trial, faced jeering
throngs who called out for my death.
     "Destroy  the time machine," was the watchword, "and destroy this murderer
with it!"
     Murderer!  I  had  only sought to help humanity. In vain I tried to explain
the accident, but popular resentment is a thing not to be reasoned with.
     One  day, weeks later, I was taken from my secret prison and hurried, under
heavy  guard, to the hospital room where Leske lay. He raised himself on one arm
and his smouldering eyes looked at me. That’s all I could see of him, just his
eyes  the rest of him was swathed in bandages. For a moment he just looked and
if ever I saw insanity, but a cunning insanity, in a man’s eyes, it was then.
     For  about  ten  seconds  he  looked, then with a great effort he pointed a
bulging, bandaged arm at me.
     "No,  do  not destroy him," he mumbled to the authorities gathered around.
"Destroy  his  machine, yes, but save the parts. I have a better plan, a fitting
one, for this man who murdered the world’s greatest scientists."
     I remembered Leske’s old hatred of me, and I shuddered.
     IN  THE  weeks  that  followed,  one  of  my  guards told me with a sort of
malicious  pleasure  of my time device being dismantled, and secret things being
done with it. Leske was directing the operations from his bed.
     At  last came the day when I was ledforth and saw the huge pendulum for the
first  time.  As  I  looked at it there, fantastic and formidable, I realized as
never  before  the  extent  of Leske’s insane revenge. And the populace seemed
equally  vengeful,  equally  cruel,  like  the  ancient Romans on a gladiatorial
holiday. In a sudden panic of terror, I shriekedand tried to leap away.
     That only amused the people who crowded the electrical sidewalks around the
plaza. They laughed and shrieked derisively.
     My guards thrust me into the glass pendulum head and I lay there quivering,
realizing  the  irony of my fate. This pendulum had been built from the precious
metal  and  glassite  of my own time device! It was intended as a monument to my
slaughtering!  I was being put on exhibition for life within my own executioning
device! The crowd roared thunderous approval, damning me.
     Then  a  little click and a whirring above me, and my glass prison began to
move.  It  increased  in  speed. The arc of the pendulum’s swing lengthened. I
remember  how I pounded at the glass, futilely screaming, and how my hands bled.
I remember the rows of faces becoming blurred white blobs before me....
     I  did not become insane, as I had thought at first I would. I did not mind
it  so much that first night. I couldn’t sleep but it wasn’t uncomfortable.
The  lights  of  the  city were comets with tails that pelted from right to left
like  foaming fireworks. But as the night wore on I felt a gnawing in my stomach
that  grew  worse  until  I  became  very  sick. The next day was the same and I
couldn’t  eat  anything.  In  the  days  that  followed they never stopped the
pendulum,  not  once.  They slid my food down the hollow pendulum stem in little
round  parcels  that plunked at my feet. The first time I attempted eating I was
unsuccessful  it  wouldn’t  stay  down. In desperation I hammered against the
cold  glass with my fists until they bled again, and I cried hoarsely, but heard
nothing but my own weak words muffled in my ears.
     After  an  infinitude  of  misery,  I  began  to  eat  and even sleep while
traveling back and forth this way . . . they had allowed me small glass loops on
the  floor  with  which  I  fastened  myself down at night and slept a soundless
slumber, without sliding. I even began to take an interest in the world outside,
watching  it  tip  one  way and another, back and forth and up and down, dizzily
before my eyes until they ached. The monotonous movements never changed. So huge
was  the  pendulum that it shadowed one hundred feet or more with every majestic
sweep  of  its  gleaming shape, hanging from the metal intestines of the machine
overhead.  I  estimated that it took four or five seconds for it to traverse the
arc.
     On and on like this--for how long would it be? I dared not think of it....

     
     DAY  by  day  I  began to concentrate on the gaping, curiosity-etched faces
outside-faces  that  spoke  soundless  words,  laughing  and pointing at me, the
prisoner  of  time, traveling forever nowhere. Then after a time-was it weeks or
months  or  years?-the  town  people ceased to come and it was only tourists who
came tost are....
     Once  a  day  the attendants sent down my food, once a day they sent down a
tube to vacuum out the cell. The days and nights ran together in my memory until
time came to mean very little to me....
     IT  WAS  not  until  I  knew, inevitably, that I was doomed forever to this
swinging  chamber,  that  the  thought occurred to me to leave a written record.
Then the idea obsessed me and I could think of nothing else.
     I  had  noticed  that  once  a  day  an attendant climbed into the whirring
coggery  overhead  in  order  to drop my food down the tube. I began to tap code
signals  along  the  tube,  a  request  for  writing materials. For days, weeks,
months,   my   signals   remained  unanswered.  I  be  cameinfuriated--and  more
persistent.
     Then,  at  long last, the day when not only my packet of food came down the
tube,  but  with  it  a  heavy  notebook,  and  writing materials! I suppose the
attendant  above became weary at last of my tappings! I was in a perfect ecstasy
of joy at this slight luxury.
     I  have  spent  the last few days in recounting my story, without any undue
elaboration.  I  am  weary  now  of  writing,  but I shall continue from time to
time--in the present tense instead of the past.
     My  pendulum  still  swings in its unvarying arc. I am sure it has been not
months,  but  years!  I am accustomed to it now. I think if the pendulum were to
stop suddenly, I should go mad at the motionless existence!

     
     (Later):  There  is  unusual  activity on the electrically moving sidewalks
surrounding  me.  Men  are  coming,  scientists, and setting up peculiar looking
instruments  with  which to study me at a distance. I think I know the reason. I
guessed  it  some  time ago. I have not recorded the years, but I suspect that I
have  already outlived Leske and all the others! I know my cheeks have developed
a  short  beard  which  suddenly  ceased growing, and I feel a curious, tingling
vitality. I feel that I shall outlive them all! I cannot account for it, nor can
they  out  there,  those scientists who now examine me so scrupulously. And they
dare  not  stop my pendulum, my little world, for fear of the effect it may have
on me!

     
     (Still  later): These men, these puny scientists, have dropped a microphone
down  the  tube  to  me!  They  have actually remembered that I was once a great
scientist,  encased  here  cruelly.  In  vain they have sought the reason for my
longevity  now  they  want  me  to  converse  with them, giving my symptoms and
reactions  and suggestions! They are perplexed, but hopeful, desiring the secret
of  eternal  life to which they feel I can give them a clue. I have already been
here two hundred years, they tell me they are the fifth generation.
     At  first I said not a word, paying no attention to themicrophone. I merely
listened  to  their babblings and pleadings until I weared of it. Then I grasped
the  microphone  and  looked  up  and  saw their tense, eager faces, awaiting my
words.
     "One does not easily forgive such an injustice as this," I shouted. "And I
do not believe I shall be ready to until five more generations."
     Then I laughed. Oh, how I laughed.
     "He’s  insane!"  I heard one of them say: "The secret of immortality may
lie  somehow  with him, but I feel we shall never learn it and we dare not stop
the  pendulum--that  might  break  the  time  field,  or whatever it is that’s
holding him in thrall...."

     
     (MUCH LATER): It has been a longer time than I care to think, since I wrote
those  last  words. Years . . . I know not how many. I have almost forgotten how
to hold a pencil in my fingers to write.
     Many  things have transpired, many changes have come in the crazy world out
there.
     Once  I  saw wave after wave of planes, so many that they darkened the sky,
far  out  in  the  direction of the ocean, moving toward the city and a host of
planes  arising  from  here,  going out to meet them and a brief, but lurid and
devastating battle in which planes fell like leaves in the wind and some planes
triumphantly returning, I know not which ones...
     But  all that was very long ago, and it matters not to me. My daily parcels
of  food continue to come down the pendulum stem I suspect that it has become a
sort of ritual, and the inhabitants of the city, whoever they are now, have long
since  forgotten the legend of why I was encased here. My little world continues
to  swing  in  its  arc, and I continue to observe the puny little creatures out
there who blunder through their brief span of life.
     Already  I  have  outlived generations! Now I want to outlive the very last
one of them! I shall!
     . . . Another thing, too, I have noticed. The attendants who daily drop the
parcels  of  food  for  me, and vacuum out the cell, are robots! Square, clumsy,
ponderous  and four-limbed things--unmistakably metal robots, only vaguely human
in shape.
     .  .  . I begin to see more and more of these clumsy robots about the city.
Oh,  yes,  humans  too--but  they  only  come on sight-seeing tours and pleasure
jaunts  now  they  live,  for  the most part, in luxury high among the towering
buildings.  Only the robots occupy the lower level now, doing all the menial and
mechanical  tasks  necessary  to  the operation of the city. This, I suppose, is
progress as these self centered beings have willed it.
     ..  .  robots  are  becoming  more  complicated,  more  human  in shape and
movements . . . and more numerous . . . uncanny ... I have a premonition....

     
     (Later):It  has come! I knew it! Vast, surging activity out there . . . the
humans,  soft  from  an aeon of luxury and idleness, could not even escape . . .
those  who  tried,  in  their rocket planes, were brought down by the pale, rosy
electronic  beams  of  the  robots  .  .  . others of the humans, more daring or
desperate,  tried  to  sweep  low  over the central robot base and drop thermite
bombs--but  the  robots had erected an electronic barrier which hurled the bombs
back among the planes, causing inestimable havoc ...
     The  revolt  was brief, but inevitably successful. I suspect that all human
life  except  mine  has  been  swept  from  the  earth. I begin to see, now, how
cunningly the robots devised it.
     The humans had gone forward recklessly and blindly to achieve their Utopia
they  had  designed  their  robots  with  more and more intricacy, more and more
finesse,  until  the great day when they were able to leave the entire operation
of  the city to the robots--under the guidance perhaps of one or two humans. But
somewhere, somehow, one of those robots was imbued with a spark of intelligence
it  began  to  think, slowly but precisely it began to add unto itself, perhaps
secretly  until finally it had evolved itself into a terribly efficient unit of
inspired intelligence, a central mechanical Brain which planned this revolt.
     At  least,  so  I  pictured  it.  Only  the  robots  are left now--but very
intelligent  robots. A group of them came yesterday and stood before my swinging
pendulum and seemed to confer among themselves. They surely must recognize me as
one of the humans, the last one left. Do they plan to destroy me too?
     No.  I  must have become a legend, even among the robots. My pendulum still
swings.  They  have  now  encased  the  operating mechanism beneath a protective
glassite  dome.  They  have  erected a device whereby my daily parcel of food is
dropped  to  me  mechanically.  They  no  longer come near me they seem to have
forgotten me.
     This infuriates me! Well, I shall outlast them too! After all, they are but
products  of  the  human  brain  .  . . I shall outlast everything even remotely
human! I swear it!

     
     (MUCH  LATER):  Is  this  the  end? I have seen the end of the reign of the
robots!  Yesterday,  just as the sun was crimsoning in the west, I perceived the
hordes of things that came swarming out of space, expanding in the heavens . . .
alien creatures fluttering down, great gelatinous masses of black that clustered
thickly over everything....
     I  saw the robot rocket planes criss-crossing the sky on pillars of scarlet
flame, blasting into the black masses with their electronic beams--but the alien
things were unperturbed and unaffected! Closer and closer they pressed to earth,
until the robot rockets began to dart helplessly for shelter.
     To  no  avail.  The  silvery robot ships began crashing to earth in ghastly
devastation, like drops of mercury splashing on tiles....
     And the black gelatinous masses came ever closer, to spread over the earth,
to crumble the city and corrode whatever metal was left exposed.
     Except  my  pendulum.  They  came  dripping  darkly  down over it, over the
glassite  dome  which  protects  the  whirring  wheels and roaring bowels of the
mechanism.  The  city  has  crumbled,  the robots are destroyed, but my pendulum
still  moves, the only moving thing on this world now . . . and I know that fact
puzzles  the sealien things and they will not be content until they have stopped
it....
     This all happened yesterday. I am lying very still now, watching them. Most
of  the mare gathering out there over the ruins of the city, preparing to leave-
except  a  few  of  the  black  quivering  things  that  are still hanging to my
pendulum,  almost  blotting  out  the  sunlight  and a few more above, near the
operating  machinery, concentrating those same emanations by which they corroded
the  robots. They are determined to do a complete job here. I know that in a few
minutes  they  will  begin  to  take effect, even through the glassite shield. I
shall  continue  to write until my pendulum stops swinging. .... it is happening
now.  I  can  feel a peculiar grinding and grating in the coggery above. Soon my
tiny glassite world will ceaseits relentless arc.
     I  feel now only a fierce elation flaming i thin me, for after all, this is
my  victory!  I  have conquered over the men who planned this punishment for me,
and  over  countless  other  generations,  and over the final robots themselves!
There is nothing more I desire except annihilation, and I am sure that will come
automatically  when  my  pendulum  ceases, bringing me to a state of unendurable
motionlessness....
     It is coming now. Those black, gelatinous shapes above are drifting away to
join  their  companions. The mechanism isgrinding raucously. My arc is narrowing
... smaller ... smaller....

     
     I feel... so strange...
