prose_contemporaryRayBradburyEnd of SummercutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
End of Summer
One.Two.Hattie's lips counted the long, slow strokes of the high town
clock as she lay quietly on her bed. The streets were asleep under the
courthouse clock, which seemed like a white moon rising, round and full,
the light from it freezing all of the town in late summer time. Her
heart raced.
She rose swiftly to look down on the empty avenues, the dark and silent
lawns. Below, the porch swing creaked ever so little in the wind.
She saw the long, dark rush of her hair in the mirror as she unknotted
the tight schoolteacher's bun and let it fall loose to her shoulders.
Wouldn't her pupils be surprised, she thought; so long, so black, so
glossy. Not too bad for a woman of thirty-five. From the closet, her
hands trembling, she dug out hidden parcels. Lipstick, rouge, eyebrow
pencil, nail polish. A pale blue negligee, like a breath of vapor.
Pulling off her cotton nightgown, she stepped on in, hard, even while
she drew the negligee over her head.
She touched her ears with perfume, used the lipstick on her nervous
mouth, penciled her eyebrows, and hurriedly painted her nails.
She was ready.
She let herself out into the hall of the sleeping house. She glanced
fearfully at three white doors. If they sprang open now, then what? She
balanced between the walls, waiting.
The door stayed shut.
She shack her tongue out at one door, then at the other two.
She drifted down the noiseless stairs onto the moonlit porch and then
into the quiet street.
The smell of a September night was everywhere. Underfoot, the concrete
breathed warmth up along her thin white legs.
"I've always wanted to do this." She plucked a blood rose for her black
hair and stood a moment smiling at the shaded windows of her house. "You
don't know what I'm doing," she whispered. She swirled her negligee.
Down the aisle of trees, past glowing street lamps, her bare feet were
soundless. She saw every bush and fence and wondered, "Why didn't I
think of this a long time ago?" She paused in the wet grass just to feel
how it was, cool and prickly.
The patrolman, Mr. Waltzer, was wandering down Glen Bay Street, singing
in a low, sad tenor. As he passed, Hattie circled a tree and stood
staring at his broad back as he walked on, still singing.
When she reached the courthouse, the only noise was the sound of her
bare toes on the rusty fire escape. At the top of the flight, on a ledge
under the shining silver clock face, she held out her hands.
There lay the sleeping town!
A thousand roofs glittered with snow that had fallen from the moon.
She shook her fists and made faces at the town. She flicked her negligee
skirt contemptuously at the far houses. She danced and laughed silently,
then stopped to snap her fingers in all four directions.
A minute later, eyes bright, she was racing on the soft lawns of the
town.
She came to the house of whispers.
She paused by a certain window and heard a man's voice and a woman's
voice in the secret room.
Hattie leaned against the house and listened to whispering, whispering.
It was like hearing two tiny moths fluttering gently inside on the
window screen. There was a soft, remote laughter.
Hattie put her hand to the screen above, her face the face of one at a
shrine. Perspiration shone on her lips.
"What was that?" cried a voice inside.
Like mist, Hattie whirled and vanished.
When she stopped running she was by another house window.
A man stood in the brightly lighted bathroom, perhaps the only lighted
room in the town, shaving carefully around his yawning mouth. He had
black hair and blue eyes and was twenty-seven years old and every
morning carried to his job in the railyards a lunch bucket packed with
ham sandwiches. He wiped his face with a towel and the light went out.
Hattie waited behind the great oak in the yard, all film, all spiderweb.
She heard the front door click, his footsteps down the walk, the clank
of his lunch pail. From the odors of tobacco and fresh soap, she knew,
without looking, that he was passing.
Whistling between his teeth, he walked down the street toward the
ravine. She followed from tree to tree, a white veil behind an elm, a
moon shadow behind an oak. Once, he whirled about. Just in time she hid
from sight. She waited, heart pounding. Silence. Then, his footsteps
walking on.
He was whistling the song "June Night."
The high arc light on the edge of the ravine cast his shadow directly
beneath him. She was not two yards away, behind an ancient chestnut
tree.
He stopped but did not turn. He sniffed the air.
The night wind blew her perfume over the ravine, as she had planned it.
She did not move. It was not her turn to act now. She simply stood
pressing against the tree, exhausted with the shaking of her heart.
It seemed an hour before he moved. She could hear the dew breaking
gently under the pressure of his shoes. The warm odor of tobacco and
fresh soap came nearer.
He touched one of her wrists. She did not open her eyes. He did not
speak.
Somewhere, the courthouse clock sounded the time as three in the
morning.
His mouth fitted over hers very gently and easily.
Then his mouth was at her ear and she was held to the tree by him. He
whispered. Soshewas the one who'd looked in his windows the last three
nights! He kissed her neck. She,shehad followed him, unseen, last night!
He stared at her. The shadows of the trees fell soft and numerous all
about, on her lips, on her cheeks, on her brow, and only her eyes were
visible, gleaming and alive. She was lovely, did she know that? He had
thought he was being haunted. His laughter was no more than a faint
whisper in his mouth. He looked at her and made a move of his hand to
his pocket. He drew forth a match, to strike, to hold by her face, to
see, but she took his hand and held it and the unlit match. After a
moment, he let the matchstick drop into the wet grass. "It doesn't
matter," he said.
She did not look up at him. Silently he took her arm and began to walk.
Looking at her pale feet, she went with him to the edge of the cool
ravine and down to the silent flow of the stream, to the moss banks and
the willows.
He hesitated. She almost looked up to see if he was still there. They
had come into the light, and she kept her head turned away so that he
saw only the blowing darkness of her hair and the whiteness of her arms.
He said, "You don't have to come any further, you know. Which house did
you come from? You can run back to wherever it is. But if you run, don't
ever come back; I won't want to see you again. I couldn't take any more
of this, night after night. Now's your chance. Run, if you want!"
Summer night breathed off her, warm and quiet.
Her answer was to lift her hand to him.
Next morning, as Hattie walked downstairs, she found Grandma, Aunt
Maude, and Cousin Jacob with cold cereal in their tight mouths, not
liking it when Hattie pulled up her chair. Hattie wore a grim,
high-necked dress, with a long skirt. Her hair was a knotted, hard bun
behind her ears, her face was scrubbed pale, clean of color in the
cheeks and lips. Her painted eyebrows and eyelashes were gone. Her
fingernails were plain.
"You're late, Hattie," they all said, as if an agreement had been made
to say it when she sat down.
"I know." She did not move in her chair.
"Better not eat much," said Aunt Maude. "It's eight-thirty. You
should've been at school. What'll the superintendent say? Fine example
for a teacher to set her pupils."
The three stared at her.
Hattie was smiling.
"You haven't been late in twelve years, Hattie," said Aunt Maude.
Hattie did not move, but continued smiling.
"You'd better go," they said.
Hattie walked to the hall to take down her green umbrella and pinned on
her ribboned flat straw hat.
They watched her. She opened the front door and looked back at them for
a long moment, as if about to speak, her cheeks flushed. They leaned
toward her. She smiled and ran out, slamming the door.

