prose_contemporaryRayBradburyThe Lonely OnescutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
The Lonely Ones
They ate six suppers in the open, talking back and forth over the small
campfire. The light shone high on the silver rocket in which they had
traveled across space. From a long way off in the blue hills, their
campfire seemed like a star that had landed beside the long Martian
canals under the clear and windless Martian sky.
On the sixth night the two men sat by the fire, looking tensely in all
directions.
‘Cold?’ asked Drew, for the other was shivering.
‘What?’ Smith looked at his arms. ‘No.’
Drew looked at Smith’s forehead. It was covered with sweat.
‘Too warm?’
‘No, not that either.’
‘Lonely?’
‘Maybe.’ His hand jerked as he put another piece of wood on the fire.
‘Game of cards?’
‘Can’t concentrate.’
Drew listened to Smith’s quick shallow breathing. ‘We’ve our
information. Each day we took pictures and ore samples. We’re about
loaded. Why don’t we start the trip home tonight?’
Smith laughed. ‘You’re notthatlonely, are you?’
‘Cut it.’
They shifted their boots in the cool sand. There was no wind. The fire
burned steadily, straight up, fed by the oxygen hose from the ship. They
themselves wore transparent glass masks over their faces, very thin,
through which a soft oxygen film pulsed up from the oxygen vests under
their jackets. Drew checked his wrist dial. Six more hours of oxygen in
his jacket. Fine.
He pulled out his ukelele and started to strum on it carelessly, eyes
half closed, leaning back to look at the stars.
The girl of my dreams is the sweetest girl
Of all the girls I know—
Each sweet coed, like a rainbow red
Fades in the afterglow.
The blue of her eyes and the gold of her hair …
The sound of the ukelele came up Drew’s arms into his earphones. Smith
could not hear the instrument, only Drew’s singing. The atmosphere was
too thin.
‘She’s the sweetheart of Sigma Chi—’
‘Aw, cut it out!’ cried Smith.
‘What’s eating you?’
‘I said cut it out, is all!’ Smith sat back, glaring at the other man.
‘Okay, okay, don’t get excited.’
Drew put the ukelele down and lay back, thinking. He knew what it was.
It was in him, too. The cold loneliness, the midnight loneliness, the
loneliness of distance and time and space, of stars and travel and
months and days.
Only too well he remembered Anna’s face looking in at him through the
space port of the rocket a minute before blast-off time. It was like a
vivid, clear-cut blue cameo – the blue round glass and her lovely face,
her hand uplifted to wave, her smiling lips and her bright eyes. She had
kissed her hand to him. Then she had vanished.
He looked idly over at Smith. Smith’s eyes were closed. He was turning
over a thought of his own in his mind. Marguerite, of course. Wonderful
Marguerite, the brown eyes and the soft brown hair. Sixty million miles
away on some improbable world where they had been born.
‘I wonder what they’re doing tonight?’ Drew said.
Smith opened his eyes and looked across the fire. Without even
questioning Drew’s meaning, he replied, ‘Going to a television concert,
swimming, playing badminton, lots of things.’
Drew nodded. He withdrew into himself again and he felt the sweat
starting to come out in his hands and his face. He began to tremble and
there was a shrill whining emotion deep inside himself. He didn’t want
to sleep tonight. It would be like other nights. Out of nothing, the
lips and the warmth and the dream. And, all too soon, the empty morning,
the arising into the nightmare of reality.
He jumped up violently.
Smith fell back, staring.
‘Let’s take a walk, do something,’ said Drew heartily.
‘All right.’
They walked through the pink sands of the empty sea bottom, saying
nothing, only walking. Drew felt part of the tightness vanish. He
cleared his throat.
‘Suppose,’ he said, ‘just to be supposing, of course, you met up with a
Martian woman? Now. Some time in the next hour?’
Smith snorted. ‘Don’t be silly. There aren’t any.’
‘But just suppose.’
‘I don’t know,’ replied Smith, looking ahead as he walked. He put his
head down and rubbed his hand along the thin warm glass mask over his
face. ‘Marguerite’s waiting for me in New York.’
‘And Anna’s waiting for me. But let’s be practical. Here we are, two
very human men, a year away from earth, cold, lonely, isolated, in need
of consolation, hand-holding. No wonder we’re brooding over the women we
left behind.’
‘It’s plain silly to brood, and we ought to quit it. There’s no women
around anyway, drat it!’
They walked onward for a distance.
‘Anyway,’ Smith continued at last, after a time of thinking, ‘if we did
find a woman here, I’m sure Marguerite would be the first to comprehend
the situation and forgive me.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘Absolutely!’
‘Or are you rationalizing?’
‘No!’
‘Let me show you something, then. Turn back. Over there.’ Drew took
Smith’s arm and guided him back and to one side about fifty paces. ‘The
reason I brought the whole subject up is this.’ He pointed.
Smith gasped.
A footprint lay like a tiny soft valley in the sand.
The two men bent, put their fingers eagerly down, brushing nervously to
each side of it. Their breath hissed in their nostrils. Smith’s eyes
glittered.
They looked into each other’s faces for a long time.
‘A woman’s footstep!’ cried Smith.
‘Perfect in every detail,’ said Drew, nodding solemnly. ‘I happen to
know. I once worked in a shoe store. I’d know a woman’s print anywhere.
Perfect, perfect!’
They swallowed the thickened knots in their dry throats. Their hearts
began to beat wildly.
Smith opened and closed his hands into fists. ‘Glory, it’s small! Look
at the toes! Gosh, it’s dainty!’
He stood up and looked ahead, eyes squinted. Then, crying out, he began
to run. ‘Here’s another, and another. More. They go on, that way!’
‘Take it easy,’ Drew caught up with him. He took hold of Smith’s arm.
‘Where you think you’re going?’
‘Let go; blast it!’ Smith pointed. ‘I’m following them up, of course.’
‘What about Marguerite?’
‘This is a devil of a time to talk of her. Let go before I crack you
one!’
Musingly, Drew dropped his hand. ‘Okay. Go ahead.’
They ran together.…
Fresh footsteps, fresh and deep and delicately defined. Footsteps that
rushed, swirled, pelted on before them, coming and going, alone, across
the dry sea bottom. Glance at the wrist watch. Five minutes, then.
Hurry. Rush. Run. Drew panted, laughing. Ridiculous. Silly. Two men
plunging forward. Really, if it weren’t such a lonely, serious thing, he
would sit down and laugh until he cried. Two supposedly intelligent men,
two Robinson Crusoes racing after a feminine and as yet invisible girl
Friday! Ha!
‘What’s funny?’ shouted Smith, far ahead.
‘Nothing. Watch the time. Oxygen gives out, you know.’
‘We’ve plenty.’
‘Watch it, though!’
Did she realize when she came by here, thought Drew amusedly, putting
her footfalls so delicately into the earth, that by so doing, so
innocently laying her gentle small feet, she would cause a crisis among
men? No. Totally unaware. Totally.
He must run anyway and keep up with that insane Smith. Silly, silly. And
yet – not so silly.
As Drew ran, a warmness filled his head. After all, it would be swell to
sit by the fire tonight beside a beautiful woman, holding her hand,
kissing her and touching her.
‘What if she’s blue?’
Smith turned as he ran. ‘What?’
‘What if her skin’s blue? Like the hills? What then?’
‘Blast you, Drew!’
‘Ha!’ Drew shouted his laugh and they pelted into an old river draw and
along a canal, both lying empty in the seasonless time.
The footprints moved delicately on and on to the foothills. They had to
stop when they reached the climb.
‘Dibs,’ said Drew, eyes sharp and yellow.
‘What?’
‘I said “Dibs on her.” That means I get to speak to her first. Remember
when we were kids? We said “Dibs.” Okay. I just said “Dibs.” That makes
it official.’
Smith was not smiling.
‘What’s wrong, Smith? ’Fraid of competition?’ said Drew.
Smith did not speak.
‘I’ve got quite a profile,’ Drew pointed out. ‘Also, I’m four inches
taller.’
Smith looked coldly at him. His eyes were still.
‘Yes, sir, competition,’ Drew went on. ‘Tell you what, Smith – if she’s
got a friend, I’ll let you have the friend.’
‘Shut up,’ said Smith glaring at him.
Drew stopped smiling and stood back. ‘Look here, Smith, you better take
it slow. You’re getting all het up. I don’t like to see you this way.
Everything’s been fine until now.’
‘I’ll act anyway I please. You just keep out of my business. After
all,Ifound the footprints!’
‘Say that again.’
‘Well, you found them, maybe, but it wasmyidea to follow them up!’
‘Wasit?’ Drew said slowly.
‘You know it was.’
‘DoI?’
‘Holy Pete, a year in space, no company, nothing, traveling, and now
when something like this happens, someone human—’
‘Someonefeminine.’
Smith cocked his fist. Drew caught it, twisted it, slapped Smith’s face.
‘Wake up!’ he shouted into the blank face. ‘Wake up!’ He seized Smith’s
shirt front. He shook him like a kid. ‘Listen, listen, you fool! Maybe
she’s somebody else’s woman. Think of that. Where there’s a Martian
woman, there’s going to be a Martian man, you chump.’
‘Let go of me!’
‘Think of it, you idiot, that’s all.’ Drew gave Smith a shove. Smith
toppled, almost fell, reached for his gun, thought better of it, shoved
it back.
But Drew had seen the gesture. He looked at Smith. ‘So it’s come to
that, has it? You really are in a bad way, aren’t you? The old cave man
himself.’
‘Shut up!’ Smith started to walk on, climbing. ‘You don’t understand.’
‘No, I’ve been nowhere the last year. I’ve been home with Anna every
night. I’ve been warm and safe in New York. You went on the trip all by
your lonely little self!’ Drew snorted violently and swore. ‘You sure
are an egocentric little squirt!’
They climbed a hill of sand and were among other hills where the
footprints led them. They found an abandoned fireplace, charred sticks
of wood, a small metal tin which had once, from its arrangement,
contained oxygen to feed the fire. They looked new.
‘She can’t be much farther on.’ Smith was ready to drop, but still he
ran. He slugged his feet into the sand and gasped.
I wonder what she’s like, thought Drew, moving in his thoughts, freely,
wonderingly. I wonder if she’s tall and slender or small and very thin.
I wonder what color eyes, what color hair she has? I wonder what her
voice is like? Sweet, high? Or soft and very low?
I wonder a lot of things. So does Smith. Smith’s wondering, too, now.
Listen to him wonder and gasp and run and wonder some more. This isn’t
any good. It’ll lead us to something bad, I know. Why do we go on? A
silly question. We go on, of course, because we’re only human, no more,
no less.
I just hope, he thought, that she doesn’t have snakes for hair.
‘A cave!’
They had come to the side of a small mountain, into which a cave went
back through darkness. The footprints vanished within.
Smith snatched forth his electric torch and sent the beam inside,
flashing it swiftly about, grinning with apprehension. He moved forward
cautiously, his breath rasping in the earphones.
‘It won’t be long now,’ said Drew.
Smith didn’t look at him.
They walked together, elbows bumping. Every time Drew tried to draw
ahead, Smith grunted and increased his pace; his face angry with color.
The tunnel twisted, but the footprints still appeared as they flicked
the torch beam down.
Suddenly they came out into an immense cave. Across it, by a campfire
which had gone out, a figure lay.
‘There she is!’ shouted Smith. ‘There she is!’
‘Dibs,’ whispered Drew quietly.
Smith turned, the gun was in his hand. ‘Get out,’ he said.
‘What?’ Drew blinked at the gun.
‘You heard what I said, get out!’
‘Now, wait a minute—’
‘Get back to the ship, wait for me there!’
‘If you think you’re going to—’
‘I’ll count to ten, if you haven’t moved by then, I’ll burn you where
you stand—’
‘You’re crazy!’
‘One, two, three, better start moving.’
‘Listen to me, Smith, for Heaven’s sake!’
‘Four, five, six, I warned you – ah!’
The gun went off.
The bullet struck Drew in the hip, whirling him about to fall face down,
crying out with pain. He lay in darkness.
‘I didn’t mean it, Drew, I didn’t!’ Smith cried. ‘It went off; my
finger, my hand, nervous; I didn’t mean it!’ A figure bent down in the
blazing light, turned him over. ‘I’l fix you up, I’m sorry. I’ll get her
to help us. Just a second!’
The pain in his side, Drew lay watching as the torch turned and Smith
rushed loudly across the long cave toward the sleeping figure by the
black fire. He heard Smith call out once or twice, saw him approach and
bend down to the figure, touch it.
For a long time, Drew waited.
Smith turned the figure over.
From a distance, Drew heard Smith say, ‘She’s dead.’
‘What!’ called Drew. With fumbling hands he was taking out a small kit
of medicine. He broke open a vial of white powder which he swallowed.
The pain in his side stopped instantly. Now he went about bandaging the
wound. It was bad enough, but not too bad. In the middle distance he saw
Smith standing all alone, his torch senselessly in his numb hand,
looking down at the woman’s figure.
Smith came back and sat down and looked at nothing.
‘She’s – she’s been dead a long long time.’
‘But the footprints? What about them?’
‘This world, of course, this world. We didn’t stop to think. We just
ran. I just ran. Like a fool. This world, I didn’t think until now. Now
I know.’
‘What is it?’
‘There’s no wind, nothing. No seasons, no rain, no storms, no nothing.
Ten thousand years ago, in a dying world, that woman there walked across
the sands, alone. Maybe the last one alive. With a few oxygen tins to
keep her going. Something happened to the planet. The atmosphere drained
off into space. No wind, no oxygen, no seasons. And her walking alone.’
Smith shaped it in his mind before telling it quietly to Drew, not
looking at him. ‘And she came to this cave and lay down and died.’
‘Ten thousand years ago?’
‘Ten thousand years. And she’s been here ever since. Perfect. Lying
here, waiting for us to come and make fools of ourselves. A cosmic joke.
Ah, yes! Very funny.’
‘But the footprints?’
‘No wind. No rain. The footprints look just as fresh as the day she made
them, naturally. Everything looks new and fresh. Even her. Except
there’s something about her. Just by seeing her you know she’s been dead
a long long while. I don’t know what it is.’
His voice faded away.
Suddenly he remembered Drew. ‘My gun. You. Can I help?’
‘I got it all dressed. It was an accident. Let’s put it that way.’
‘Does it hurt?’
‘No.’
‘You won’t try and kill me for this?’
‘Shut your mouth. Your finger slipped.’
‘It did – it really did! I’m sorry.’
‘I know it did. Shut up.’ Drew finished packing the wound. ‘Give me a
hand now, we’ve got to get back to the ship.’ Smith helped him grunt to
his feet and stand swaying. ‘Now walk me over so I can take a look at
Miss Mars, ten thousand B.C. After all that running and this trouble I
ought to get a look at her, anyway.’
Smith helped him slowly over to stand above the sprawling form. ‘Looks
like she’s only sleeping,’ said Smith. ‘But she’s dead, awful dead.
Isn’t she pretty?’
She looks just like Anna, thought Drew, with a sense of shock. Anna
sleeping there, ready to wake and smile and say hello.
‘She looks just like Marguerite,’ Smith said.
Drew’s mouth twitched. ‘Marguerite?’ He hesitated. ‘Yes. Y-yes, I guess
she does.’ He shook his head. ‘All depends on how you look at it. I was
just thinking myself—’
‘What?’
‘Never mind. Let her lie. Leave her there. Now, we’ve got to hurry. Back
to the ship for us.’
‘I wonder who she was?’
‘We’ll never know. A princess maybe. A stenographer in some ancient
city, a dancing maid? Come on, Smith.’
They made it back to the rocket in half an hour, slowly and painfully.
‘Aren’t we fools, though? Really prime fools?’
The rocket door slammed.
The rocket fired up on fountains of red and blue flame.
Below, the sand was stirred and blasted and blown. The footprints, for
the first time in ten thousands years were disturbed. They blew away in
fine particles. When the fire wind died, the prints were gone.

