                                
                                   The Exiles
                                      1949

     Their  eyes were fire and the breath flamed out the witches' mouths as they
bent to probe the caldron with greasy stick and bony finger.

     
     

     _"When shall we three meet again In thunder, lightning, or in rain?"_

     
     
     They  danced  drunkenly  on the shore of an empty sea, fouling the air with
their three tongues, and burning it with their cats eyes malevolently aglitter:

     
     

     _"Round about the cauldron go;
     In the poison'd entrails throw.... Double, double, toil and trouble;
     Fire bum, and cauldron bubble!"
     _

     
     
     They  paused  and  cast  a  glance  about.  "Where's the crystal? Where the
needles?"
     "Here!"
     "Good!"
     "Is the yellow wax thickened?"
     "Yes!"
     "Pour it in the iron mold!"
     "Is the wax figure done?" They shaped it like molasses adrip on their green
hands.
     "Shove the needle through the heart!"

     "The crystal, the crystal; fetch it from the tarot bag. Dust it off; have a
look!"

     They bent to the crystal, their faces white.

     
     

     _"See, see, see..."_

     
     
     A rocket ship moved through space from the planet Earth to the planet Mars.
On the rocket ship men were dying.
     The captain raised his head, tiredly. "We'll have to use the morphine."
     "But, Captain-"
     "You  see  yourself  this  man's  condition."  The  captain lifted the wool
blanket  and the man restrained beneath the wet sheet moved and groaned. The air
was full of sulphurous thunder.
     "I  saw  it-1 saw it." The man opened his eyes and stared at the port where
there  were  only black spaces, reeling stars, Earth far removed, and the planet
Mars  rising  large  and  red. "I saw it-a bat, a huge thing, a bat with a man's
face,  spread  over  the  front  port. Fluttering and fluttering, fluttering and
fluttering."
     "Pulse?" asked the captain.
     The orderly measured it. "One hundred and thirty."
     "He can't go on with that. Use the morphine. Come along, Smith."
     They  moved  away. Suddenly the floor plates were laced with bone and white
skulls that screamed. The captain did not dare look down, and over the screaming
he said, "Is this where Perse is?" turning in at a hatch.
     A  white-smocked surgeon stepped away from a body. "I just don't understand
it."
     "How did Perse die?"
     "We  don't  know,  Captain.  It  wasn't  his heart, his brain, or shock. He
just-died."
     The  captain  felt the doctor's wrist, which changed to a hissing snake and
bit  him.  The  captain  did  not flinch. "Take care of yourself. You've a pulse
too."
     The  doctor  nodded.  "Perse  complained  of  pains-needles, he said-in his
wrists  and  legs.  Said he felt like wax, melting. He fell. I helped him up. He
cried  like  a child. Said he had a silver needle in his heart. He died. Here he
is. We can repeat the autopsy for you. Everything's physically normal."
     "That's impossible! He died of something
     The  captain  walked  to a port. He smelled of menthol and iodine and green
soap  on his polished and manicured hands. His white teeth were dentifriced, and
his ears scoured to a pinkness, as were his cheeks. His uniform was the color of
new  salt, and his boots were black mirrors shining below him. His crisp crewcut
hair  smelled  of  sharp  alcohol.  Even his breath was sharp and new and clean.
There  was no spot to him. He was a fresh instrument, honed and ready, still hot
from the surgeon's oven.
     The  men  with  him  were  from the same mold. One expected huge brass keys
spiraling  slowly  from  their  backs. They were expensive, talented, well-oiled
toys, obedient and quick.
     The captain watched the planet Mars grow very large in space.
     "We'll  be  landing in an hour on that damned place. Smith, did you see any
bats, or have other nightmares?"
     "Yes,  sir.  The month before our rocket took off from New York, sir. White
rats biting my neck, drinking my blood. I didn't tell. I was afraid you wouldn't
let me come on this trip."
     "Never  mind,"  sighed  the  captain. "I had dreams too. In all of my fifty
years  I  never  had  a dream until that week before we took off from Earth. And
then every night I dreamed I was a white wolf. Caught on a snowy hill. Shot with
a  silver  bullet.  Buried  with  a stake in my heart." He moved his head toward
Mars. "Do you think, Smith, they know we're coming?"
     "We don't know if there are Martian people, sir."
     "Don't  we?  They  began  frightening  us  off  eight  weeks ago, before we
started. They've killed Perse and Reynolds now. Yesterday they made Grenville go
blind.  How?  I  don't know. Bats, needles, dreams, men dying for no reason. I'd
call  it  witchcraft  in  another  day.  But this is the year 2120, Smith. We're
rational  men.  This  all  can't be happening. But it is! Whoever they are, with
their needles and their bats, they'll try to finish us all."
     He swung about. "Smith, fetch those books from my file. I want them when we
land."
     Two hundred books were piled on the rocket deck.
     "Thank  you,  Smith.  Have  you glanced at them? Think I'm insane? Perhaps.
It's  a  crazy  hunch.  At  that  last  moment  I  ordered  these books from the
Historical Museum. Because of my dreams. Twenty nights I was stabbed, butchered,
a screaming bat pinned to a surgical mat, a thing rotting underground in a black
box; bad, wicked dreams. Our whole crew dreamed of witch-things and were-things,
vampires  and  phantoms, things they couldn 't know anything about. Why? Because
books  on  such ghastly subjects were destroyed a century ago. By law. Forbidden
for  anyone  to  own  the  grisly volumes. These books you see here are the last
copies, kept for historical purposes in the locked museum vaults."
     Smith bent to read the dusty titles:
     "Tales  of  Mystery  and  Imagination, by Edgar Allan Poe. Dracula, by Bram
Stoker.  Frankenstein,  by  Mary Shelley. The Turn of the Screw, by Henry James.
The  Legend  of  Sleepy  Hollow, by Washington Irving. Rappaccini's Daughter, by
Nathaniel Hawthorne. An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge, by Ambrose Bierce. Alice
in  Wonderland, by Lewis Carroll. The Willows, by Algernon Blackwood. The Wizard
of  Oz,  by L. Frank Baum. The Weird Shadow Over Inns-mouth, by H. P. Lovecraft.
And  more!  Books  by  Walter  de  la  Mare,  Wakefield, Harvey, Wells, Asquith,
Huxley-all  forbidden  authors.  All  burned in the same year that Halloween was
outlawed  and  Christmas  was banned! But, sir, what good are these to us on the
rocket?"
     "I don't know," sighed the captain, "yet."
     The  three hags lifted the crystal where the captain's image flickered, his
tiny voice tinkling out of the glass:
     "I don't know," sighed the captain, "yet."
     The three witches glared redly into one another's faces.
     "We haven't much time," said one.
     "Better warn Them in the City."
     "They'll want to know about the books. It doesn't look good. That fool of a
captain!"
     "In an hour they'll land their rocket."
     The  three hags shuddered and blinked up at the Emerald City by the edge of
the  dry  Martian  sea. In its highest window a small man held a blood-red drape
aside.  He  watched the wastelands where the three witches fed their caldron and
shaped  the  waxes.  Farther  along,  ten  thousand  other blue fires and laurel
incenses,  black  tobacco  smokes  and fire weeds, cinnamons and bone dusts rose
soft  as  moths  through  the  Martian night. The man counted the angry, magical
fires.  Then,  as  the  three  witches  stared,  he  turned.  The crimson drape,
released, fell, causing the distant portal to wink, like a yellow eye.
     Mr.  Edgar  Allan  Poe  stood in the tower window, a faint vapor of spirits
upon  his  breath.  "Hecate's  friends  are  busy  tonight," he said, seeing the
witches, far below.
     A  voice  behind  him  said,  "I saw Will Shakespeare at the shore earlier,
whipping  them  on. All along the sea Shakespeare's army alone, tonight, numbers
thousands:  the  three  witches,  Oberon,  Hamlet's  father.  Puck-all,  all  of
them-thousands! Good Lord, a regular sea of people."
     "Good  William."  Poe  turned. He let the crimson drape fall shut. He stood
for a moment to observe the raw stone room, the black-timbered table, the candle
flame,  the  other  man,  Mr.  Ambrose Bierce, sitting very idly there, lighting
matches  and  watching  them  bum down, whistling under his breath, now and then
laughing to himself.
     "We'll  have  to tell Mr. Dickens now," said Mr. Poe. "We've put it off too
long. It's a matter of hours. Will you go down to his home with me, Bierce?"
     Bierce glanced up merrily. "I've just been thinking-what'll happen to us?"
     "If  we  can't kill the rocket men off, frighten them away, then we'll have
to  leave,  of  course.  We'll  go on to Jupiter, and when they come to Jupiter,
we'll  go  on  to  Saturn,  and when they come to Saturn, we'll go to Uranus, or
Neptune, and then on out to Pluto-"
     "Where then?"
     Mr.  Poe's  face was weary; there were fire coals remaining, fading, in his
eyes,  and  a  sad wildness in the way he talked, and a uselessness of his hands
and  the  way  his  hair  fell lankly over his amazing white brow. He was like a
satan  of  some lost dark cause, a general arrived from a derelict invasion. His
silky,  soft,  black  mustache was worn away by his musing lips. He was so small
his brow seemed to float, vast and phosphorescent, by itself, in the dark room.
     "We  have  the  advantages  of  superior forms of travel," he said. "We can
always hope for one of their atomic wars, dissolution, the dark ages come again.
The  return  of  superstition. We could go back then to Earth, all of us, in one
night." Mr. Poe's black eyes brooded under his round and luminant brow. He gazed
at  the  ceiling.  "So  they're  coming to ruin this world too? They won't leave
anything undefiled, will they?"
     "Does  a  wolf  pack stop until it's killed its prey and eaten the guts? It
should  be quite a war. I shall sit on the side lines and be the scorekeeper. So
many  Earthmen  boiled  in  oil,  so  many  Mss. Found in Bottles burnt, so many
Earthmen  stabbed with needles, so many Red Deaths put to flight by a battery of
hypodermic syringes-ha!"
     Poe  swayed  angrily, faintly drunk with wine. "What did we do? Be with us,
Bierce,  in  the  name  of  God!  Did  we  have a fair trial before a company of
literary  critics?  No!  Our  books  were plucked up by neat, sterile, surgeon's
pliers,  and flung into vats, to boil, to be killed of all their mortuary germs.
Damn them all!"
     "I find our situation amusing," said Bierce.
     They were interrupted by a hysterical shout from the tower stair.
     "Mr. Poe! Mr. Bierce!"
     "Yes,  yes,  we're  coming!" Poe and Bierce descended to find a man gasping
against the stone passage wall.
     "Have you heard the news?" he cried immediately, clawing at them like a man
about  to  fall  over  a cliff. "In an hour they'll land! They're bringing books
with  them-old books, the witches said! What're you doing in the tower at a time
like this? Why aren't you acting?"
     Poe  said:  "We're  doing  everything  we can, Blackwood. You're new to all
this. Come along, we're going to Mr. Charles Dickens' place-"
     "-to contemplate our doom, our black doom," said Mr. Bierce, with a wink.
     They  moved  down  the echoing throats of the castle, level after dim green
level,  down  into mustiness and decay and spiders and dreamlike webbing. "Don't
worry,"  said  Poe,  his  brow  like  a huge white lamp before them, descending,
sinking.  "All  along  the dead sea tonight I've called the others. Your friends
and  mine,  Blackwood-  Bierce. They're all there. The animals and the old women
and  the  tall  men with the sharp white teeth. The traps are waiting; the pits,
yes,  and the pendulums. The Red Death." Here he laughed quietly. "Yes, even the
Red  Death. I never thought-no, I never thought the time would come when a thing
like the Red Death would actually be. But they asked for it, and they shall have
it!"
     "But are we strong enough?" wondered Black-wood.
     "How  strong  is  strong?  They  won't  be  prepared for us, at least. They
haven't  the  imagination.  Those  clean  young rocket men with their antiseptic
bloomers  and  fish-bowl helmets, with their new religion. About their necks, on
gold  chains, scalpels. Upon their heads, a diadem of microscopes. In their holy
fingers,  steaming  incense  urns which in reality are only germicidal ovens for
steaming    out   superstition.   The   names   of   Poe,   Bierce,   Hawthorne,
Blackwood-blasphemy to their clean lips."
     Outside  the  castle  they advanced through a watery space, a tarn that was
not  a  tarn,  which  misted  before  them like the stuff of nightmares. The air
filled  with  wing  sounds  and  a  whirring, a motion of winds and blacknesses.
Voices  changed,  figures  swayed  at  campfires.  Mr.  Poe  watched the needles
knitting, knitting, knitting, in the firelight;
     knitting  pain  and  misery, knitting wickedness into wax marionettes, clay
puppets.  The caldron smells of wild garlic and cayenne and saffron hissed up to
fill the night with evil pungency.
     "Get on with it!" said Poe. "I'll be back!"
     All  down  the empty seashore black figures spindled and waned, grew up and
blew  into  black  smoke  on the sky. Bells rang in mountain towers and licorice
ravens spilled out with the bronze sounds and spun away to ashes.
     Over  a  lonely  moor  and  into a small valley Poe and Bierce hurried, and
found  themselves  quite  suddenly  on  a cobbled street, in cold, bleak, biting
weather,  with  people stomping up and down stony courtyards to warm their feet;
foggy withal, and candles flaring in the windows of offices and shops where hung
the  Yuletide  turkeys.  At a distance some boys, all bundled up, snorting their
pale  breaths  on the wintry air, were trilling, "God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen,"
while the immense tones of a great clock continuously sounded midnight. Children
dashed  by  from  the baker's with dinners all asteam  in their grubby fists, on
trays and under silver bowls.
     At a sign which read SCROOGE, MARLEY AND DICKENS, Poe gave the Marley-faced
knocker  a  rap, and from within, as the door popped open a few inches, a sudden
gust  of music almost swept them into a dance. And there, beyond the shoulder of
the  man  who was sticking a trim goatee and mustaches at them, was Mr. Fezziwig
clapping  his  hands, and Mrs. Fezziwig, one vast substantial smile, dancing and
colliding  with  other  merrymakers,  while  the fiddle chirped and laughter ran
about  a  table like chandelier crystals  given a sudden push of wind. The large
table  was  heaped  with  brawn and turkey and holly and geese; with mince pies,
suckling  pigs,  wreaths  of  sausages,  oranges  and  apples; and there was Bob
Cratchit  and  Little  Dorrit  and Tiny Tim and Mr. Fagin himself, and a man who
looked  as  if he might be an undigested bit of beef, a blot of mustard, a crumb
of cheese, a fragment of an underdone potato-who else but Mr. Marley, chains and
all,  while  the  wine  poured and the brown turkeys did their excellent best to
steam!
     "What do you want?" demanded Mr. Charles Dickens.
     "We've come to plead with you again, Charles;
     we need your help," said Poe.
     "Help? Do you think I would help you fight against those good men coming in
the rocket? I don't belong here, anyway. My books were burned by mistake. I'm no
supernaturalist, no writer of horrors and terrors like you, Poe, you, Bierce, or
the others. I'll have nothing to do with you terrible people!"
     "You  are  a  persuasive  talker,"  reasoned Poe. "You could go to meet the
rocket men, lull them, lull their suspicions and then-then we would take care of
them."
     Mr.  Dickens  eyed  the folds of the black cape which hid Poe's hands. From
it, smiling, Poe drew forth a black cat. "For one of our visitors."
     "And for the others?"
     Poe smiled again, well pleased. "The Premature Burial?"
     "You are a grim man, Mr. Poe."
     "I  am  a frightened and an angry man. I am a god, Mr. Dickens, even as you
are  a  god,  even  as  we  all  are gods, and our inventions-our people, if you
wish-have  not  only  been  threatened,  but  banished  and  burned, torn up and
censored,  ruined  and  done  away  with. The worlds we created are falling into
ruin. Even gods must fight!"
     "So?"  Mr.  Dickens  tilted his head, impatient to return to the party, the
music,  the  food.  "Perhaps  you  can  explain why we are here? How did we come
here?"
     "War  begets  war. Destruction begets destruction. On Earth, a century ago,
in  the  year 2020 they outlawed our books. Oh, what a horrible thing-to destroy
our  literary creations that way! It summoned us out of-what? Death? The Beyond?
I  don't like abstract things. I don't know. I only know that our worlds and our
creations  called  us  and  we  tried to save them, and the only saving thing we
could  do  was  wait out the century here on Mars, hoping Earth might overweight
itself  with  these  scientists  and  their doubtings; but now they're coming to
clean  us  out of here, us and our dark things, and all the alchemists, witches,
vampires,  and  were-things  that, one by one, retreated across space as science
made  inroads  through every country on Earth and finally left no alternative at
all but exodus. You must help us. You have a good speaking manner. We need you."
     "I  repeat,  I am not of you, I don't approve of you and the others," cried
Dickens  angrily.  "I  was  no  player  with  witches  and vampires and midnight
things."
     "What of A Christmas Carol?"
     "Ridiculous! One story. Oh, I wrote a few others about ghosts, perhaps, but
what of that? My basic works had none of that nonsense!"
     "Mistaken  or not, they grouped you with us. They destroyed your books-your
worlds too. You must hate them, Mr. Dickens!"
     "I admit they are stupid and rude, but that is all. Good day!"
     "Let Mr. Marley come, at least!"
     "Nor
     The  door  slammed.  As Poe turned away, down the street, skimming over the
frosty ground, the coachman playing a lively air on a bugle, came a great coach,
out  of which, cherry-red, laughing and singing, piled the Pickwickians, banging
on the door, shouting Merry Christmas good and loud, when the door was opened by
the fat boy.
     Mr. Poe hurried along the midnight shore of the dry sea. By fires and smoke
he  hesitated,  to shout orders, to check the bubbling caldrons, the poisons and
the chalked pentagrams. "Good!" he said, and ran on. "Fine!" he shouted, and ran
again.  People joined him and ran with him. Here were Mr. Coppard and Mr. Machen
running  with him now. And there were hating serpents and angry demons and fiery
bronze  dragons  and  spitting  vipers  and trembling witches like the barbs and
nettles  and thorns and all the vile flotsam and jetsam of the retreating sea of
imagination, left on the melancholy shore, whining and frothing and spitting.
     Mr.  Machen stopped. He sat like a child on the cold sand. He began to sob.
They  tried  to  soothe him, but he would not listen. "I just thought," he said.
"What happens to us on the day when the last copies of our books are destroyed?"
     The air whirled.
     "Don't speak of it!"
     "We must," wailed Mr. Machen. "Now, now, as the rocket comes down, you, Mr.
Poe;  you,  Coppard; you, Bierce-all of you grow faint. Like wood smoke. Blowing
away. Your faces melt-"
     "Death! Real death for all of us."
     "We  exist  only  through  Earth's  sufferance.  If  a  final edict tonight
destroyed our last few works we'd be like lights put out."
     Coppard brooded gently. "I wonder who I am. In what Earth mind tonight do I
exist?  In  some  African  hut?  Some hermit, reading my tales? Is he the lonely
candle in the wind of time and science? The flickering orb sustaining me here in
rebellious  exile? Is it him? Or some boy in a discarded attic, finding me, only
just  in  time!  Oh,  last  night I felt ill, ill, ill to the marrows of me, for
there  is  a  body of the soul as well as a body of the body, and this soul body
ached  in  all  of  its  glowing  parts,  and last night I felt myself a candle,
guttering.  When  suddenly I sprang up, given new light! As some child, sneezing
with  dust,  in some yellow garret on Earth once more found a worn, time-specked
copy of me! And so I'm given a short respite!"
     A  door  banged  wide  in a little hut by the shore. A thin short man, with
flesh  hanging  from  him  in folds, stepped out and, paying no attention to the
others, sat down and stared into his clenched fists.
     "There's  the  one I'm sorry for," whispered Blackwood. "Look at him, dying
away.  He  was  once  more real than we, who were men. They took him, a skeleton
thought,  and  clothed  him  in  centuries  of pink flesh and snow beard and red
velvet  suit  and  black  boot;  made  him  reindeers,  tinsel, holly. And after
centuries  of  manufacturing  him  they drowned him in a vat of Lysol, you might
say."
     The men were silent.
     "What  must  it  be  on  Earth?"  wondered  Poe. "Without Christmas? No hot
chestnuts, no tree, no ornaments or drums or candles-nothing;
     nothing but the snow and wind and the lonely, factual people...."
     They  all  looked  at  the  thin little old man with the scraggly beard and
faded red velvet suit.
     "Have you heard his story?"
     "I  can  imagine it. The glitter-eyed psychiatrist, the clever sociologist,
the resentful, froth-mouthed educationalist, the antiseptic parents-"
     "A   regrettable  situation,"  said  Bierce,  smiling,  "for  the  Yuletide
merchants  who,  toward  the  last  there, as I recall, were beginning to put up
holly  and  sing  Noel  the day before Halloween. With any luck at all this year
they might have started on Labor Day!"
     Bierce  did  not  continue. He fell forward with a sigh. As he lay upon the
ground  he  had  time  to  say  only,  "How  interesting." And then, as they all
watched,  horrified,  his body burned into blue dust and charred bone, the ashes
of which fled through the air in black tatters.
     "Bierce, Bierce!"
     "Gone!"
     "His last book gone. Someone on Earth just now burned it."
     "God rest him. Nothing of him left now. For what are we but books, and when
those are gone, nothing's to be seen."
     A rushing sound filled the sky.
     They  cried  out,  terrified,  and  looked up. In the sky, dazzling it with
sizzling  fire  clouds,  was the rocket! Around the men on the seashore lanterns
bobbed;  there  was  a  squealing  and  a bubbling and an odor of cooked spells.
Candle-eyed  pumpkins lifted into the cold clear air. Thin fingers clenched into
fists and a witch screamed from her withered mouth:

     
     

     _"Ship,  ship, break, fall! Ship, ship, bum all! Crack, flake, shake, melt!
Mummy dust, cat pelt!"_

     
     
     "Time to go," murmured Blackwood. "On to Jupiter, on to Saturn or Pluto."
     "Run away?" shouted Poe in the wind. "Never!"
     "I'm a tired old man!"
     Poe  gazed into the old man's face and believed him. He climbed atop a huge
boulder and faced the ten thousand gray shadows and green lights and yellow eyes
on the hissing wind.
     "The powders!" he shouted.
     A thick hot smell of bitter almond, civet, cumin, wormseed and orris!
     The rocket came down-steadily down, with the shriek of a damned spirit! Poe
raged  at  it!  He  flung  his  fists up and the orchestra of heat and smell and
hatred  answered  in  symphony!  Like stripped tree fragments, bats flew upward!
Burning  hearts,  flung  like  missiles, burst in bloody fireworks on the singed
air.  Down,  down,  relentlessly  down, like a pendulum the rocket came. And Poe
howled,  furiously,  and  shrank  back  with every sweep and sweep of the rocket
cutting  and  ravening the air! All the dead sea seemed a pit in which, trapped,
they  waited  the  sinking  of the dread machinery, the glistening ax; they were
people under the avalanche!
     "The snakes!" screamed Poe.
     And  luminous serpentines of undulant  green hurtled toward the rocket. But
it  came  down, a sweep, a fire, a motion, and it lay panting out exhaustions of
red plumage on the sand, a mile away.
     "At it!" shrieked Poe. "The plan's changed! Only one chance! Run! At it! At
it! Drown them with our bodies! Kill them!"
     And  as  if  he  had  commanded a violent sea to change its course, to suck
itself  free  from primeval beds, the whirls and savage gouts of fire spread and
ran  like wind and rain and stark lightning over the sea sands, down empty river
deltas,   shadowing   and  screaming,  whistling  and  whining,  sputtering  and
coalescing  toward  the rocket which, extinguished, lay like a clean metal torch
in the farthest hollow. As if a great charred caldron of sparkling lava had been
overturned,  the  boiling  people  and  snapping  animals  churned  down the dry
fathoms.
     "Kill them!" screamed Poe, running.
     The  rocket  men  leaped out of their ship, guns ready. They stalked about,
sniffing the air like hounds. They saw nothing. They relaxed.
     The  captain stepped forth last. He gave sharp commands. Wood was gathered,
kindled,  and a fire leapt up in an instant. The captain beckoned his men into a
half circle about him.
     "A  new  world,"  he said, forcing himself to speak deliberately, though he
glanced  nervously,  now and again, over his shoulder at the empty sea. "The old
world  left  behind.  A new start. What more symbolic than that we here dedicate
ourselves all the more firmly to science and progress." He nodded crisply to his
lieutenant. "The books."
     Firelight  limned the faded gilt titles: The Willows, The Outsider, Behold,
The  Dreamer, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, The Land of Oz, Pellucidar, The Land That
Time  Forgot,  A  Midsummer  Night's Dream and the monstrous names of Machen and
Edgar  Allan  Poe  and  Cabell  and Dunsany and Blackwood and Lewis Carroll; the
names, the old names, the evil names.
     "A new world. With a gesture, we bum the last of the old."
     The  captain  ripped pages from the books. Leaf by seared leaf, he fed them
into the fire.
     A scream!
     Leaping  back,  the  men  stared  beyond  the firelight at the edges of the
encroaching and uninhabited sea.
     Another  scream!  A  high and wailing thing, like the death of a dragon and
the  thrashing  of a bronzed whale left gasping when the waters of a leviathan's
sea drain down the shingles and evaporate.
     It  was  the  sound  of  air  rushing  in to fill a vacuum, where, a moment
before, there had been something.
     The captain neatly disposed of the last book by putting it into the fire.
     The air stopped quivering.
     Silence!
     The rocket men leaned and listened.
     "Captain, did you hear it?"
     "No."
     "Like  a  wave,  sir.  On  the  sea bottom! I thought I saw something. Over
there. A black wave. Big. Running at us."
     "You were mistaken."
     "There, sir!"
     "What?"
     "See  it?  There!  The  city! Way over! That green city near the lake! It's
splitting in half. It's falling!"
     The men squinted and shuffled forward.
     Smith stood trembling among them. He put his hand to his head as if to find
a  thought  there.  "I  remember.  Yes, now I do. A long time back. When I was a
child.  A book I read. A story. Oz, I think it was. Yes, Oz. The Emerald City of
Oz..."
     "Oz? Never heard of it."
     "Yes,  Oz,  that's what it was. I saw it just now, like in the story. I saw
it fall."
     "Smith!"
     "Yes, sir?"
     "Report for psychoanalysis tomorrow."
     "Yes, sir!" A brisk salute.
     "Be careful."
     The men tiptoed, guns alert, beyond the ship's aseptic light to gaze at the
long sea and the low hills.
     "Why,"  whispered  Smith,  disappointed,  "there's  no  one here at all, is
there? No one here at all."
     The wind blew sand over his shoes, whining.