
                                    The Jar
                                      1944

     It  was one of those things they keep in a jar in the tent of a sideshow on
the  outskirts  of  a  little, drowsy town. One of those pale things drifting in
alcohol  plasma,  forever  dreaming  and  circling,  with  its peeled, dead eyes
staring  out at you and never seeing you. It went with the noiselessness of late
night,  and  only  the  crickets  chirping,  the  frogs sobbing off in the moist
swampland.  One  of those things in a big jar that makes your stomach jump as it
does when you see a preserved arm in a laboratory vat.

     Charlie stared back at it for a long time.

     A  long time, his big, raw hands, hairy on the roofs of them, clenching the
rope that kept back curious people. He had paid his dime and now he stared.

     It  was  getting late. The merry-go-round drowsed down to a lazy mechanical
tinkle.  Tent-peggers  back  of  a  canvas  smoked and cursed over a poker game.
Lights  switched  out, putting a summer gloom over the carnival. People streamed
homeward  in cliques and queues. Somewhere, a radio flared up, then cut, leaving
Louisiana sky wide and silent with stars.

     There  was  nothing  in the world for Charlie but that pale thing sealed in
its  universe  of  serum.  Charlie's loose mouth hung open in a pink weal, teeth
showing; his eyes were puzzled, admiring, wondering.

     Someone  walked  in  the  shadows  behind him, small beside Charlie's gaunt
tallness.  "Oh,"  said  the shadow, coming into the light-bulb glare. "You still
here, bud?"

     "Yeah," said Charlie, like a man in his sleep.

     The  carny-boss  appreciated  Charlie's  curiosity.  He  nodded  at his old
acquaintance in the jar. "Everybody likes it; in a peculiar kinda way, I mean."

     Charlie rubbed his long jaw-bone. "You--uh--ever consider selling it?"

     The  carny-boss's  eyes  dilated,  then closed. He snorted. "Naw. It brings
customers. They like seeing stuff like that. Sure."

     Charlie made a disappointed, "Oh."

     "Well," considered the carny-boss, "if a guy had money, maybe--"

     "How much money?"

     "If  a  guy  had--"  the  carny-boss  estimated, counting fingers, watching
Charlie as he tacked it out one finger after another. "If a guy had three, four,
say, maybe seven or eight--"

     Charlie  nodded  with each motion, expectantly. Seeing this, the carny-boss
raised his total, "--maybe ten dollars or maybe fifteen--"

     Charlie scowled, worried. The carny_boss retreated. "Say a guy has _twelve_
dollars--" Charlie grinned. "Why he could buy that thing in that jar," concluded
the carny-boss.

     "Funny  thing,"  said Charlie, "I got just twelve bucks in my denims. And I
been  reckoning  how looked-up-to I'd be back down at Wilder's Hollow if I brung
home something like this to set on my shelf over the table. The folks would sure
look up to me then, I bet."

     "_Well_, now, listen here--" said the carny-boss.

     The  sale  was  completed  with  the  jar put on the back seat of Charlie's
wagon. The horse skittered his hoofs when he saw the jar, and whinnied.

     The  carny-boss  glanced  up  with an expression of, almost, relief. "I was
tired  of  seeing  that damn thing around, anyway. Don't thank me. Lately I been
thinking  things about it, funny things--but, hell, I'm a big-mouthed so-and-so.
S'long, farmer!"

     Charlie  drove  off.  The naked blue light bulbs withdrew like dying stars,
the open, dark country night of Louisiana swept in around wagon and horse. There
was just Charlie, the horse timing his gray hoofs, and the crickets.

     And the jar behind the high seat.

     It  sloshed  back and forth, back and forth. Sloshed wet. And the cold gray
thing  drowsily  slumped against the glass, looking out, looking out, but seeing
nothing, nothing.

     Charlie  leaned  back  to  pet the lid. Smelling of strange liquor his hand
returned,  changed  and  cold  and trembling, excited. _Yes, sir!_ he thought to
himself, _Yes, sir!_

     Slosh, slosh, slosh...

      

     In  the  Hollow,  numerous  grass-green and blood-red lanterns tossed dusty
light over men huddled, murmuring, spitting, sitting on General Store property.

     They  knew the creak-bumble of Charlie's wagon and did not shift their raw,
drab-haired  skulls  as  he rocked to a halt. Their cigars were glowworms, their
voices were frog mutterings on summer nights.

     Charlie leaned down eagerly. "Hi, Clem! Hi, Milt!"

     "Lo,   Charlie.   Lo,  Charlie,"  they  murmured.  The  political  conflict
continued. Charlie cut it down the seam:

     "I got somethin' here. I got somethin' you might wanna see!"

     Tom  Carmody's eyes glinted, green in the lamplight, from the General Store
porch. It seemed to Charlie that Tom Carmody was forever installed under porches
in shadow, or under trees in shadow, or if in a room, then in the farthest niche
shining  his  eyes  out  at  you from the dark. You never knew what his face was
doing,  and  his eyes were always funning you. And every time they looked at you
they laughed a different way.

     "You ain't got nothin' we wants to see, baby-doll."

     Charlie  made  a  fist  and looked at it. "Somethin' in a jar," he went on.
"Looks  kine a like a brain, kine a like a pickled jellyfish, kine a like--well,
come see yourself!"

     Someone  snicked  a  cigar into a fall of pink ash and ambled over to look.
Charlie  grandly  elevated  the  jar lid, and in the uncertain lantern light the
man's face changed. "Hey, now, what in hell _is_ this--?"

     It was the first thaw of the evening. Others shifted lazily upright, leaned
forward;  gravity  pulled  them into walking. They made no effort, except to put
one shoe before the other to keep from collapsing upon their unusual faces. They
circled  the  jar  and  contents.  And  Charlie, for the first time in his life,
seized on some hidden strategy and crashed the glass lid shut.

     "You  want to see more, drop aroun' my house! It'll be there," he declared,
generously.

     Tom Carmody spat from out his porch eyrie. "Ha!"

     "Lemme see that again!" cried Gramps Medknowe. "Is it a octopus?"

     Charlie flapped the reins; the horse stumbled into action.

     "Come on aroun'! You're welcome!"

     "What'll your wife say?"

     "She'll kick the tar off'n our heels!"

     But  Charlie and wagon were gone over the hill. The men stood, all of them,
chewing  their  tongues,  squinting  up  the road in the dark. Tom Carmody swore
softly from the porch. . . .

      

      

     Charlie climbed the steps of his shack and carried the jar to its throne in
the  living room, thinking that from now on this lean-to would be a palace, with
an  "emperor"--that  was  the  word!  "emperor"--all  cold  and  white and quiet
drifting  in  his  private pool, raised, elevated upon a shelf over a ramshackle
table.

     The  jar,  as he watched, burnt off the cold mist that hung over this place
on the rim of the swamp.

     "What you got there?"

     Thedy's thin soprano turned him from his awe. She stood in the bedroom door
glaring  out,  her  thin body clothed in faded blue gingham, her hair drawn to a
drab  knot  behind  red  ears. Her eyes were faded like the gingham. "Well," she
repeated. "What is it?" 

     "What's it look like to you, Thedy?"

     She took a thin step forward, making a slow, indolent pendulum of hips, her
eyes intent upon the jar, her lips drawn back to show feline milk teeth.

     The dead pale thing hung in its serum.

     Thedy  snapped  a  dull-blue  glance at Charlie, then back to the jar, once
more at Charlie, once more to the jar, then she whirled quickly.

     "It--it looks--looks just like _you_, Charlie!" she cried.

     The bedroom door slammed.

     The  reverberation  did  not  disturb the jar's contents. But Charlie stood
there,  longing after his wife, heart pounding frantically. Much later, when his
heart slowed, he talked to the thing in the jar.

     "I  work  the  bottom  land  to the butt-bone every year, and she grabs the
money and runs off down home visitin' her folks nine weeks at a stretch. I can't
keep  hold  of her. Her and the men from the store, they make fun of me. I can't
help it if I don't know a way to hold onto her! Damn, but I _try!_"

     Philosophically, the contents of the jar gave no advice.

     "Charlie?"

     Someone stood in the front-yard door.

     Charlie turned, startled, then broke out a grin.

     It was some of the men from the General Store.

     "Uh--Charlie---we--we   thought--well--we   came  up  to  have  a  look  at
that--stuff--you got in that there jar--"

      

     July passed warm and it was August.

     For the first time in years, Charlie was happy as tall corn growing after a
drought. It was gratifying of an evening to hear boots shushing through the tall
grass,  the  sound  of  men spitting into the ditch prior to setting foot on the
porch, the sound of heavy bodies creaking the boards, and the groan of the house
as yet another shoulder leaned against its frame door and another voice said, as
a hairy wrist wiped a mouth clean:

     "Kin I come in?"

     With  elaborate  casualness,  Charlie'd  invite the arrivals in. There'd be
chairs,  soapboxes  for  all,  or  at least carpets to squat on. And by the time
crickets  were  itching  their  legs  into  a  summertime humming and frogs were
throat-swollen  like  ladies  with goiters shouting in the great night, the room
would be full to bursting with people from all the bottom lands.

     At first nobody would say anything. The first half-hour of such an evening,
while people came in and got settled, was spent in carefully rolling cigarettes.
Putting  tobacco  neatly into the rut of brown paper, loading it, tamping it, as
they loaded and tamped and rolled their thoughts and fears and amazement for the
evening.  It  gave them time to think. You could see their brains working behind
their eyes as they fingered the cigarettes into smoking order.

     It  was  kind  of  a  rude  church gathering. They sat, squatted, leaned on
plaster  walls,  and  one by one, with reverent awe, they stared at the jar upon
its shelf.

     They  wouldn't  stare sudden-like. No, they kind of did it slow, casual, as
if  they  were glancing around the room--letting their eyes fumble over just any
old object that happened into their consciousness.

     And--just  by  accident, of course--the focus of their wandering eyes would
occur  always  at  the  same  place. After a while all eyes in the room would be
fastened  to  it,  like  pins  stuck in some incredible pincushion. And the only
sound would be someone sucking a corncob. Or the children's barefooted scurry on
the  porch  planks  outside.  Maybe some woman's voice would come, "You kids git
away,  now!  Git!" And with a giggle like soft, quick water, the bare feet would
rush off to scare the bullfrogs.

     Charlie  would be up front, naturally, on his rocking chair, a plaid pillow
under  his lean rump, rocking slow, enjoying the fame and looked-up-to-ness that
came with keeping the jar.

     Thedy,  she'd  be  seen way back of the room with the womenfolk in a bunch,
all gray and quiet, abiding their men.

     Thedy looked like she was ripe for jealous screaming. But she said nothing,
just  watched  men  tromp  into  her living room and sit at the feet of Charlie,
staring  at this here Holy Grail-like thing, and her lips were set cold and hard
and she spoke not a civil word to anybody.

     After  a  period of proper silence, someone, maybe old Gramps Medknowe from
Crick  Road,  would  clear the phlegm from a deep cave somewhere inside himself,
lean forward, blinking, wet his lips, maybe, and there'd be a curious tremble in
his calloused fingers.

     This  would  cue  everyone  to get ready for the talking to come. Ears were
primed. People settled like sows in the warm mud after a rain.

     Gramps  looked  a  long while, measured his lips with a lizard tongue, then
settled back and said, like always, in a high, thin oldman's tenor:

     "Wonder  what it is? Wonder if it's a he or a she or just a plain old _it?_
Sometimes  I  wake  up  nights,  twist  on my corn-matting, think about that jar
settin'  here  in  the long dark. Think about it hangin' in liquid, peaceful and
pale  like  an  animal oyster. Sometimes I wake Maw and we both think on it. . .
."

     While talking, Gramps moved his fingers in a quavering pantomime. Everybody
watched his thick thumb weave, and the other heavy-nailed fingers undulate.

     ".  .  .  we  both  lay there, thinkin'. And we shivers. Maybe a hot night,
trees  sweatin',  mosquitoes  too  hot to fly, but we shivers jest the same, and
turn over, trying to sleep. . . ."

     Gramps  lapsed back into silence, as if his speech was enough from him, let
some other voice talk the wonder, awe, and strangeness.

     Juke  Marmer,  from  Willow Sump, wiped sweat off his palms on the round of
his knees and softly said:

     "I  remember  when  I  was a runnel-nosed kid. We had a cat who was all the
time  makin' kittens. Lordamighty, she'd a litter any time she jumped around and
skipped  a fence--" Juke spoke in a kind of holy softness, benevolent. "Well, we
give the kittens away, but when this one particular litter busted out, everybody
within walkin' distance had one-two our cats by gift, already.

     "So Ma busied on the back porch with a big two-gallon glass jar, fillin' it
to  the  top  with  water.  Ma said, 'Juke, you drown them kittens!' I 'member I
stood  there;  the  kittens  mewed,  runnin' 'round, blind, small, helpless, and
funny_just  beginnin'  to  get their eyes open. I looked at Ma, I said, 'Not me,
Ma!  _You_  do  it!' But Ma turned pale and said it had to be done and I was the
only  one  handy. And she went off to stir gravy and fix chicken. I--I picked up
one--kitten. I held it. It was warm. It made a mewin' sound, I felt like runnin'
away, not ever comin' back."

     Juke  nodded his head now, eyes bright, young, seeing into the past, making
it new, shaping it with words, smoothing it with his tongue.

     "I  dropped the kitten in the water. The kitten closed his eyes, opened his
mouth,  tryin'  for  air.  I 'member how the little white fangs showed, the pink
tongue came out, and bubbles with it, in a line to the top of the water!

     "I  know  to  this  day  the way that kitten floated after it was all over,
driftin' aroun', slow and not worryin', lookin' out at me, not condemnin' me for
what I done. But not likin' me, neither. Ahhhh. . . ."

     Hearts jumped quick. Eyes swiveled from Juke to the shelved jar, back down,
up again apprehensively.

     A pause.

     Jahdoo,  the  black man from Heron Swamp, tossed his ivory eyeballs, like a
dusky  juggler,  in his head. His dark knuckles knotted and flexed--grasshoppers
alive.

     "You  know  what  that  is?  You know, you _know?_ I tells you. That be the
center of Life, sure 'nuff! Lord believe me, it so!"

     Swaying  in  a  tree-like  rhythm,  Jahdoo was blown by a swamp wind no one
could see, hear or feel, save himself. His eyeballs went around again, as if cut
free  to wander. His voice needled a dark thread pattern, picking up each person
by the lobes of their ears and sewing them into one unbreathing design:

     "From that, lyin' back in the Middibamboo Sump, all sort o' thing crawl. It
put  out  hand,  it put out feet, it put out tongue an' horn an' it grow. Little
bitty  amoeba,  perhap.  Then  a  frog  with a bulgethroat fit ta bust! Yah!" He
cracked  knuckles.  "It  slobber  on up to its gummy joints and it--it AM HUMAN!
That am the center of creation! That am Middibamboo Mama, from which we all come
ten thousand year ago. Believe it!"

     "Ten thousand year ago!" whispered Granny Carnation.

     "It  am  old!  Looky it! It donn worra no more. It know betta. It hang like
pork  chop  in  fryin'  fat. It got eye to see with, but it donn blink 'em, they
donn  look fretted, does they? No, man! It know betta. It know that we done come
from it, and we is goin' back to it."

     "What color eyes it got?"

     "Gray."

     "Naw, _green!_"

     "What color hair? Brown?"

     "Black!"

     "Red!"

     "No, _gray!_"

     Then Charlie would give his drawling opinion. Some nights he'd say the same
thing,  some  nights  not.  It didn't matter. When you said the same thing night
after  night  in  the  deep  summer,  it  always sounded different. The crickets
changed  it.  The  frogs  changed  it.  The thing in the jar changed it. Charlie
said:

     "What  if  an  old  man went back into the swamp, or maybe a young kid, and
wandered aroun' for years and years lost in all that drippin', on the trails and
gullies,  in them old wet ravines in the nights, skin a turnin' pale, and makin'
cold  and shrivelin' up. Bein' away from the sun he'd keep witherin' away up and
up and finally sink into a muck-hole and lay in a kind of--scum--like the maggot
'skeeters  sleepin'  in sump-water. Why, why--for all we can tell, this might be
someone  we  _know!_  Someone  we  passed  words with once on a time. For all we
know--"

     A  hissing from among the womenfolk back in the shadow. One woman standing,
eyes  shining  black,  fumbled  for  words.  Her  name was Mrs. Tridden, and she
murmured:

     "Lots  of  little  kids  run stark naked to the swamp ever' year. They runs
around  and never comes back. I almost got lost maseif. I--I lost my little boy,
Foley, that way. You--you DON'T SUPPOSE! ! !"

     Breath was snatched through nostrils, constricted, tightened. Mouths turned
down  at  corners,  bent by hard, clinching muscle. Heads turned on celery-stalk
necks,  and  eyes  read  her  horror  and  hope.  It was in Mrs. Tridden's body,
wire-taut, holding to the wall back of her with straight fingers stiff.

     "My  baby,"  she whispered. She breathed it out. "My baby. My Foley. Foley!
Foley, is that you? Foley! Foley, tell me, baby, is that YOU!"

     Everybody held their breath, turning to see the jar.

      

     The  thing in the jar said nothing. It just stared blind-white out upon the
multitude.  And  deep  in  rawboned bodies a secret fear juice ran like a spring
thaw,  and their resolute calmness and belief and easy humbleness was gnawed and
eaten by that juice and melted away in a torrent! Someone screamed.

     "It moved!"

     "No, no, it didn' move. Just your eyes playin' tricks!"

     "Hones' ta God!" cried Juke. "I saw it shift slow like a dead kitten!"

     "Hush up, now. It's been dead a long, long time. Maybe since before you was
born!"

     "He  made a sign!" screamed Mrs. Tridden. "That's my Foley! My baby you got
there! Three-year-old he was! My baby lost and gone in the swamp!"

     The sobbing broke from her.

     "Now,  Mrs.  Tridden.  There now. Set yourself down, stop shakin'. Ain't no
more your child'n mine. There, there."

     One  of  the  womenfolk  held  her  and  faded  out the sobbing into jerked
breathing  and  a  fluttering  of  her lips in butterfly quickness as the breath
stroked over them, afraid.

     When  all was quiet again, Granny Carnation, with a withered pink flower in
her  shoulder-length  gray  hair,  sucked  the pipe in her trap mouth and talked
around it, shaking her head to make the hair dance in the light:

     "All  this  talkin'  and  shovin'  words. Like as not we'll never find out,
never  know  what it is. Like as not if we found out we wouldn't _want_ to know.
It's  like  magic tricks magicians do at shows. Once you find the fake, ain't no
more  fun'n  the  innards of a jackbob. We come collectin' around here every ten
nights  or  so,  talkin', social-like, with somethin', always somethin', to talk
about.  Stands  to  reason  if  we  spied  out what the damn thing is there'd be
nothin' to chew about, so there!"

     "Well,  damn  it  to  hell!"  rumbled  a  bull  voice.  "I don't think it's
nothin'!"

     Tom Carmody.

     Tom Carmody standing, as always, in shadow. Out on the porch, just his eyes
staring  in,  his  lips  laughing at you dimly, mocking. His laughter got inside
Charlie  like  a  hornet  sting. Thedy had put him up to it. Thedy was trying to
kill Charlie's new life, she was!

     "Nothin',"  repeated  Carmody,  harshly,  "in  that  jar but a hunch of old
jellyfish from Sea Cove, a rottin' and stinkin' fit to whelp!"

     "You mightn't be jealous, Cousin Carmody?" asked Charlie, slow.

     "Haw!"  snorted  Carmody.  "I  just come aroun' ta watch you dumb fools jaw
about  nuthin'.  You notice I never set foot inside or took part. I'm goin' home
right now. Anybody wanna come along with me?"

     He  got  no  offer  of  company. He laughed again, as if this were a bigger
joke,  how  so  many people could be so far gone, and Thedy was raking her palms
with  her  fingernails  away back in a corner of the room. Charlie saw her mouth
twitch and was cold and could not speak.

     Carmody, still laughing, rapped off the porch with his highheeled boots and
the sound of crickets took him away.

     Granny Carnation gummed her pipe. "Like I was sayin' before the storm: that
thing  on the shelf, why couldn't it be sort of--all things? Lots of things. All
kinds  of  life--death--I  don't  know. Mix rain and sun and muck and jelly, all
that  together.  Grass  and  snakes and children and mist and all the nights and
days  in  the  dead  canebrake.  Why's  it  have  to  be _one_ thing? Maybe it's
_lots_."

     And  the talking ran soft for another hour, and Thedy slipped away into the
night  on  the track of Tom Carmody, and Charlie began to sweat. They were up to
something, those two. They were planning something. Charlie sweated warm all the
rest of the evening. . . .

      

     The meeting broke up late, and Charlie bedded down with mixed emotions. The
meeting had gone off well, but what about Thedy and Tom?

     Very  late, with certain star coveys shuttled down the sky marking the time
as  after  midnight,  Charlie heard the slushing of the tall grass parted by her
penduluming  hips.  Her heels tacked soft across the porch, into the house, into
the bedroom.

     She  lay soundlessly in bed, cat eyes staring at him. He couldn't see them,
but he could feel them staring.

     "Charlie?"

     He waited.

     Then he said, "I'm awake."

     Then she waited.

     "Charlie?"

     "What?"

     "Bet  you don't know where I been; bet you don't know where I been." It was
a faint, derisive singsong in the night.

     He waited.

     She waited again. She couldn't bear waiting long, though, and continued:

     "I  been  to  the  carnival over in Cape City. Tom Carmody drove me. We--we
talked  to the carny-boss, Charlie, we did, we did, we _sure_ did!" And she sort
of giggled to herself, secretly.

     Charlie was ice-cold. He stirred upright on an elbow.

     She said, "We found out what it is in your jar, Charlie--" insinuatingly.

     Charlie flumped over, hands to ears. "I don't wanna hear!"

     "Oh,  but  you  gotta  hear,  Charlie.  It's  a  good  joke. Oh, it's rare,
Charlie," she hissed.

     "Go away," he said.

     "Unh-unh!  No,  no,  sir,  Charlie.  Why,  no,  Charlie--Honey. Not until I
tell!"

     "Git!" he said.

     "Let  me  tell!  We  talked  to  that  carny-boss,  and he--he liked to die
laughin'.  He  said he sold that jar and what was in it to some, some--hick--for
twelve bucks. And it ain't worth more'n two bucks at most!"

     Laughter  bloomed  in  the  dark,  right out of her mouth, an awful kind of
laughter.

     She finished it, quick:

     "It's  just junk, Charlie! Rubber, papier-maché, silk, cotton, boric-acid!
That's  all!  Got  a metal frame inside! That's all it is, Charlie. That's all!"
she shrilled.

     "No, no!"

     He sat up swiftly, ripping sheets apart in big fingers, roaring.

     "I don't wanna hear! Don't wanna hear!" he bellowed over and over.

     She  said,  "Wait'll everyone hears how fake it is! Won't they laugh! Won't
they flap their lungs!"

     He caught her wrists. "You ain't gonna tell them?"

     "Wouldn't wan me known as a liar, would you, Charlie?"

     He flung her off and away.

     "Whyncha  leave me alone? You dirty! Dirty jealous mean of ever'thing I do.
I took shine off your nose when I brung the jar home. You didn' sleep right 'til
you ruined things!"

     She laughed. "Then I won't tell anybody," she said.

     He  stared at her. "You spoiled _my_ fun. That's all that counted. It don't
matter  if you tell the rest. _I_ know. And I'll never have no more fun. You and
that Tom Carmody. I wish I could stop him laughin'. He's been laughin' for years
at  me!  Well,  you  just go tell the rest, the other people, now--might as well
have your fun--!"

     He  strode  angrily, grabbed the jar so it sloshed, and would have flung it
on  the  floor,  but he stopped trembling, and let it down softly on the spindly
table.  He  leaned over it, sobbing. If he lost this, the world was gone. And he
was losing Thedy, too. Every month that passed she danced further away, sneering
at  him, funning him. For too many years her hips had been the pendulum by which
he  reckoned  the  time of his living. But other men, Tom Carmody, for one, were
reckoning time from the same source.

     Thedy  stood  waiting  for  him  to  smash  the jar. Instead, he petted and
stroked  and  gradually  quieted  himself  over it. He thought of the long, good
evenings  in  the  past  month,  those rich evenings of friends and talk, moving
about the room. That, at least, was good, if nothing else.

     He turned slowly to Thedy. She was lost forever to him.

     "Thedy, you didn't go to the carnival."

     "Yes, I did."

     "You're lyin'," he said, quietly.

     "No, I'm not!"

     "This--this  jar  _has_ to have somethin' in it. Somethin' besides the junk
you  say.  Too  many  people  believe  there's somethin' in it, Thedy. You can't
change  that.  The  carny-boss, if you talked with him, he lied." Charlie took a
deep breath and then said, "Come here, Thedy."

     "What you want?" she asked, sullenly.

     "Come over here."

     He took a step toward her. "Come here."

     "Keep away from me, Charlie."

     "Just  want  to  show  you  something, Thedy." His voice was soft, low, and
insistent. "Here, kittie. Here, kittie, kittie, kittie-- HERE KITTIE!"

      

     It  was  another  night,  about  a  week  later. Gramps Medknowe and Granny
Carnation  came, followed by young Juke and Mrs. Tridden and Jahdoo, the colored
man.  Followed  by  all the others, young and old, sweet and sour, creaking into
chairs,  each  with his or her thought, hope, fear, and wonder in mind. Each not
looking at the shrine, but saying hello softly to Charlie.

     They  waited  for  the  others  to gather. From the shine of their eyes one
could  see  that  each saw something different in the jar, something of the life
and  the pale life after life, and the life in death and the death in life, each
with his story, his cue, his lines, familiar, old but new.

     Charlie sat alone.

     "Hello,  Charlie."  Somebody peered into the empty bedroom. "Your wife gone
off again to visit her folks?"

     "Yeah, she run for Tennessee. Be back in a couple weeks. She's the darndest
one for runnin'. You know Thedy."

     "Great one for jumpin' around, that woman."

     Soft  voices talking, getting settled, and then, quite suddenly, walking on
the dark porch and shining his eyes in at the people--Tom Carmody.

     Tom  Carmody  standing  outside the door, knees sagging and trembling, arms
hanging  and  shaking at his side, staring into the room. Tom Carmody not daring
to  enter.  Tom  Carmody  with his mouth open, but not smiling. His lips wet and
slack,  not  smiling.  His face pale as chalk, as if it had been sick for a long
time.

     Gramps  looked  up  at  the jar, cleared his throat and said, "Why, I never
noticed so definite before. It's got _blue_ eyes."

     "It always had blue eyes," said Granny Carnation.

     "No," whined Gramps. "No, it didn't. They was brown last time we was here."
He  blinked  upward.  "And another thing--it's got brown hair. Didn't have brown
hair _before!_"

     "Yes, yes, it did," sighed Mrs. Tridden.

     "No, it didn't!"

     "Yes, it did!"

     Tom Carmody, shivering in the summer night, staring in at the jar. Charlie,
glancing  up  at  it,  rolling  a  cigarette, casually, all peace and calm, very
certain  of  his  life and thoughts. Tom Carmody, alone, seeing things about the
jar  he never saw before. _Everybody_ seeing what he wanted to see; all thoughts
running in a fall of quick rain:

     "My baby. My little baby," thought Mrs. Tridden.

     "A brain!" thought Gramps.

     The colored man jigged his fingers. "Middibamboo Mama!"

     A fisherman pursed his lips. "Jellyfish!"

     "Kitten!  Here  kittie,  kittie,  kittie!"  the thoughts drowned clawing in
Juke's eyes. "Kitten!"

     "Everything  and anything!" shrilled Granny's weazened thought. "The night,
the swamp, death, the pale things, the wet things from the sea!"

     Silence.  And  then  Gramps whispered, "I wonder. Wonder if it's a he--or a
she--or just a plain old _it?_"

     Charlie  glanced  up,  satisfied,  tamping his cigarette, shaping it to his
mouth.  Then he looked at Tom Carmody, who would never smile again, in the door.
"I  reckon  we'll  never  know. Yeah, I reckon we won't." Charlie shook his head
slowly and settled down with his guests, looking, looking.

     It  was  just  one  of  those  things  they  keep in a jar in the tent of a
sideshow  on  the  outskirts  of a little, drowsy town. One of those pale things
drifting  in alcohol plasma, forever dreaming and circling, with its peeled dead
eyes staring out at you and never seeing you...
