                                
                                The October Game
                                      1948

     He put the gun back into the bureau drawer and shut the drawer.
     No,  not  that way. Louise wouldn't suffer. It was very important that this
thing have, above all duration. Duration through imagination. How to prolong the
suffering? How, first of all, to bring it about? Well.
     The  man standing before the bedroom mirror carefully fitted his cuff-links
together.  He  paused  long  enough  to hear the children run by switftly on the
street  below,  outside  this  warm two-storey house, like so many grey mice the
children, like so many leaves.
     By  the  sound  of the children you knew the calendar day. By their screams
you  knew  what  evening it was. You knew it was very late in the year. October.
The last day of October, with white bone masks and cut pumpkins and the smell of
dropped candle wax.
     No.  Things  hadn't  been  right for some time. October didn't help any. If
anything  it  made  things  worse.  He  adjusted his black bow-tie. If this were
spring,  he  nodded  slowly, quietly, emotionlessly, at his image in the mirror,
then  there  might  be a chance. But tonight all the world was burning down into
ruin. There was no green spring, none of the freshness, none of the promise.
     There  was  a  soft  running in the hall. "That's Marion", he told himself.
"My'little  one".  All eight quiet years of her. Never a word. Just her luminous
grey  eyes  and her wondering little mouth. His daughter had been in and out all
evening,  trying  on  various  masks, asking him which was most terrifying, most
horrible.  They  had  both  finally  decided  on the skeleton mask. It was 'just
awful!' It would 'scare the beans' from people!
     Again  he  caught the long look of thought and deliberation he gave himself
in the mirror. He had never liked October. Ever since he first lay in the autumn
leaves  before his granmother's house many years ago and heard the wind and sway
the  empty  trees.  It  has made him cry, without a reason. And a little of that
sadness  returned each year to him. It always went away with spring. But, it was
different tonight. There was a feeling of autumn coming to last a million years.
There would be no spring.
     He  had  been crying quietly all evening. It did not show, not a vesitge of
it, on his face. It was all hidden somewhere and it wouldn't stop.
     The  rich syrupy smell of sweets filled the bustling house. Louise had laid
out  apples  in new skins of toffee; there were vast bowls of punch fresh-mixed,
stringed apples in each door, scooped, vented pumpkins peering triangularly from
each  cold  window.  There  was  a  water  tub in the centre of the living room,
waiting, with a sack of apples nearby, for dunking to begin. All that was needed
was  the  catalyst,  the impouring of children, to start the apples bobbing, the
srtinged  apples  to penduluming in the crowded doors, the sweets to vanish, the
halls to echo with fright or delight, it was all the same.
     Now,  the  house  was  silent with preparation. And just a little more than
that.
     Louise had managed to be in every other room save the room he was in today.
It was her very fine way of intimating, Oh look Mich, see how busy I am! So busy
that  when  you walk into a room I'm in there's always something I need to do in
another room! Just see how I dash about!
     For  a  while  he had played a little game with her, a nasty childish game.
When  she was in the kitchen then he came to the kitchen saying, 'I need a glass
of water.' After a moment, he standing, drinking water, she like a crystal witch
over the caramel brew bubbling like a prehistoric mudpot on the stove, she said,
'Oh,  I  must light the pumpkins!' and she rushed to the living room to make the
pumpkins  smile  with  light. He came after, smiling, 'I must get my pipe.' 'Oh,
the  cider!'  she had cried, running to the dining room. 'I'll check the cider,'
he  had said. But when he tried following she ran to the bathroom and locked the
door.
     He stood outside the bathroom door, laughing strangely and senselessly, his
pipe  gone  cold  in  his  mouth,  and then, tired of the game, but stubborn, he
waited  another  five minutes. There was not a sound from the bath. And lest she
enjoy  in  any way knowing that he waited outside, irritated, he suddenly jerked
about and walked upstairs, whistling merrily.
     At  the  top of the stairs he had waited. Finally he had heard the bathroom
door  unlatch and she had come out and life below-stairs and resumed, as life in
a jungle must resume once a terror has passed on away and the antelope return to
their spring.
     Now,  as  he  finished  his  bow-tie  and  put  his  dark  coat there was a
mouse-rustle  in  the  hall.  Marion  appeared in the door, all skeletons in her
disguise.
     'How do I look, Papa?'
     'Fine!'
     From  under the mask, blonde hair showed. From the skull sockets small blue
eyes  smiled.  He  sighed.  Marion  and Louise, the two silent denouncers of his
virility,  his  dark  power. What alchemy had there been in Louise that took the
dark  of  a  dark man and bleached the dark brown eyes and black hair and washed
and bleached the ingrown baby all during the period before birth until the child
was  born, Marion, blonde, blue-eyed, ruddy-cheeked? Sometimes he suspected that
Louise  had  conceived  the  child as an idea, completely asexual, an immaculate
conception  of  contemptuous  mind  and  cell.  As  a firm rebuke to him she had
produced  a  child  in  her own image, and, to top it, she had somehow fixed the
doctor  so  he  shook his head and said, 'Sorry, Mr Wilder, your wife will never
have  another  child. This is the last one.' 'And I wanted a boy,' Mich had said
eight years ago.
     He  almost  bent  to take hold of Marion now, in her skull mask. He felt an
inexplicable  rush  of  pity for her, because she had never had a father's love,
only  the crushing, holding love of a loveless mother. But most of all he pitied
himself,  that  somehow  he  had  not  made the most of a bad birth, enjoyed his
daughter  for  herself,  regardless  of  her  not  being dark and a son and like
himself.  Somewhere  he  had missed out. Other things being equal, he would have
loved  the  child. But Louise hadn't wanted a child, anyway, in the first place.
She  had  been  frightened of the idea of birth. He had forced the child on her,
and  from  that night, all through the year until the agony of the birth itself,
Louise  had lived in another part of the house. She had expected to die with the
forced  child.  It  had  been  very  easy for Louise to hate this husband who so
wanted a son that he gave his only wife over to the mortuary.
     But  -  Louise  had lived. And in truimph! Her eyes, the day he came to the
hospital,  were  cold.  I'm  alive they said. And I have a blonde daughter! Just
look!  And  when  he  had put out a hand to touch, the mother had turned away to
conspire  with  her  new  pink  daughter-child  -  away  from  that dark forcing
murderer. It had all been so beautifully ironic. His selfishness deserved it.
     But  now  it  was  October again. There had been other Octobers and when he
thought  of  the  long  winter he had been filled with horror year after year to
think  of  the endless months mortared into the house by an insane fall of snow,
trapped  with  a  woman and child, neither of whom loved him, for months on end.
During  the  eight  years  there had been respites. In spring and summer you got
out, walked, picknicked; these were desperate solutions to the desperate problem
of a hated man.
     But,  in  winter,  the hikes and picnics and escapes fell away with leaves.
Life, like a tree, stood empty, the fruit picked, the sap run to earth. Yes, you
invited people in, but people were hard to get in winter with blizzards and all.
Once  he had been clever enough to save for a Florida trip. They had gone south.
He had walked in the open.
     But  now,  the eighth winter coming, he knew things were finally at an end.
He  simply  could not wear this one through. There was an acid walled off in him
that  slowly had eaten through tissue and bone over the years, and now, tonight,
it would reach the wild explosive in him and all would be over!
     There was a mad ringing of the bell below. In the hall, Louise went to see.
Marion,  without a word, ran down to greet the first arrivals. There were shouts
and hilarity.
     He walked to the top of the stairs.
     Louise was below, taking cloaks. She was tall and slender and blonde to the
point of whiteness, laughing down upon the new children.
     He  hesitated.  What  was all this? The years? The boredom of living? Where
had  it  gone wrong? Certainly not with the birth of the child alone. But it had
been  a  symbol  of  all  their  tensions,  he  imagined. His jealousies and his
business failures and all the rotten rest of it. Why didn't he just turn, pack a
suitcase, and leave? No. Not without hurting Louise as much as she had hurt him.
It  was  simple as that. Divorce wouldn't hurt her at all. It would simply be an
end to numb indecision. If he thought divorce would give her pleasure in any way
he  would stay married the rest of his life to her, for damned spite. No he must
hurt  her. Figure some way, perhaps, to take Marion away from her, legally. Yes.
That was it. That would hurt most of all. To take Marion.
     'Hello down there!' He descended the stairs beaming.
     Louise didn't look up.
     'Hi, Mr Wilder!'
     The children shouted, waved, as he came down.
     By  ten  o'clock  the  doorbell had stopped ringing, the apples were bitten
from  stringed  doors,  the  pink  faces were wiped dry from the apple bobbling,
napkins  were  smeared with toffee and punch, and he, the husband, with pleasant
efficiency had taken over. He took the party right out of Louise's hands. He ran
about  talking  to  the  twenty children and the twelve parents who had come and
were  happy  with  the special spiked cider he had fixed them. He supervised pin
the  tail on the donkey, spin the bottle, musical chairs, and all the rest, amid
fits of shouting laughter. Then, in the triangular-eyed pumpkin shine, all house
lights out, he cried, 'Hush! Follow me!' tiptoeing towards the cellar.
     The parents, on the outer periphery of the costumed riot, commented to each
other,  nodding  at  the clever husband, speaking to the lucky wife. How well he
got on with children, they said.
     The children, crowded after the husband, squealing.
     'The cellar!' he cried. 'The tomb of the witch!'
     More  squealing.  He  made  a  mock  shiver. 'Abandon hope all ye who enter
here!'
     The parents chuckled.
     One  by  one  the  children  slid down a slide which Mich had fixed up from
lengths  of  table-section,  into the dark cellar. He hissed and shouted ghastly
utterances  after  them.  A wonderful wailing filled dark pumpkin-lighted house.
Everybody  talked  at  once.  Everybody but Marion. She had gone through all the
party with a minimum of sound or talk; it was all inside her, all the excitement
and  joy.  What a little troll, he thought. With a shut mouth and shiny eyes she
had watched her own party, like so many serpentines thrown before her.
     Now,  the  parents.  With  laughing  reluctance  they  slid  down the short
incline, uproarious, while little Marion stood by, always wanting to see it all,
to be last. Louise went down without help. He moved to aid her, but she was gone
even before he bent.
     The  upper  house was empty and silent in the candle-shine. Marion stood by
the slide. 'Here we go,' he said, and picked her up.
     They  sat in a vast circle in the cellar. Warmth came from the distant bulk
of  the  furnace.  The  chairs  stood  in  a  long  line along each wall, twenty
squealing children, twelve rustling relatives, alternatively spaced, with Louise
down  at  the  far  end, Mich up at this end, near the stairs. He peered but saw
nothing.  They  had  all  grouped  to  their  chairs,  catch-as-you-can  in  the
blackness.  The  entire programme from here on was to be enacted in the dark, he
as  Mr  Interlocutor.  There was a child scampering, a smell of damp cement, and
the sound of the wind out in the October stars.
     'Now!' cried the husband in the dark cellar. 'Quiet!'
     Everybody settled.
     The room was black black. Not a light, not a shine, not a glint of an eye.
     A scraping of crockery, a metal rattle.
     'The witch is dead,' intoned the husband.
     'Eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee,' said the children.
     'The  witch  is  dead,  she  has been killed, and here is the knife she was
killed  with.'  He  handed over the knife. It was passed from hand to hand, down
and  around the circle, with chuckles and little odd cries and comments from the
adults.
     'The  witch  is  dead,  and  this  is her head,' whispered the husband, and
handed an item to the nearest person.
     'Oh,  I  know  how  this game is played,' some child cried, happily, in the
dark.  'He  gets  some old chicken innards from the icebox and hands them around
and  says,  "These  are her innards!" And he makes a clay head and passes it for
her  head,  and  passes a soup bone for her arm. And he takes a marble and says,
"This  is her eye!" And he takes some corn and says, "This is her teeth!" And he
takes  a sack of plum pudding and gives that and says, "This is her stomach!&" I
know how this is played!'
     'Hush, you'll spoil everything,' some girl said.
     'The witch came to harm, and this is her arm,' said Mich.
     'Eeeeeeeeeeee!'
     The items were passed and passed, like hot potatoes, around the cirle. Some
children  screamed,  wouldn't touch them. Some ran from their chairs to stand in
the centre of the cellar until the grisly items had passed.
     'Aw, it's only chicken insides,' scoffed a boy. 'Come back, Helen!'
     Shot  from  hand  to  hand,  with small scream after scream, the items went
down, down, to be followed by another and another.
     'The witch cut apart, and this is her heart,' said the husband.
     Six or seven items moving at once through the laughing, trembling dark.
     Louise spoke up. 'Marion, don't be afraid; it's only play."
     Marion didn't say anything.
     'Marion?, asked Louise. 'Are you afraid?'
     Marion didn't speak.
     'She's all right,' said the husband. 'She's not afraid.'
     On and on the passing, the screams, the hilarity.
     The  autumn  wind  sighed about the house. And he, the husband stood at the
head of the dark cellar, intoning the words, handing out the items.
     'Marion?' asked Louise again, from far across the cellar.
     Everybody was talking.
     'Marion?' called Louise.
     Everybody quieted.
     'Marion, answer me, are you afraid?'
     Marion didn't answer.
     The husband stood there, at the bottom of the cellar steps.
     Louise called 'Marion, are you there?'
     No answer. The room was silent.
     'Where's Marion?' called Louise.
     'She was here', said a boy.
     'Maybe she's upstairs.'
     'Marion!'
     No answer. It was quiet.
     Louise cried out, 'Marion, Marion!'
     'Turn on the lights,' said one of the adults.
     The  items  stopped  passing.  The children and adults sat with the witch's
items in their hands.
     'No.'  Louise  gasped.  There  was  a scraping of her chair, wildly, in the
dark.  'No.  Don't  turn  on  the lights, oh, God, God, God, don't turn them on,
please,  don't  turn  on the lights, don't!.Louise was shrieking now. The entire
cellar froze with the scream.
     Nobody moved.
     Everyone  sat  in the dark cellar, suspended in the suddenly frozen task of
this  October  game;  the  wind  blew  outside,  banging the house, the smell of
pumpkins  and  apples  filled  the  room  with the smell of the objects in their
fingers  while  one  boy cried, 'I'll go upstairs and look!' and he ran upstairs
hopefully  and  out  around  the  house,  four  times around the house, calling,
'Marion,  Marion,  Marion!'  over  and  over  and at last coming slowly down the
stairs  into  the  waiting breathing cellar and saying to the darkenss, 'I can't
find her.'

     
     
     Then ...... some idiot turned on the lights.