 
                                   The Scythe
                                      1943

     Quite  suddenly  there  was  no  more road. It ran down the valley like any
other  road, between slopes of barren, stony ground and live oak trees, and then
past  a broad field of wheat standing alone in the wilderness. It came up beside
the  small white house that belonged to the wheat field and then just faded out,
as though there was no more use for it.

     It  didn't  matter  much,  because just there the last of the gas was gone.
Drew  Erickson  braked  the  ancient  car to a stop and sat there, not speaking,
staring at his big, rough farmer's hands.

     Molly  spoke,  without  moving  where she lay in the corner beside him. "We
must of took the wrong fork back yonder."

     Drew nodded.

     Molly's  lips  were  almost as white as her face. Only they were dry, where
her skin was damp with sweat. Her voice was flat with no expression in it.

     "Drew," she said. "Drew, what are we a-goin' to do now?"

     Drew  stared  at  his hands. A farmer's hands, with the farm blown out from
under them by the dry, hungry wind that never got enough good loam to eat.

     The  kids  in  the  back seat woke up and pried themselves out of the dusty
litter  of bundles and bedding. They poked their heads over the back of the seat
and said:

     "What  are  we  stoppin' for, Pa? Are we gonna eat now, Pa? Pa, we're awful
hungry. Can we eat now, Pa?"

     Drew closed his eyes. He hated the sight of his hands.

     Molly's  fingers  touched his wrist. Very light, very soft. "Drew, maybe in
the house there they'd spare us somethin' to eat?"

     A  white  line  showed around his mouth. "Beggin'," he said harshly. "Ain't
none of us ever begged before. Ain't none of us ever goin' to."

     Molly's hand tightened on his wrist. He turned and saw her eyes. He saw the
eyes of Susie and little Drew, looking at him. Slowly all the stiffness went out
of  his  neck and his back. His face got loose and blank, shapeless like a thing
that  has  been  beaten too hard and too long. He got out of the car and went up
the  path to the house. He walked uncertainly, like a man who is sick, or nearly
blind.

     The door of the house was open. Drew knocked three times. There was nothing
inside but silence, and a white window curtain moving in the slow, hot air.

     He  knew it before he went in. He knew there was death in the house. It was
that kind of silence.

     He  went  through  a  small,  clean  living room and down a little hall. He
wasn't thinking anything. He was past thinking. He was going toward the kitchen,
unquestioning, like an animal.

     Then  he  looked  through  an open door and saw the dead man. He was an old
man,  lying  out on a clean white bed. He hadn't been dead long; not long enough
to  lose  the  last quiet look of peace. He must have known he was going to die,
because  he  wore  his grave clothes--an old black suit, brushed and neat, and a
clean white shirt and a black tie.

     A  scythe  leaned  against  the  wall beside the bed. Between the old man's
hands there was a blade of wheat, still fresh. A ripe blade, golden and heavy in
the tassel.

     Drew  went  into the bedroom, walking soft. There was a coldness on him. He
took off his broken, dusty hat and stood by the bed, looking down.

     The paper lay open on the pillow beside the old man's head. It was meant to
he  read.  Maybe  a request for burial, or to call a relative. Drew scowled over
the words, moving his pale, dry lips.

      

     To him who stands beside me at my death bed:

      

     _Being  of  sound  mind,  and alone in the world as it has been decreed, I,
John Buhr, do give and bequeath this farm, with all pertaining to it, to the man
who  is  to  come. Whatever his name or origin shall be, it will not matter. The
farm  is  his, and the wheat; the scythe, and the task ordained thereto. Let him
take them freely, and without question--and re

     member  that  I, John Buhr, am only the giver, not the ordainer. To which I
set my hand and seal this third day of April, 1938_.

     ((_Signed_)) _John Buhr_. Kyrie eléison!

      

     Drew  walked  back  through  the house and opened the screen door. He said,
"Molly, you come in. Kids, you stay in the car."

     Molly  came inside. He took her to the bedroom. She looked at the will, the
scythe,  the wheat field moving in a hot wind outside the window. Her white face
tightened  up and she bit her lips and held onto him. "It's too good to be true.
There must be some trick to it."

     Drew  said,  "Our luck's changin', that's all. We'll have work to do, stuff
to  eat,  somethin'  over our heads to keep rain off." He touched the scythe. It
gleamed  like  a  half-moon.  Words  were  scratched  on  its  blade: WHO WIELDS
ME--WIELDS THE WORLD! It didn't mean much to him, right at that moment.

     "Drew," Molly asked, staring at the old man's clasped hands, "why--why's he
holdin' that wheat-stalk so hard in his fingers?"

     Just  then the heavy silence was broken by the sound of the kids scrambling
up the front porch. Molly gasped.

      

     They  lived  in  the house. They buried the old man on a hill and said some
words  over him, and came back down and swept the house and unloaded the car and
had  something  to  eat, because there was food, lots of it, in the kitchen; and
they  did  nothing for three days but fix the house and look at the land and lie
in  the  good  beds,  and then look at one another in surprise that all this was
happening  this way, and their stomachs were full and there was even a cigar for
him to smoke in the evenings

     There  was  a  small barn behind the house and in the barn a bull and three
cows; and there was a well-house, a spring-house, under some big trees that kept
it cool. And inside the well-house were big sides of beef and bacon and pork and
mutton,  enough  to  feed  a family five times their size for a year, two years,
maybe three. There was a churn and a box of cheese there, and big metal cans for
the milk.

     On  the  fourth morning Drew Erickson lay in bed looking at the scythe, and
he  knew  it  was  time for him to work because there was ripe grain in the long
field;  he  had  seen  it  with his eyes, and he did not want to get soft. Three
days'  sitting  were  enough  for  any man. He roused himself in the first fresh
smell  of  dawn and took the scythe and held it before him as he walked out into
the field. He held it up in his hands and swung it down.

     It  was  a big field of grain. Too big for one man to tend, and yet one man
had tended it.

     At  the  end  of the first day of work, he walked in with the scythe riding
his  shoulder quietly, and there was a look on his face of a puzzled man. It was
a  wheat  field the like of which he had never seen. It ripened only in separate
clusters,  each set off from the others. Wheat shouldn't do that. He didn't tell
Molly.  Nor  did  he  tell  her the other things about the field. About how, for
instance,  the  wheat  rotted  within  a  few  hours after he cut it down. Wheat
shouldn't do that, either. He was not greatly worried. After all, there was food
at hand.

     The  next  morning  the wheat he had left rotting, cut down, had taken hold
and came up again in little green sprouts, with tiny roots, all born again.

     Drew  Erickson rubbed his chin, wondered what and why and how it acted that
way,  and  what  good it would be to him--he couldn't sell it. A couple of times
during  the  day he walked far up in the hills to where the old man's grave was,
just  to  be  sure the old man was there, maybe with some notion he might get an
idea  there  about the field. He looked down and saw how much land he owned. The
wheat stretched three miles in one direction toward the mountains, and was about
two  acres wide, patches of it in seedlings, patches of it golden, patches of it
green,  patches  of  it  fresh  cut  by  his  hand. But the old man said nothing
concerning  this; there were a lot of stones and dirt in his face now. The grave
was  in  the  sun and the wind and silence. So Drew Erickson walked back down to
use the scythe, curious, enjoying it because it seemed important. He didn't know
just why, but it was. Very, very important.

     He  couldn't  just let the wheat stand. There were always new patches of it
ripened, and in his figuring out loud to no one in particular he said, "If I cut
the  wheat for the next ten years, just as it ripens up, I don't think I'll pass
the  same  spot  twice.  Such  a damn big field." He shook his head. "That wheat
ripens just so. Never too much of it so I can't cut all the ripe stuff each day.
That  leaves nothin' hut green grain. And the next mornin', sure enough, another
patch of ripe stuff. . . ."

     It  was damned foolish to cut the grain when it rotted as quick as it fell.
At the end of the week he decided to let it go a few days.

     He  lay in bed late, just listening to the silence in the house that wasn't
anything like death silence, but a silence of things living well and happily.

     He  got up, dressed, and ate his breakfast slowly. He wasn't going to work.
He  went  out  to  milk the cows, stood on the porch smoking a cigarette, walked
about  the  back-yard a little and then came back in and asked Molly what he had
gone out to do.

     "Milk the cows," she said.

     "Oh, yes," he said, and went out again. He found the cows waiting and full,
and  milked  them and put the milk cans in the springhouse, hut thought of other
things. The wheat. The scythe.

     All  through  the  morning  he sat on the hack porch rolling cigarettes. He
made  a  toy boat for little Drew and one for Susie, and then he churned some of
the  milk  into butter and drew off the buttermilk, hut the sun was in his head,
aching.  It  burned  there.  He  wasn't hungry for lunch. He kept looking at the
wheat  and  the  wind  bending and tipping and ruffling it. His arms flexed, his
fingers,  resting  on his knee as he sat again on the porch, made a kind of grip
in  the empty air, itching. The pads of his palms itched and burned. He stood up
and  wiped  his  hands  on  his  pants  and  sat  down and tried to roll another
cigarette  and got mad at the mixings and threw it all away with a muttering. He
had  a  feeling  as  if  a  third  arm  had  been cut off of him, or he had lost
something of himself. It had to do with his hands and his arms.

     He heard the wind whisper in the field.

     By  one  o'clock  he  was going in and out of the house, getting underfoot,
thinking  about  digging  an  irrigation ditch, but all the time really thinking
about the wheat and how ripe and beautiful it was, aching to be cut.

     "Damn it to hell!"

     He strode into the bedroom, took the scythe down off its wallpegs. He stood
holding  it.  He felt cool. His hands stopped itching. His head didn't ache. The
third arm was returned to him. He was intact again.

     It  was instinct. Illogical as lightning striking and not hurting. Each day
the  grain  must be cut. It had to be cut. Why? Well, it just did, that was all.
He  laughed  at  the scythe in his big hands. Then, whistling, he took it out to
the  ripe  and  waiting field and did the work. He thought himself a little mad.
Hell, it was an ordinary-enough wheat field, really, wasn't it? Almost.

      

     The days loped away like gentle horses.

     Drew Erickson began to understand his work as a sort of dry ache and hunger
and need. Things built in his head.

     One  noon,  Susie  and little Drew giggled and played with the scythe while
their father lunched in the kitchen. He heard them. He came out and took it away
from  them. He didn't yell at them. He just looked very concerned and locked the
scythe up after that, when it wasn't being used.

     He never missed a day, scything.

     Up.  Down.  Up, down, and across. Back and up and down and across. Cutting.
Up. Down.

     Up.

     Think about the old man and the wheat in his hands when he died.

     Down.

     Think about this dead land, with wheat living on it.

     Up.

     Think about the crazy patterns of ripe and green wheat, the way it grows!

     Down.

     Think about . . .

     The  wheat  whirled in a full yellow tide at his ankles. The sky blackened.
Drew  Erickson  dropped  the  scythe and bent over to hold his stomach, his eyes
running blindly. The world reeled.

     "I've  killed  somebody!" he gasped, choking, holding to his chest, falling
to his knees beside the blade. "I've killed a lot--"

     The  sky  revolved like a blue merry-go-round at the county fair in Kansas.
But no music. Only a ringing in his ears.

     Molly  was  sitting  at  the  blue  kitchen  table peeling potatoes when he
blundered into the kitchen, dragging the scythe behind him.

     "Molly!"

     She swam around in the wet of his eyes.

     She  sat  there,  her  hands fallen open, waiting for him to finally get it
out.

     "Get the things packed!" he said, looking at the floor.

     "Why?"

     "We're leaving," he said, dully.

     "We're leaving?" she said.

     "That  old  man. You know what he did here? It's the wheat, Molly, and this
scythe.  Every  time  you use the scythe on the wheat a thousand people die. You
cut across them and--"

     Molly  got up and put the knife down and the potatoes to one side and said,
understandingly,  "We traveled a lot and haven't eaten good until the last month
here, and you been workin' every day and you're tired--"

     "I  hear voices, sad voices, out there. In the wheat," he said. "Tellin' me
to stop. Tellin' me not to kill them!"

     "Drew!"

     He  didn't  hear her. "The field grows crooked, wild, like a crazy thing. I
didn't tell you. But it's wrong."

     She stared at him. His eyes were blue glass, nothing else.

     "You  think I'm crazy," he said, "but wait 'til I tell you. Oh, God, Molly,
help me; I just killed my mother!"

     "Stop it!" she said firmly.

     "I  cut  down one stalk of wheat and I killed her. I felt her dyin', that's
how I found out just now--"

     "Drew!"  Her  voice was like a crack across the face, angry and afraid now.
"Shut up!"

     He mumbled. "Oh--Molly--"

     The  scythe dropped from his hands, clamored on the floor. She picked it up
with  a snap of anger and set it in one corner. "Ten years I been with you," she
said.  "Sometimes  we  had  nothin' but dust and prayers in our mouths. Now, all
this good luck sudden, and you can't bear up under it!"

     She brought the Bible from the living room.

     She  rustled  its  pages  over.  They  sounded like the wheat rustling in a
small, slow wind. "You sit down and listen," she said.

     A  sound  came in from the sunshine. The kids, laughing in the shade of the
large live oak beside the house.

     She read from the Bible, looking up now and again to see what was happening
to Drew's face.

     She  read  from  the  Bible each day after that. The following Wednesday, a
week  later,  when  Drew walked down to the distant town to see if there was any
General Delivery mail, there was a letter.

     He came home looking two hundred years old.

     He held the letter out to Molly and told her what it said in a cold, uneven
voice.

     "Mother passed away--one o'clock Tuesday afternoon--her heart--"

      

     All that Drew Erickson had to say was, "Get the kids in the _____ car, load
it up with food. We're goin' on to California."

     "Drew--" said his wife, holding the letter.

     "You  know  yourself," he said, "this is poor grain land. Yet look how ripe
it  grows.  I ain't told you all the things. It ripens in patches, a little each
day.  It  ain't  right. And when I cut it, it rots! And next mornin' it comes up
without  any help, growin' again! Last Tuesday, a week ago, when I cut the grain
it  was  like  rippin'  my  own  flesh. I heard somebody scream. It sounded just
like--And now, today, this letter."

     She said, "We're stayin' here."

     "Molly."

     "We're  stayin'  here,  where  we're sure of eatin' and sleepin' and livin'
decent and livin' long. I'm not starvin' my children down again, ever!"

     The  sky was blue through the windows. The sun slanted in, touching half of
Molly's  calm  face,  shining one eye bright blue. Four or five water drops hung
and  fell  from the kitchen faucet slowly, shining, before Drew sighed. The sigh
was husky and resigned and tired. He nodded, looking away. "All right," he said.
"We'll stay."

     He  picked  up  the  scythe weakly. The words on the metal leaped up with a
sharp glitter.

     WHO WIELDS ME--WIELDS THE WORLD!

     "We'll stay. . . ."

      

     Next  morning  he  walked  to the old man's grave. There was a single fresh
sprout  of  wheat growing in the center of it. The same sprout, reborn, that the
old man had held in his hands weeks before.

     He talked to the old man, getting no answers.

     "You  worked  the field all your life because you _had_ to, and one day you
came  across your own life growin' there. You knew it was yours. You cut it. And
you  went home, put on your grave clothes, and your heart gave out and you died.
That's  how it was, wasn't it? And you passed the land on to me, and when I die,
I'm supposed to hand it over to someone else."

     Drew's  voice  had awe in it. "How long a time has this been goin' on? With
nobody  knowin'  about this field and its use except the man with the scythe . .
."

     Quite  suddenly  he  felt  very  old. The valley seemed ancient, mummified,
secretive,  dried  and bent and powerful. When the Indians danced on the prairie
it  had been here, this field. The same sky, the same wind, the same wheat. And,
before  the  Indians? Some Cro-Magnon, gnarled and shag-haired, wielding a crude
wooden scythe, perhaps, prowling down through the living wheat.

     Drew  returned to work. Up, down. Up, down. Obsessed with the idea of being
the wielder of _the_ scythe. He, himself! It burst upon him in a mad, wild surge
of strength and horror.

     Up! WHO WIELDS ME! Down! WIELDS THE WORLD!

     He  had  to  accept the job with some sort of philosophy. It was simply his
way  of getting food and housing for his family. They deserved eating and living
decent, he thought, after all these years.

     Up and down. Each grain a life he neatly cut into two pieces. If he planned
it  carefully--he looked at the wheat--why, he and Molly and the kids could live
forever!

     Once  he  found the place where the grain grew that was Molly and Susie and
little Drew he would never cut it.

     And then, like a signal, it came, quietly.

     Right there, before him.

     Another sweep of the scythe and he'd cut them away.

     Molly,  Drew,  Susie. It was certain. Trembling, he knelt and looked at the
few grains of wheat. They glowed at his touch.

     He  groaned  with  relief. What if he had cut them down, never guessing? He
blew  out his breath and got up and took the scythe and stood back away from the
wheat and stood for a long while looking down.

     Molly  thought it awfully strange when he came home early and kissed her on
the cheek, for no reason at all.

      

     At  dinner,  Molly  said, "You quit early today? Does--does the wheat still
spoil when it falls?"

     He nodded and took more meat.

     She  said, "You ought to write to the Agriculture people and have them come
look at it."

     "No," he said.

     "I was just suggestin'," she said.

     His  eyes  dilated. "I got to stay here all my life. Can't nobody else mess
with  that wheat; they wouldn't know where to cut and not to cut. They might cut
the wrong parts."

     "What wrong parts?"

     "Nothin'," he said, chewing slowly. "Nothin' at all."

     He  slapped  his  fork down, hard. "Who knows _what_ they might want to do!
Those  government  men! They might even--might even want to plow the whole field
under!"

     Molly  nodded.  "That's  just what it needs," she said. "And start all over
again, with new seed."

     He  didn't  finish  eating.  "I'm  not  writin' any gover'ment, and I'm not
handin'  this  field  over to no stranger to cut, and that's that!" he said, and
the screen door banged behind him.

      

     He  detoured around that place where the lives of his children and his wife
grew  up  in  the  sun, and used his scythe on the far end of the field where he
knew he would make no mistakes.

     But  he  no  longer  liked  the  work. At the end of an hour he knew he had
brought  death  to  three  of  his old, loved friends in Missouri. He read their
names on the cut grain and couldn't go on.

     He  locked  the scythe in the cellar and put the key away. He was done with
the reaping, done for good and all.

      

     He  smoked  his  pipe  in the evening on the front porch, and told the kids
stories  to  hear them laugh. But they didn't laugh much. They seemed withdrawn,
tired and funny, like they weren't his children any more.

     Molly  complained of a headache, dragged around the house a little, went to
bed  early  and fell into a deep sleep. That was funny, too. Molly always stayed
up late and was full of vinegar.

     The wheat field rippled with moonlight on it, making it into a sea.

     It  wanted  cutting. Certain parts needed cutting _now_. Drew Erickson sat,
swallowing quietly, trying not to look at it.

     What'd  happen  to  the  world  if he never went in the field again? What'd
happen to people ripe for death, who waited the coming of the scythe?

     He'd wait and see.

     Molly was breathing softly when he blew out the oil lamp and got to bed. He
couldn't  sleep.  He heard the wind in the wheat, felt the hunger to do the work
in his arms and fingers.

     In  the  middle  of  the  night  he found himself walking in the field, the
scythe  in  his hands. Walking like a crazy man, walking and afraid, half-awake.
He  didn't  remember  unlocking the cellar door, getting the scythe, but here he
was in the moonlight, walking in the grain.

     Among  these  grains  there  were many who were old, weary, wanting so very
much to sleep. The long, quiet, moonless sleep.

     The scythe held him, grew into his palms, forced him to walk.

     Somehow,  struggling, he got free of it. He threw it down, ran off into the
wheat, where he stopped and went down on his knees.

     "I  don't  want  to kill anymore," he said. "If I work with the scythe I'll
have to kill Molly and the kids. Don't ask me to do that!"

     The stars only sat in the sky, shining.

     Behind him, he heard a dull, thumping sound.

     Something  shot  up over the hill into the sky. It was like a living thing,
with  arms  of  red  color, licking at the stars. Sparks fell into his face. The
thick, hot odor of fire came with it.

     The house!

     Crying  out, he got sluggishly, hopelessly, to his feet, looking at the big
fire.

     The  little  white  house  with  the live oaks was roaring up in one savage
bloom  of fire. Heat rolled over the hill and he swam in it and went down in it,
stumbling, drowning over his head.

     By the time he got down the hill there was not a shingle, bolt or threshold
of  it  that  wasn't  alive  with flame. It made blistering, crackling, fumbling
noises.

     No one screamed inside. No one ran around or shouted.

     He yelled in the yard. "Molly! Susie! Drew!"

     He  got no answer. He ran close in until his eyebrows withered and his skin
crawled hot like paper burning, crisping, curling up in tight little curls.

     "Molly! Susie!"

     The  fire  settled  contentedly  down  to feed. Drew ran around the house a
dozen  times,  all  alone,  trying  to find a way in. Then he sat where the fire
roasted  his body and waited until all the walls had sunken down with fluttering
crashes,  until the last ceiling bent, blanketing the floors with molten plaster
and  scorched  lathing.  Until the flames died and smoke coughed up, and the new
day  came  slowly;  and  there  was  nothing  but  embering  ashes  and  an acid
smoldering.

     Disregarding the heat fanning from the leveled frames, Drew walked into the
ruin.  It  was  still  too  dark  to  see much. Red light glowed on his sweating
throat. He stood like a stranger in a new and different land. Here--the kitchen.
Charred  tables, chairs, the iron stove, the cupboards. Here--the hall. Here the
parlor and then over there was the bedroom where--

     Where Molly was still alive.

     She  slept among fallen timbers and angry-colored pieces of wire spring and
metal.

     She  slept  as  if  nothing  had happened. Her small white hands lay at her
sides,  flaked  with  sparks. Her calm face slept with a flaming lath across one
cheek.

     Drew  stopped and didn't believe it. In the ruin of her smoking bedroom she
lay  on a glittering bed of sparks, her skin intact, her breast rising, falling,
taking air.

     "Molly!"

     Alive  and  sleeping after the fire, after the walls had roared down, after
ceilings had collapsed upon her and flame had lived all about her.

     His shoes smoked as he pushed through piles of fuming litter. It could have
seared his feet off at the ankles, he wouldn't have known.

     "Molly. . ."

     He  bent  over  her. She didn't move or hear him, and she didn't speak. She
wasn't  dead. She wasn't alive. She just lay there with the fire surrounding her
and  not  touching  her,  not  harming  her in any way. Her cotton nightgown was
streaked  with  ashes, but not burnt. Her brown hair was pillowed on a tumble of
red-hot coals.

     He  touched  her  cheek,  and it was cold, cold in the middle of hell. Tiny
breaths trembled her half-smiling lips.

     The  children  were  there,  too.  Behind  a  veil of smoke he made out two
smaller figures huddled in the ashes sleeping.

     He carried all three of them out to the edge of the wheat field.

     "Molly. Molly, wake up! Kids! Kids, wake up!"

     They breathed and didn't move and went on sleeping.

     "Kids, wake up! Your mother is--"

     Dead? No, not dead. But--

     He  shook  the  kids as if they were to blame. They paid no attention; they
were busy with their dreams. He put them back down and stood over them, his face
cut with lines.

     He  knew  why  they'd slept through the fire and continued to sleep now. He
knew why Molly just lay there, never wanting to laugh again.

     The power of the wheat and the scythe.

     Their  lives, supposed to end yesterday, May 30th, 1938, had been prolonged
simply  because  he refused to cut the grain. They should have died in the fire.
That's the way it was meant to be. But since he had not used the scythe, nothing
could  hurt  them.  A  house  had flamed and fallen and still they lived, caught
halfway,  not dead, not alive. Simply--waiting. And all over the world thousands
more  just  like  them,  victims  of accidents, fires, disease, suicide, waited,
slept just like Molly and her children slept. Not able to die, not able to live.
All  because  a man was afraid of harvesting the ripe grain. All because one man
thought  he  could  stop  working  with a scythe and never work with that scythe
again.

     He  looked  down  upon  the  children. The job had to be done every day and
every day with never a stopping but going on, with never a pause, but always the
harvesting, forever and forever and forever.

     All right, he thought. All right. I'll use the scythe.

     He  didn't  say  good-by to his family. He turned with a slow-feeding anger
and found the scythe and walked rapidly, then he began to trot, then he ran with
long  jolting strides into the field, raving, feeling the hunger in his arms, as
the  wheat  whipped  and  flailed  his legs. He pounded through it, shouting. He
stopped.

     "Molly!" he cried, and raised the blade and swung it down.

     "Susie!" he cried. "Drew!" And swung the blade down again.

     Somebody screamed. He didn't turn to look at the fire-ruined house.

     And then, sobbing wildly, he rose above the grain again and again and hewed
to  left  and  right and to left and to right and to left and to right. Over and
over  and  over!  Slicing  out huge scars in green wheat and ripe wheat, with no
selection  and  no  care,  cursing, over and over, swearing, laughing, the blade
swinging up in the sun and falling in the sun with a singing whistle! Down!

     Bombs shattered London, Moscow, Tokyo.

     The blade swung insanely.

     And the kilns of Belsen and Buchenwald took fire.

     The blade sang, crimson wet.

     And mushrooms vomited out blind suns at White Sands, Hiroshima, Bikini, and
up, through, and in continental Siberian skies.

     The grain wept in a green rain, falling.

     Korea,  Indo-China, Egypt, India trembled; Asia stirred, Africa woke in the
night. . . .

     And  the  blade  went  on rising, crashing, severing, with the fury and the
rage of a man who has lost and lost so much that he no longer cares what he does
to the world.

     Just  a  few  short miles off the main highway, down a rough dirt road that
leads  to  nowhere,  just  a  few short miles from a highway jammed with traffic
bound for California.

     Once  in  a while during the long years a jalopy gets off the main highway,
pulls  up  steaming  in front of the charred ruin of a little white house at the
end  of the dirt road, to ask instructions from the farmer they see just beyond,
the one who works insanely, wildly, without ever stopping, night and day, in the
endless fields of wheat.

     But  they  get  no help and no answer. The farmer in the field is too busy,
even  after  all  these  years;  too  busy slashing and chopping the green wheat
instead of the ripe.

     And  Drew  Erickson  moves on with his scythe, with the light of blind suns
and a look of white fire in his never-sleeping eyes, on and on and on....
