                            
                                The Man Upstairs
                                      1947

     He  remembered how carefully and expertly Grandmother would fondle the cold
cut  guts of the chicken and withdraw the marvels therein; the wet shining loops
of  meat-  smelling  intestine,  the muscled lump of heart, the gizzard with the
collection  of seeds in it. How neatly and nicely Grandma would slit the chicken
and  push  her  fat  little  hand in to deprive it of its medals. These would be
segregated,  some  in  pans  of  water,  others in paper to be thrown to the dog
later,  perhaps.  And  then  the  ritual  of  taxidermy,  stuffing the bird with
watered,  seasoned  bread,  and  performing surgery with a swift, bright needle,
stitch after pulled-tight stitch.
     This was one of the prime thrills of Douglas's eleven-year-old life span.
     Altogether,  he  counted  twenty knives in the various squeaking drawers of
the magic kitchen table from which Grandma, a kindly, gentle-faced, white-haired
old witch, drew paraphernalia for her miracles.
     Douglas  was  to  be quiet. He could stand across the table from Grandmama,
his  freckled  nose tucked over the edge, watching, hut any loose boy-talk might
interfere with the spell. It was a wonder when Grandma brandished silver shakers
over the bird, supposedly sprinkling showers of mummy-dust and pulverized Indian
bones, muttering mystical verses under her toothless breath.
     "Grammy,"  said  Douglas  at  last,  breaking  the silence. "Am I like that
inside?" He pointed at the chicken.
     "Yes," said Grandma. "A little more orderly and presentable, but just about
the same. . . ."
     "And more _of_ it!" added Douglas, proud of his guts.
     "Yes," said Grandma. "More of it."
     "Grandpa  has  lots  more'n  me. His sticks out in front so he can rest his
elbows on it."
     Grandma laughed and shook her head.
     Douglas said, "And Lucie Williams, down the street, she . . ."
     "Hush, child!" cried Grandma.
     "But she's got. . ."
     "Never you mind what she's got! That's different."
     "But why is _she_ different?"
     "A  darning-needle dragon-fly is coming by some day and sew up your mouth,"
said Grandma firmly.
     Douglas  waited,  then  asked, "How do you know I've got insides like that,
Grandma?"
     "Oh, go 'way, now!"
     The front doorbell rang.
     Through  the  front-door glass as he ran down the hall, Douglas saw a straw
hat. The bell jangled again and again. Douglas opened the door.
     "Good morning, child, is the landlady at home?"
     Cold  gray  eyes in a long, smooth, walnut-colored face gazed upon Douglas.
The  man  was tall, thin, and carried a suitcase, a briefcase, an umbrella under
one  bent  arm,  gloves  rich and thick and gray on his thin fingers, and wore a
horribly new straw hat.
     Douglas backed up. "She's busy."
     "I wish to rent her upstairs room, as advertised."
     "We've got ten boarders, and it's already rented; go away!"
     "Douglas!"  Grandma  was  behind him suddenly. "How do you do?" she said to
the stranger. "Never mind this child."
     Unsmiling,  the  man stepped stiffly in. Douglas watched them ascend out of
sight  up  the  stairs, heard Grandma detailing the conveniences of the upstairs
room.  Soon she hurried down to pile linens from the linen closet on Douglas and
send him scooting up with them.
     Douglas  paused at the room's threshold. The room was changed oddly, simply
because  the  stranger  had  been  in it a moment. The straw hat lay brittle and
terrible  upon  the  bed, the umbrella leaned stiff against one wall like a dead
bat with dark wings folded.
     Douglas blinked at the umbrella.
     The stranger stood in the center of the changed room, tall, tall.
     "Here!"  Douglas littered the bed with supplies. "We eat at noon sharp, and
if  you're  late  coming down the soup'll get cold. Grandma fixes it so it will,
every time!"
     The tall strange man counted out ten new copper pennies and tinkled them in
Douglas' blouse pocket. "We shall be friends," he said, grimly.
     It  was  funny, the man having nothing but pennies. Lots of them. No silver
at all, no dimes, no quarters. Just new copper pennies.
     Douglas  thanked  him  glumly.  "I'll drop these in my dime bank when I get
them  changed  into a dime. I got six dollars and fifty cents in dimes all ready
for my camp trip in August."
     "I must wash now," said the tall strange man.
     Once,   at   midnight,  Douglas  had  wakened  to  hear  a  storm  rumbling
outside--the  cold  hard  wind  shaking  the house, the rain driving against the
window.  And  then a lightning bolt had landed outside the window with a silent,
terrific  concussion.  He  remembered  that  fear  of looking about at his room,
seeing it strange and awful in the instantaneous light.
     So  it  was,  now,  in this room. He stood looking up at the stranger. This
room  was no longer the same, but changed indefinably because this man, quick as
a  lightning  bolt, had shed his light about it. Douglas backed up slowly as the
stranger advanced.
     The door closed in his face.
      
     The  wooden  fork  went  up  with  mashed  potatoes,  came  down empty. Mr.
Koberman,  for  that  was his name, had brought the wooden fork and wooden knife
and spoon with him when Grandma called lunch.
     "Mrs.  Spaulding," he said, quietly, "my own cutlery; please use it. I will
have lunch today, but from tomorrow on, only breakfast and supper."
     Grandma  bustled in and out, bearing steaming tureens of soup and beans and
mashed  potatoes  to  impress  her  new  boarder, while Douglas sat rattling his
silverware on his plate, because he had discovered it irritated Mr. Koberman.
     "I  know  a  trick,"  said Douglas. "Watch." He picked a fork-tine with his
fingernail.  He  pointed  at  various  sectors  of  the  table, like a magician.
Wherever  he  pointed, the sound of the vibrating forktine emerged, like a metal
elfin  voice.  Simply  done,  of  course.  He  pressed  the  fork  handle on the
table-top,  secretly. The vibration came from the wood like a sounding board. It
looked  quite  magical.  "There, there, and _there!_" exclaimed Douglas, happily
plucking  the  fork  again. He pointed at Mr. Koberman's soup and the noise came
from it.
     Mr.  Koberman's  walnut-colored  face  became  hard  and firm and awful. He
pushed  the  soup  bowl  away  violently, his lips twisting. He fell back in his
chair.
     Grandma appeared. "Why, what's wrong, Mr. Koberman?"
     "I cannot eat this soup."
     "Why?"
     "Because I am full and can eat no more. Thank you."
     Mr. Koberman left the room, glaring.
     "What did you do, just then?" asked Grandma at Douglas, sharply.
     "Nothing. Grandma, why does he eat with wooden spoons?"
     "Yours not to question! When do you go back to school, anyway?"
     "Seven weeks."
     "Oh, my land!" said Grandma.
      
     Mr.  Koberman  worked nights. Each morning at eight he arrived mysteriously
home,  devoured  a  very small breakfast, and then slept soundlessly in his room
all  through  the dreaming hot daytime, until the huge supper with all the other
boarders at night.
     Mr.  Koberman's  sleeping habits made it necessary for Douglas to be quiet.
This  was  unbearable.  So,  whenever  Grandma  visited down the street, Douglas
stomped  up  and  down  stairs  beating  a  drum,  bouncing  golf balls, or just
screaming  for three minutes outside Mr. Koberman's door, or flushing the toilet
seven times in succession.
     Mr.  Koberman  never moved. His room was silent, dark. He did not complain.
There was no sound. He slept on and on. It was very strange.
     Douglas  felt  a  pure  white  flame  of  hatred burn inside himself with a
steady,  unflickering  beauty. Now that room was Koberman Land. Once it had been
flowery  bright  when  Miss  Sadlowe  lived there. Now it was stark, bare, cold,
clean, everything in its place, alien and brittle.
     Douglas climbed upstairs on the fourth morning.
     Halfway  to  the  second  floor  was  a  large sun-filled window, framed by
six-inch panes of orange, purple, blue, red and burgundy glass. In the enchanted
early  mornings  when  the sun fell through to strike the landing and slide down
the  stair banister, Douglas stood entranced at this window peering at the world
through the multicolored windows.
     Now  a  blue  world,  a  blue  sky,  blue  people, blue streetcars and blue
trotting dogs.
     He  shifted  panes.  Now--an  amber  world!  Two  lemonish women glided by,
resembling  the daughters of Fu Manchu! Douglas giggled. This pane made even the
sunlight more purely golden.
     It  was  eight  A.M.  Mr.  Koberman  strolled  by  below,  on the sidewalk,
returning from his night's work, his cane looped over his elbow, straw hat glued
to his head with patent oil.
     Douglas  shifted  panes again. Mr. Koberman was a red man walking through a
red world with red trees and red flowers and-- something else.
     Something about--Mr. Koberman.
     Douglas squinted.
     The  red glass _did_ things to Mr. Koberman. His face, his suit, his hands.
The  clothes  seemed  to  melt  away.  Douglas almost believed, for one terrible
instant,  that he could see _inside_ Mr. Koberman. And what he saw made him lean
wildly against the small red pane, blinking.
     Mr.   Koberman   glanced   up  just  then,  saw  Douglas,  and  raised  his
cane-umbrella  angrily,  as  if to strike. He ran swiftly across the red lawn to
the front door.
     "Young man!" he cried, running up the stairs. "What were you doing?"
     "Just looking," said Douglas, numbly.
     "That's all, is it?" cried Mr. Koberman.
     "Yes,  sir. I look through all the glasses. All kinds of worlds. Blue ones,
red ones, yellow ones. All different."
     "All  kinds  of worlds, is it!" Mr. Koberman glanced at the little panes of
glass,  his  face  pale.  He  got  hold  of  himself.  He  wiped his face with a
handkerchief  and pretended to laugh. "Yes. All kinds of worlds. All different."
He walked to the door of his room. "Go right ahead; play," he said.
     The door closed. The hall was empty. Mr. Koberman had gone in.
     Douglas shrugged and found a new pane.
     "Oh, everything's violet!"
      
     Half  an hour later, while playing in his sandbox behind the house, Douglas
heard the crash and the shattering tinkle. He leaped up.
     A  moment  later,  Grandma  appeared on the back porch, the old razor strop
trembling in her hand.
     "Douglas! I told you time and again never fling your basketball against the
house! Oh, I could just cry!"
     "I been sitting right here," he protested.
     "Come see what you've done, you nasty boy!"
     The  great  colored  window  panes  lay shattered in a rainbow chaos on the
upstairs landing. His basketball lay in the ruins.
     Before  he  could  even  begin  telling his innocence, Douglas was struck a
dozen  stinging  blows  upon  his rump. Wherever he landed, screaming, the razor
strop struck again.
     Later,  hiding his mind in the sandpile like an ostrich, Douglas nursed his
dreadful pains. He knew who'd thrown that basketball. A man with a straw hat and
a  stiff  umbrella  and  a cold, gray room. Yeah, yeah, yeah. He dribbled tears.
Just wait. Just _wait_.
     He heard Grandma sweeping up the broken glass. She brought it out and threw
it in the trash bin. Blue, pink, yellow meteors of glass dropped brightly down.
     When  she  was  gone, Douglas dragged himself, whimpering, over to save out
three pieces of the incredible glass. Mr. Koberman disliked the colored windows.
These--he clinked them in his fingers-- would be worth saving.
      
     Grandfather  arrived from his newspaper office each night, shortly ahead of
the  other  boarders, at five o'clock. When a slow, heavy tread filled the hall,
and  a thick, mahogany cane thumped in the cane-rack, Douglas ran to embrace the
large stomach and sit on Grandpa's knee while he read the evening paper.
     "Hi, Grampa!"
     "Hello, down there!"
     "Grandma cut chickens again today. It's fun watching," said Douglas.
     Grandpa  kept  reading.  "That's  twice  this  week,  chickens.  She's  the
chickenist  woman. You like to watch her cut 'em, eh? Coldblooded little pepper!
Ha!"
     "I'm just curious."
     "You  are,"  rumbled  Grandpa, scowling. "Remember that day when that young
lady  was  killed  at  the rail station? You just walked over and looked at her,
blood  and  all."  He laughed. "Queer duck. Stay that way. Fear nothing, ever in
your  life.  I  guess  you get it from your father, him being a military man and
all,  and  you  so close to him before you came here to live last year." Grandpa
returned to his paper.
     A long pause. "Gramps?"
     "Yes?"
     "What  if  a  man  didn't have a heart or lungs or stomach but still walked
around, alive?"
     "That," rumbled Gramps, "would be a miracle."
     "I  don't mean a--a miracle. I mean, what if he was all _different_ inside?
Not like me."
     "Well, he wouldn't be quite human then, would he, boy?"
     "Guess not, Gramps. Gramps, you got a heart and lungs?"
     Gramps  chuckled.  "Well,  tell the truth, I don't _know_. Never seen them.
Never  had  an  X-ray, never been to a doctor. Might as well be potato-solid for
all I know."
     "Have _I_ got a stomach?"
     "You  certainly  have!" cried Grandma from the parlor entry. "'Cause I feed
it!  And  you've lungs, you scream loud enough to wake the crumblees. And you've
dirty hands, go wash them! Dinner's ready. Grandpa, come on. Douglas, git!"
     In  the  rush  of  boarders  streaming  downstairs, Grandpa, if he intended
questioning  Douglas further about the weird conversation, lost his opportunity.
If  dinner  delayed  an  instant  more,  Grandma  and the potatoes would develop
simultaneous lumps.
      
     The  boarders,  laughing  and talking at the table--Mr. Koberman silent and
sullen  among them--were silenced when Grandfather cleared his throat. He talked
politics  a  few  minutes and then shifted over into the intriguing topic of the
recent peculiar deaths in the town.
     "It's  enough  to make an old newspaper editor prick up his ears," he said,
eying them all. "That young Miss Larson, lived across the ravine, now. Found her
dead three days ago for no reason, just funny kinds of tattoos all over her, and
a  facial  expression  that  would make Dante cringe. And that other young lady,
what was her name? Whitely? She disappeared and _never did_ come back."
     "Them  things  happen  alla  time,"  said  Mr.  Britz, the garage mechanic,
chewing.  "Ever  peek  inna  Missing  Peoples Bureau file? It's _that_ long." He
illustrated. "Can't tell _what_ happens to most of 'em."
     "Anyone  want  more  dressing?"  Grandma  ladled  liberal portions from the
chicken's interior. Douglas watched, thinking about how that chicken had had two
kinds of guts--God-made and Manmade.
     Well, how about _three_ kinds of guts?
     Eh?
     Why not?
     Conversation  continued  about  the  mysterious death of so-andso, and, oh,
yes, remember a week ago, Marion Barsumian died of heart failure, but maybe that
didn't  connect up? or did it? you're crazy! forget it, why talk about it at the
dinner table? So.
     "Never can tell," said Mr. Britz. "Maybe we got a vampire in town."
     Mr. Koberman stopped eating.
     "In the year 1927?" said Grandma. "A vampire? Oh go on, now."
     "Sure,"  said Mr. Britz. "Kill 'em with silver bullets. Anything silver for
that  matter. Vampires _hate_ silver. I read it in a book somewhere, once. Sure,
I did."
     Douglas  looked  at  Mr.  Koberman who ate with wooden knives and forks and
carried only new copper pennies in his pocket.
     "It's  poor  judgment," said Grandpa, "to call anything by a name. We don't
know  what  a hobgoblin or a vampire or a troll is. Could be lots of things. You
can't  heave  them  into  categories  with labels and say they'll act one way or
another.  That'd be silly. They're people. People who do things. Yes, that's the
way to put it: people who _do_ things."
     "Excuse  me,"  said  Mr.  Koberman, who got up and went out for his evening
walk to work.
      
     The  stars,  the  moon, the wind, the clock ticking, and the chiming of the
hours  into  dawn, the sun rising, and here it was another morning, another day,
and  Mr. Koberman coming along the sidewalk from his night's work. Douglas stood
off  like  a  small  mechanism  whirring and watching with carefully microscopic
eyes.
     At noon, Grandma went to the store to buy groceries.
     As  was  his custom every day when Grandma was gone, Douglas yelled outside
Mr.  Koberman's  door for a full three minutes. As usual, there was no response.
The silence was horrible.
     He ran downstairs, got the pass-key, a silver fork, and the three pieces of
colored  glass  he had saved from the shattered window. He fitted the key to the
lock and swung the door slowly open.
     The  room  was  in  half light, the shades drawn. Mr. Koberman lay atop his
bedcovers,  in  slumber  clothes, breathing gently, up and down. He didn't move.
His face was motionless.
     "Hello, Mr. Koberman!"
     The colorless walls echoed the man's regular breathing.
     "Mr. Koberman, hello!"
     Bouncing  a  golf  ball, Douglas advanced. He yelled. Still no answer. "Mr.
Koberman!"
     Bending  over  Mr. Koberman, Douglas picked the tines of the silver fork in
the sleeping man's face.
     Mr. Koberman winced. He twisted. He groaned bitterly.
     Response. Good. Swell.
     Douglas  drew  a  piece  of blue glass from his pocket. Looking through the
blue  glass  fragment he found himself in a blue room, in a blue world different
from  the world he knew. As different as was the red world. Blue furniture, blue
bed,  blue  ceiling and walls, blue wooden eating utensils atop the blue bureau,
and  the  sullen  dark  blue  of Mr. Koberman's face and arms and his blue chest
rising, falling. Also . . .
     Mr. Koherman's eyes were wide, staring at him with a hungry darkness.
     Douglas felt back, pulled the blue glass from his eyes.
     Mr. Koberman's eyes were shut.
     Blue  glass  again--open.  Blue  glass  away--shut. Blue glass again--open.
Away--shut.  Funny.  Douglas experimented, trembling. Through the glass the eyes
seemed  to peer hungrily, avidly through Mr. Koberman's closed lids. Without the
blue glass they seemed tightly shut.
     But it was the rest of Mr. Koberman's body.
     Mr.  Koberman's  bedclothes dissolved off him. The blue glass had something
to  do  with  it.  Or  perhaps  it was the clothes themselves, just being on Mr.
Koberman. Douglas cried out.
     He  was  looking through the wall of Mr. Koberman's stomach, right _inside_
him!
     Mr. Koberman was solid.
     Or, nearly so, anyway.
     There were strange shapes and sizes within him.
     Douglas  must  have  stood amazed for five minutes, thinking about the blue
worlds,  the  red  worlds,  the yellow worlds side by side, living together like
glass  panes around the big white stair window. Side by side, the colored panes,
the different worlds; Mr. Koberman had said so himself.
     So this was why the colored window had been broken.
     "Mr. Koberman, wake up!"
     No answer.
     "Mr.  Koberman,  where  do  you  work  at night? Mr. Koberman, where do you
work?"
     A little breeze stirred the blue window shade.
     "In a red world or a green world or a yellow one, Mr. Koberman?"
     Over everything was a blue glass silence.
     "Wait there," said Douglas.
     He  walked  down to the kitchen, pulled open the great squeaking drawer and
picked out the sharpest, biggest knife.
     Very  calmly  he  walked  into  the hall, climbed back up the stairs again,
opened  the  door  to  Mr.  Koberman's room, went in, and closed it, holding the
sharp knife in one hand.
      
     Grandma  was  busy fingering a piecrust into a pan when Douglas entered the
kitchen to place something on the table.
     "Grandma, what's this?"
     She glanced up briefly, over her glasses. "I don't know."
     It  was  square, like a box, and elastic. It was bright orange in color. It
had four square tubes, colored blue, attached to it. It smelled funny.
     "Ever see anything like it, Grandma?"
     "No."
     "That's what _I_ thought."
     Douglas  left  it  there,  went  from  the  kitchen.  Five minutes later he
returned with something else. "How about _this?_"
     He laid down a bright pink linked chain with a purple triangle at one end.
     "Don't bother me," said Grandma. "It's only a chain."
     Next  time he returned with two hands full. A ring, a square, a triangle, a
pyramid,  a  rectangle,  and--other shapes. All of them were pliable, resilient,
and  looked  as  if  they  were made of gelatin. "This isn't all," said Douglas,
putting them down. "There's more where this came from."
     Grandma said, "Yes, yes," in a far-off tone, very busy.
     "You were wrong, Grandma."
     "About what?"
     "About all people being the same inside."
     "Stop talking nonsense."
     "Where's my piggy-bank?"
     "On the mantel, where you left it."
     "Thanks."
     He tromped into the parlor, reached up for his piggy-bank.
     Grandpa came home from the office at five.
     "Grandpa, come upstairs."
     "Sure, son. Why?"
     "Something to show you. It's not nice; but it's interesting."
     Grandpa chuckled, following his grandson's feet up to Mr. Koberman's room.
     "Grandma  mustn't  know about this; she wouldn't like it," said Douglas. He
pushed the door wide open. "There."
     Grandfather gasped.
      
     Douglas  remembered  the  next few hours all the rest of his life. Standing
over  Mr.  Koberman's  naked  body,  the  coroner  and  his assistants. Grandma,
downstairs,  asking  somebody,  "What's  going on up there?" and Grandpa saying,
shakily,  "I'll take Douglas away on a long vacation so he can forget this whole
ghastly affair. Ghastly, ghastly affair!"
     Douglas said, "Why should it be bad? I don't see anything bad. I don't feel
bad."
     The coroner shivered and said, "Koberman's dead, all right."
     His  assistant  sweated. "Did you see those things in the pans of water and
in the wrapping paper?"
     "Oh, my God, my God, yes, I saw them."
     "Christ."
     The  coroner  bent  over  Mr.  Koberman's  body again. "This better be kept
secret,  boys.  It  wasn't  murder. It was a mercy the boy acted. God knows what
might have happened if he hadn't."
     "What was Koberman? A vampire? A monster?"
     "Maybe.  I  don't  know. Something--not human." The coroner moved his hands
deftly over the suture.
     Douglas  was  proud  of his work. He'd gone to much trouble. He had watched
Grandmother carefully and remembered. Needle and thread and all. All in all, Mr.
Koberman was as neat a job as any chicken ever popped into hell by Grandma.
     "I heard the boy say that Koberman lived even after all those _things_ were
taken  out  of him." The coroner looked at the triangles and chains and pyramids
floating in the pans of water. "Kept on _living_. God."
     "Did the boy say that?"
     "He did."
     "Then, what _did_ kill Koberman?"
     The coroner drew a few strands of sewing thread from their bedding.
     "This. . . ." he said.
     Sunlight blinked coldly off a half-revealed treasure trove; six dollars and
seventy cents' worth of silver dimes inside Mr. Koberman's chest.
     "I  think  Douglas  made  a  wise investment," said the coroner, sewing the
flesh back up over the "dressing" quickly.