prose_contemporaryRayBradburyThe MeadowcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
The Meadow
A wall collapses, followed by another and another; with dull thunder,
city falls into ruin.
The night wind blows.
The world lies silent.
London was torn down during the day. Port Said was destroyed. The nails
were pulled out of San Francisco. Glasgow is no more.
They are gone, forever.
Boards clatter softly in the wind, sand whines and trickles in small
storms upon the still air.
Along the road toward the colorless ruins comes the old night watchman
to unlock the gate in the high barbed-wire fence and stand looking in.
There in the moonlight lie Alexandria and Moscow and New York. There in
the moonlight lie Johannesburg and Dublin and Stockholm. And Clearwater,
Kansas, and Provincetown, and Rio de Janeiro.
Just this afternoon the old man saw it happen, saw the car roaring
outside the barbed-wire fence, saw the lean, sun-tanned men in that car,
the men with their luxurious charcoal-flannel suits, and winking
gold-mask cuff links, and their burning-gold wristwatches, and
eyeblinding rings, lighting their cork-tipped cigarettes with engraved
lighters.…
‘There it is, gentlemen. What a mess. Look what the weather’s done to
it.’
‘Yes, sir, it’s bad, Mr Douglas!’
‘We justmightsave Paris.’
‘Yes,sir!’
‘But, hell! The rain’s warped it. That’s Hollywood for you! Tear it
down! Clear it out! We can use that land. Send a wrecking crew in
today!’
‘Yes,sir, Mr Douglas!’
The car roaring off and gone away.
And now it is night. And the old night watchman stands inside the gate.
He remembers what happened this same still afternoon when the wreckers
came.
A hammering, ripping, clattering; a collapse and a roar. Dust and
thunder, thunder and dust!
And the whole of the entire world shook loose its nails and lath and
plaster and sill and celluloid window as town after town following town
banged over flat and lay still.
A shuddering, a thunder fading away, and then, once more, only the quiet
wind.
The night watchman now walks slowly forward along the empty streets.
And one moment he is in Baghdad, and beggars loll in wondrous filth, and
women with clear sapphire eyes give veiled smiles from high thin
windows.
The wind blows sand and confetti.
The women and beggars vanish.
And it is all strutworks again, it is all papier-mâché and oil-painted
canvas and props lettered with the name of this studio, and there is
nothing behind any of the building fronts but night and space and stars.
The old man pulls a hammer and a few long nails from his tool chest; he
peers around in the junk until he finds a dozen good strong boards and
some untorn canvas. And he takes the bright steel nails in his blunt
fingers, and they are single-headed nails.
And he begins to put London back together again, hammering and
hammering, board by board, wall by wall, window by window, hammering,
hammering, louder, louder, steel on steel, steel in wood, wood against
sky, working the hours toward midnight, with no end to his striking and
fixing and striking again.
‘Hey there,you!’
The old man pauses.
‘You, nightwatchman!’
Out of the shadows hurries a stranger in overalls, calling:
‘Hey, what’s-your-name!’
The old man turns. ‘The name’s Smith.’
‘Okay, Smith, what in hell’s the idea!’
The watchman eyes the stranger quietly. ‘Who areyou?’
‘Kelly, foreman of the wrecking gang.’
The old man nods. ‘Ah. The ones who tear everything down. You’ve done
plenty today. Why aren’t you home bragging about it?’
Kelly hawks and spits. ‘There was some machinery over on the Singapore
set I had to check.’ He wipes his mouth.…‘Now, Smith, what in Christ’s
name you think you’re doing? Drop that hammer. You’re building it all up
again! We tear it down and you put it up. You crazy?’
The old man nods. ‘Maybe I am. But somebody has to put it up again.’
‘Look, Smith. I domywork, you do yours, everyone’s happy. But I can’t
have you messing, see? I’m turning you in to Mr Douglas.’
The old man goes on with his hammering. ‘Call him up. Send him around. I
want to talk to him.He’sthe crazy one.’
Kelly laughs. ‘You kidding? Douglas don’t see nobody.’ He jerks his
hand, then bends to examine Smith’s newly finished work. ‘Hey, wait a
minute! Whatkindof nails you using? Single-heads! Now,cut that! It’ll be
hell to pay tomorrow, trying to pull ’em out!’
Smith turns his head and looks for a moment at the other man swaying
there. ‘Well, it stands to reason you can’t put the world together with
double-headed nails. They’re too easy to yank out. You got to use
singleheaded nails and hammer ’em way in. Likethis!’
He gives a steel nail one tremendous blow that buries it completely in
the wood.
Kelly works his hands on his hips. ‘I’ll give you one more chance. Quit
putting things back together and I’ll play ball with you.’
‘Young man,’ says the night watchman, and keeps on hammering while he
talks, and thinks about it, and talks some more, ‘I was here long before
you were born. I was here when allthiswas only a meadow. And there was a
wind set the meadow running in waves. For more than thirty years I
watched it grow, until it was all of the world together. I lived
herewithit. I lived nice. This is therealworld to me now. That world out
there, beyond the fence, is where I spend time sleeping. I got a little
room on a little street, and I see headlines and read about wars and
strange, bad people. But here? Here I have the whole world together and
it’s all peace. I been walking through the cities ofthisworld since
1920. Any night I feel like it, I have a one-o’clock snack at a bar on
the Champs Élysées! I can get me some fine amontillado sherry at a
sidewalk café in Madrid, if I want. Or else me and the stone gargoyles,
high up there – youseethem, on top Notre Dame? – we can turn over great
state matters and reach big political decisions!’
‘Yeah, Pop, sure.’ Kelly waves impatiently.
‘And now you come and kick it down and leave only that world out there
which hasn’t learned thefirst thingabout peace that I know from seeing
this land here inside the barbed wire. And so you come and rip it up and
there’s no peace anymore, anywhere. You and your wreckers so proud of
your wrecking. Pulling down towns and cities and whole lands!’
‘A guy’s got to live,’ says Kelly. ‘I got a wife and kids.’
‘That’s what they all say. They got wives and kids. And they go on,
pulling apart, tearing down, killing. They hadorders! Somebodytoldthem.
Theyhadto do it!’
‘Shut up and gimme that hammer!’
‘Don’t come any closer!’
‘Why, you crazy old—’
‘This hammer’s good for more than nails!’ The old man whistles the
hammer through the air; the wrecker jumps back.
‘Hell,’ says Kelly, ‘you’re insane! I’m putting a call through to the
main studio; we’ll get some cops here quick. My God, one minute you’re
building things up and talking crazy, but how do I know two minutes from
now you won’t run wild and start pouring kerosene and lighting matches!’
‘I wouldn’t harm the smallest piece of kindling in this place, and you
know it,’ says the old man.
‘Might burn the whole goddam place down, hell,’ says Kelly. ‘Listen, old
man, you just wait rightthere!’
The wrecker spins about and runs off into the villages and the ruined
cities and the sleeping two-dimensional towns of this night world, and
after his footsteps fade there is a music that the wind plays on the
long silver barbed wires of the fence, and the old man hammering and
hammering and selecting long boards and rearing walls until a time
finally comes when his mouth is gasping, his heart is exploding; the
hammer drops from his open fingers, steel nails tinkle like coins on the
pavement, and the old man cries out to himself alone:
‘It’s no use, no use. I can’t put it all back up before they come. I
need so very much help I don’t know what to do.’
The old man leaves his hammer lying on the road and begins to walk with
no direction, with no purpose, it seems, save that he is thinking to
make one last round and take one last look at everything and say goodbye
to whatever there is or was in this world to say good-bye to. And so he
walks with the shadows all around and the shadows all through this land
where time has grown late indeed, and the shadows are of all kinds and
types and sizes, shadows of buildings, and shadows of people. And he
doesn’t look straightatthem, no, because if he looked at them straight,
they would all blow away. No, he just walks, down the middle of
Piccadilly Circus … the echo of his steps … or the Rue de la Paix … the
sound of him clearing his throat … or Fifth Avenue … and he doesn’t look
right or left. And all around him, in dark doorways and empty windows,
are his many friends, his good friends, hisverygood friends. Far away
there are the hiss and steam and soft whispering of acaffè
espressomachine, all silver and chrome, and soft Italian singing … the
flutter of hands in darkness over the open mouths of balalaikas, the
rustle of palm trees, a touching of drums with the chimes chiming and
small bells belling, and a sound of summer apples dropped in soft night
grass which are not apples at all but the motion of women’s bared feet
slowly dancing a circle to the chimes’ faint chiming and the belling of
the tiny golden bells. There is the munch of maize kernels crushed on
black volcanic stone, the sizzle of tortillas drowned in hot fat, the
whisk of charcoals tossing up a thousand fireflies of spark at the
blowing of a mouth and the wave of a papaya frond; everywhere faces and
forms, everywhere stirs and gestures and ghost fires which float the
magical torch-colored faces of Spanish gypsies in air as on a fiery
water, the mouths crying out the songs that tell of the oddness and the
strangeness and the sadness of living. Everywhere shadows and people,
everywhere people and shadows and singing to music.
Just that very trite thing – the wind?
No. The people are all here. They have been here for many years. And
tomorrow?
The old man stops, presses his hands to his chest.
They will not be here anymore.
A horn blows!
Outside the barbed-wire gate – the enemy! Outside the gate a small black
police car and a large black limousine from the studio itself, three
miles away.
The horn blares!
The old man seizes the rungs of a ladder and climbs, the sound of the
horn pushing him higher and higher. The gate crashes wide; the enemy
roars in.
‘There he goes!’
The glaring lights of the police shine in upon the cities of the meadow;
the lights reveal the stark canvas set-pieces of Manhattan, Chicago, and
Chungking! The light glitters on the imitation stone towers of Notre
Dame Cathedral, fixes on a tiny figure balancing on the catwalks of
Notre Dame, climbing and climbing up where the night and the stars are
turning slowly by.
‘There he is, Mr Douglas, at the top!’
‘Good God. It’s getting so a man can’t spend an evening at a quiet party
without—’
‘He’s striking a match! Call the fire department!’
On top of Notre Dame, the night watchman, looking down, shielding the
match from the softly blowing wind, sees the police, the workmen, and
the producer in a dark suit, a big man, gazing up at him. Then the night
watchman slowly turns the match, cupping it, applies it to the tip of
his cigar. He lights the cigar in slow puffs.
He calls: ‘Is Mr Douglas down there?’
A voice calls back: ‘What do you want with me?’
The old man smiles. ‘Come up, alone! Bring a gun if you want! I just
want a little talk!’
The voices echo in the vast churchyard:
‘Don’tdoit, Mr Douglas!’
‘Give me your gun. Let’s get thisoverwith so I can get back to the
party. Keep me covered, I’ll play it safe. I don’t want these sets
burned. There’s two million dollars in lumber alone here.Ready?I’m on my
way.’
The producer climbs high on the night ladders, up through the half shell
of Notre Dame to where the old man leans against a plaster gargoyle,
quietly smoking a cigar. The producer stops, gun pointed, half through
an open trapdoor.
‘All right, Smith. Stay where you are.’
Smith removes the cigar from his mouth quietly. ‘Don’t you be afraid of
me. I’m all right.’
‘I wouldn’t bet money on that.’
‘Mr Douglas,’ says the night watchman, ‘did you ever read that story
about the man who traveled to the future and found everyone there
insane?Everyone. But since they were all insane they didn’tknowthey were
insane. They all acted alike and so they thought themselves normal. And
since our hero was the only sane one among them, he was abnormal;
therefore,hewas the insane one. Tothem, at least. Yes, Mr Douglas,
insanity is relative. It depends on who has who locked in what cage.’
The producer swears under his breath. ‘I didn’t climb up here to talk
all night. What do you want?’
‘I want to talk with the Creator. That’s you, Mr Douglas. You created
all this. You came here one day and struck the earth with a magical
checkbook and cried, “Let there be Paris!” And therewasParis: streets,
bistros, flowers, wine, outdoor bookshops and all. And you clapped your
hands again: “Let there be Constantinople!” And thereitwas! You clapped
your hands a thousand times, and each time made something new, and now
you think just by clapping your hands onelasttime you can drop it all
down in ruins. But, Mr Douglas, it’s not as easy as that!’
‘I own fifty-one percent of the stock in this studio!’
‘But did the studio ever belong to you, really? Did you ever think to
drive here late some night and climb up on this cathedral and see what
awonderfulworld you created? Did you ever wonder if it might not be a
good idea for you to sit up here with me and my friends and have a cup
of amontillado sherry with us? All right – so the amontillado smells and
looks and tastes like coffee. Imagination, Mr Creator, imagination. But
no, you never came around, you never climbed up, you never looked or
listened or cared. There was always a party somewhere else. And now,
very late, without asking us, you want to destroy it all. You may own
fifty-one percent of the studio stock, but you don’t ownthem.’
‘Them!’ cries the producer. ‘What’s all this business about “them”?’
‘It’s hard to put in words. The people wholivehere.’ The night watchman
moves his hand in the empty air toward the half-cities and the night.
‘So many films were made here in all the long years. Extras moved in the
streets in costumes, they talked a thousand tongues, they smoked
cigarettes and meerschaums and Persian hookahs, even. Dancing girls
danced. Theyglittered, oh, how they glittered! Women with veils smiled
down from high balconies. Soldiers marched. Children played. Knights in
silver armor fought. There were orange-tea shops. People sipped tea in
them and dropped theirh’s. Gongs were beaten. Viking ships sailed the
inland seas.’
The producer lifts himself up through the trapdoor and sits on the
plankings, the gun cradled more easily in his hand. He seems to be
looking at the old man first with one eye, then the other, listening to
him with one ear, then the other, shaking his head a little to himself.
The night watchman continues:
‘And somehow, after the extras and the men with the cameras and
microphones and all the equipment walked away and the gates were shut
and they drove off in big cars, somehow something of all those thousands
of different people remained. The things they had been, orpretendedto
be, stayed on. The foreign languages, the costumes, the things they did,
the things they thought about, their religions and their music, all
those little things and big things stayed on. The sights of far places.
The smells. The salt wind. The sea. It’s all here tonight if youlisten.’
The producer listens and the old man listens in the drafty strutworks of
the cathedral, with the moonlight blinding the eyes of the plaster
gargoyles and the wind making the false stone mouths to whisper, and the
sound of a thousand lands within a land below blowing and dusting and
leaning in that wind, a thousand yellow minarets and milk-white towers
and green avenues yet untouched among the hundred new ruins, and all of
it murmuring its wires and lathings like a great steel-and-wooden harp
touched in the night, and the wind bringing that self-made sound high up
here in the sky to these two men who stand listening and apart.
The producer laughs shortly and shakes his head.
‘Youheard,’ says the night watchman. ‘Youdidhear, didn’t you? I see it
in your face.’
Douglas shoves the gun in his coat pocket. ‘Anything you listen for you
can hear. I made the mistake of listening. You should have been a
writer. You could throw six of my best ones out of work. Well, what
about it – are you ready to come down out of here now?’
‘You sound almost polite,’ says the night watchman.
‘Don’t know why I should. You ruined a good evening for me.’
‘Did I? It hasn’t been that bad, has it? A bit different, I should say.
Stimulating, maybe.’
Douglas laughs quietly. ‘You’re not dangerous at all. You just need
company. It’s your job and everything going to hell and you’re lonely. I
can’t quite figure you, though.’
‘Don’t tell me I’ve got you thinking?’ asks the old man.
Douglas snorts. ‘After you’ve lived in Hollywood long enough, you meet
all kinds. Besides, I’ve never been up here before. It’s a real view,
like you say. But I’ll be damned if I can figure why you should worry
about all this junk. What’s it to you?’
The night watchman gets down on one knee and taps one hand into the palm
of the other, illustrating his points. ‘Look. As I said before, you came
here years ago, clapped your hands, and three hundred cities jumped up!
Then you added a half-thousand other nations, and states and peoples and
religions and political setups inside the barbed-wire fence. And there
was trouble! Oh, nothing you could see. It was all in the wind and the
spaces between. But it was the same kind of trouble the world out there
beyond the fence has – squabbles and riots and invisible wars. But at
last the trouble died out. You want to know why?’
‘If I didn’t, I wouldn’t be sitting up here freezing.’
A little night music, please, thinks the old man, and moves his hand on
the air like someone playing the proper and beautiful music to
background all that he has to tell.…
‘Because you got Boston joined to Trinidad,’ he says softly, ‘part of
Trinidad poking out of Lisbon, part of Lisbon leaning on Alexandria,
Alexandria tacked onto Shanghai, and a lot of little pegs and nails
between, like Chattanooga, Oshkosh, Oslo, Sweet Water, Soissons, Beirut,
Bombay, and Port Arthur. You shoot a man in New York and he stumbles
forward and drops dead in Athens. You take a political bribe in Chicago
and somebody in London goes to jail. You hang a Negro man in Alabama and
the people of Hungary have to bury him. The dead Jews of Poland clutter
the streets of Sydney, Portland, and Tokyo. You push a knife into a
man’s stomach in Berlin and it comes out the back of a farmer in
Memphis. It’s all soclose, so veryclose. That’s why we have peace here.
We’re all so crowded therehas got to be peace, or nothing would be left!
One fire would destroy all of us, no matter who started it, for what
reason. So all of the people, the memories, whatever you want to call
them, that are here, have settled down, and this is their world, a good
world, a fine world.’
The old man stops and licks his lips slowly and takes a breath. ‘And
tomorrow,’ he says, ‘you’re going to stomp it down.’
The old man crouches there a moment longer, then gets to his feet and
gazes out at the cities and the thousand shadows in those cities. The
great plaster cathedral whines and sways in the night air, back and
forth, rocking on the summer tides.
‘Well,’ says Douglas at last, ‘shall – shall we go down now?’
Smith nods. ‘I’ve had my say.’
Douglas vanishes, and the watchman listens to the younger man going down
and down through the ladders and catwalks of the night. Then, after a
reasonable hesitation, the old man takes hold of the ladder, breathes
something to himself, and begins the long descent in shadow.
The studio police and the few workers and some minor executives all
drive away. Only one large dark car waits outside the barbed-wire gate
as the two men stand talking in the cities of the meadow.
‘What are you going to do now?’ asks Smith.
‘Go back to my party, I suppose,’ says the producer.
‘Will it be fun?’
‘Yes.’ The producer hesitates. ‘Sure, it’ll be fun!’ He glances at the
night watchman’s right hand. ‘Don’t tell me you’ve found that hammer
Kelly told me you were using? You going to start building again? You
don’t give up, do you?’
‘Would you, if you were the last builder and everybody else was a
wrecker?’
Douglas starts to walk with the old man. ‘Well, maybe I’ll see you
again, Smith.’
‘No,’ says Smith, ‘I won’t be here. This all won’t be here. If you come
back again, it’ll be too late.’
Douglas stops. ‘Hell, hell! What do you want me to do?’
‘A simple thing. Leave all this standing. Leave these cities up.’
‘I can’t do that! Damn it. Business reasons. It has to go.’
‘A man with a real nose for business and some imagination could think up
a profitable reason for it to stay,’ says Smith.
‘My car’s waiting! How do I get out of here?’
The producer strikes off over a patch of rubble, cuts through half of a
tumbled ruin, kicking boards aside, leaning for a moment on plaster
façades and strutworks. Dust rains from the sky.
‘Watch out!’
The producer stumbles in a thunder of dust and avalanching brick; he
gropes, he topples, he is seized upon by the old man and yanked forward.
‘Jump!’
They jump, and half the building slides to ruin, crashes into hills and
mountains of old paper and lathing. A great bloom of dust strikes out
upon the air.
‘You all right?’
‘Yes. Thanks. Thanks.’ The producer looks at the fallen building. The
dust clears. ‘You probably saved my life.’
‘Hardly that. Most of those are papier-mâché bricks. You might have been
cut and bruised a little.’
‘Nevertheless, thanks. What building was that that fell?’
‘Norman village tower, built in 1925. Don’t get near the rest of it; it
might go down.’
‘I’ll be careful.’ The producer moves carefully in to stand by the
setpiece. ‘Why – I could push this whole damn building over with one
hand.’ He demonstrates; the building leans and quivers and groans. The
producer steps quickly back. ‘I could knock it down in a second.’
‘But you wouldn’t want to do that,’ says the watchman.
‘Oh, wouldn’t I? What’s one French house more or less, this late in the
day?’
The old man takes his arm. ‘Walk around here to the other side of the
house.’
They walk to the other side.
‘Read that sign,’ says Smith.
The producer flicks his cigarette lighter, holds the fire up to help him
squint, and reads:
‘“THE FIRST NATIONAL BANK MELLIN TOWN.”’ He pauses. ‘“ILLINOIS,”’ he
says, very slowly.
The building stands there in the sharp light of the stars and the bland
light of the moon.
‘On one side’ – Douglas balances his hands like a scales – ‘a French
tower. On the other side—’ He walks seven steps to the right, seven
steps to the left, peering. ‘“THE FIRST NATIONAL BANK.” Bank. Tower.
Tower. Bank. Well, I’ll bedamned.’
Smith smiles and says, ‘Still want to push the French tower down, Mr
Douglas?’
‘Wait a minute, wait a minute, hold on, hold on,’ says Douglas, and
suddenly begins to see the buildings that stand before him. He turns in
a slow circle; his eyes move up and down and across and over; his eyes
flick here, flick there, see this, see that, examine, file, put away,
and re-examine. He begins to walk in silence. They move in the cities of
the meadow, over grasses and wild flowers, up to and into and through
ruins and half-ruins and up to and into and through complete avenues and
villages and towns.
They begin a recital which goes on and on as they walk, Douglas asking,
the night watchman answering, Douglas asking, the night watchman
answering.
‘What’s this over here?’
‘A Buddhist temple.’
‘And on the other side of it?’
‘The log cabin where Lincoln was born.’
‘And here?’
‘St. Patrick’s church, New York.’
‘And on the reverse?’
‘A Russian Orthodox church in Rostov!’
‘What’sthis?’
‘The door of a castle on the Rhine!’
‘Andinside?’
‘A Kansas City soda fountain!’
‘And here? And here? And overthere? And what’sthat?’ asks Douglas.
‘What’s this!? What about that one!? And overthere?’
It seems as if they are running and rushing and yelling all through the
cities, here, there, everywhere, up, down, in, out, climbing,
descending, poking, stirring, opening-shutting doors.
‘And this, and this, and this, andthis?’
The night watchman tells all there is to tell.
Their shadows run ahead in narrow alleys, and avenues as broad as rivers
made of stone and sand.
They make a great talking circle; they hurry all around and back to
where they started.
They are quiet again. The old man is quiet from having said what there
was to say, and the producer is quiet from listening and remembering and
fitting it all together in his mind. He stands, absentmindedly fumbling
for his cigarette case. It takes him a full minute to open it, examining
every action, thinking about it, and to offer the case to the watchman.
‘Thanks.’
They light up thoughtfully. They puff on their cigarettes and watch the
smoke blow away.
Douglas says, ‘Where’s that damned hammer of yours?’
‘Here,’ says Smith.
‘You got your nails with you?’
‘Yes, sir.’
Douglas takes a deep drag on his cigarette and exhales. ‘Okay, Smith,
get to work.’
‘What?’
‘You heard me. Nail what you can back up, in your own time. Most of the
stuff that’s already torn down is a complete loss. But any bits and
pieces that fit and will look decent, put ’em together. Thank God
there’s a lot still standing. It took me a long time to get it through
my head. A man with a nose for business and some imagination, you said.
Thatisthe world, you said. I should have seen it years ago. Here it all
is inside the fence, and me too blind to see what could be done with it.
The World Federation in my own back yard and me kicking it over. So help
me God, we need more crazy people and night watchmen.’
‘You know,’ says the night watchman, ‘I’m getting old and I’m getting
strange. You wouldn’t be fooling an old and strange man, would you?’
‘I’ll make no promises I can’t keep,’ says the producer. ‘I’ll only
promise to try. There’s a good chance we can go ahead. It would make a
beautiful film, there’s no doubt of that. We could make it all here,
inside the fence, photograph it ten ways from Christmas. There’s no
doubt about a story, either. You provided it. It’s yours. It wouldn’t be
hard to put some writers to work on it. Good writers. Perhaps only a
short subject, twenty minutes, but we could show all the cities and
countries here, leaning on and holding each other up. Ilikethe idea. I
like it very much, believe me. We could show a film like that to anyone
anywhere in the world and they’d like it. They couldn’t pass it up, it
would be too important.’
‘It’s good to hear you talk this way.’
‘I hope I keep on talking this way,’ says the producer. ‘I can’t be
trusted. I don’t trust myself. Hell, I get excited, up one day, down the
next. Maybe you’ll have to hit me on the head with that hammer to keep
me going.’
‘I’d be pleased,’ says Smith.
‘Andifwe do the film,’ says the younger man, ‘I suppose you could help.
You know the sets, probably better than anyone. Any suggestions you
might want to make, we’d be glad to have. Then, after we do the film, I
suppose you won’t mind letting us tear the rest of the world down,
right?’
‘I’d give my permission,’ says the watchman.
‘Well, I’ll call off the hounds for a few days and see what happens.
Send out a camera crew tomorrow to see what we can line up for shots.
Send out some writers. Maybe you canallgab. Hell, hell. We’ll work it
out.’ Douglas turns toward the gate. ‘In the meantime, use your hammer
all you want. I’ll be seeing you. My God, I’mfreezing!’
They hurry toward the gate. On the way, the old man finds his lunch box
where he abandoned it some hours ago. He picks it up, takes out the
thermos, and shakes it. ‘How about a drink before you go?’
‘What’ve you got? Some of that amontillado you were yelling about?’
‘1876.’
‘Let’s have some of that, sure.’
The thermos is opened and the liquid poured steaming from it into the
cup.
‘There you are,’ says the old man.
‘Thanks. Here’s to you.’ The producer drinks. ‘That’s good. Ah, that’s
damned good!’
‘It might taste like coffee, but I tell you it’s the finest amontillado
ever put under a cork.’
‘You can saythatagain.’
The two of them stand among the cities of the world in the moonlight,
drinking the hot drink, and the old man remembers something: ‘There’s an
old song fits here, a drinking song, I think, a song that all of us who
live inside the fence sing, when we’re of a mind, when I listen right,
and the wind’s just right in the telephone wires. It goes like this:
‘We all go the same way home,
All the same collection, in the same direction,
All go the same way home.
So there’s no need to part at all,
And we’ll all cling together like the ivy on the old garden wall …’
They finish drinking the coffee in the middle of Port-au-Prince.
‘Hey!’ says the producer suddenly. ‘Take it easy with that cigarette!
You want to burn down the whole darnworld?’
They both look at the cigarette and smile.
‘I’ll be careful,’ says Smith.
‘So long,’ says the producer. ‘I’mreallylate for that party.’
‘So long, Mr Douglas.’
The gate hasp clicks open and shut, the footsteps die away, the
limousine starts up and drives off in the moonlight, leaving behind the
cities of the world and an old man standing in the middle of these
cities of the world raising his hand to wave.
‘So long,’ says the night watchman.
And then there is only the wind.

