                              
                                I See You Never
                                      1947

     The  soft  knock came at the kitchen door, and when Mrs. O'Brian opened it,
there  on  the  back  porch  were  her  best tenant, Mr. Ramirez, and two police
officers,  one  on each side of him. Mr. Ramirez just stood there, walled in and
small.
     "Why, Mr. Ramirez!" said Mrs. O'Brian.
     Mr. Ramirez was overcome. He did not seem to have words to explain.
     He  had arrived at Mrs. O'Brian's rooming house more than two years earlier
and had lived there ever since. He had come by bus from Mexico City to San Diego
and  had  then gone up to Los Angeles. There he had found the clean little room,
with glossy blue linoleum, and pictures and calendars on the flowered walls, and
Mrs. O'Brian as the strict but kindly landlady. During the war, he had worked at
the  airplane factory and made parts for the planes that flew off somewhere, and
even  now, after the war, he still held his job. From the first, he had made big
money.  He saved some of it, and he got drunk only once a week-a privilege that,
to  Mrs. O'Brian's way of thinking, every good workingman deserved, unquestioned
and unreprimanded.
     Inside  Mrs. O'Brian's kitchen, pies were baking in the oven. Soon the pies
would  come  out with complexions like Mr. Ramirez's, brown and shiny and crisp,
with slits in them for the air almost like the slits of Mr. Ramirez's dark eyes.
The  kitchen  smelled good. The policemen leaned forward, lured by the odor. Mr.
Ramirez gazed at his feet, as if they had carried him into all this trouble.
     "What happened, Mr. Ramirez?" asked Mrs. O'Brian.
     Behind Mrs. O'Brian, as he lifted his eyes, Mr. Ramirez saw the long table,
laid  with  clean  white  linen and set with a platter, cool, shining glasses, a
water  pitcher  with ice cubes floating inside it, a bowl of fresh potato salad,
and  one  of  bananas  and  oranges,  cubed  and sugared. At this table sat Mrs.
O'Brian's  children-her  three  grown  sons,  eating and conversing, and her two
younger daughters, who were staring at the policemen as they ate.
     "I have been here thirty months," said Mr. Ramirez quietly, looking at Mrs.
O'Brian's plump hands.
     "That's  six months too long," said one policeman. "He only had a temporary
visa. We've just got around to looking for him."
     Soon  after Mr. Ramirez had arrived, he bought a radio for his little room;
evenings,  he  turned  it  up  very  loud  and  enjoyed  it. And he had bought a
wrist-watch  and  enjoyed  that,  too.  And  on many nights he had walked silent
streets  and seen the bright clothes in the windows and bought some of them, and
he  had seen the jewels and bought some of them for his few lady friends. And he
had  gone  to  picture  shows five nights a week for a while. Then, also, he had
ridden  the  streetcars-all night some nights-smelling the electricity, his dark
eyes  moving  over  the  advertisements,  feeling  the  wheels rumble under him,
watching the little sleeping houses and big hotels slip by. Besides that, he had
gone  to  large  restaurants, where he had eaten many-course dinners, and to the
opera  and  the theatre. And he had bought a car, which later, when he forgot to
pay  for  it,  the  dealer  had  driven off angrily from in front of the rooming
house.
     "So  here  I am," said Mr. Ramirez now, "to tell you that I must give up my
room, Mrs. O'Brian. I come to get my baggage and clothes and go with these men."
     "Back to Mexico?"
     "Yes. To Lagos. That is a little town north of Mexico City."
     "I'm sorry, Mr. Ramirez."
     "I'm packed," said Mr. Ramirez hoarsely, blinking his dark eyes rapidly and
moving  his  hands helplessly before him. The policemen did not touch him. There
was no necessity for that. "Here is the key, Mrs. O'Brian," Mr. Ramirez said, "I
have my bag already."
     Mrs. O'Brian, for the first time, noticed a suitcase standing behind him on
the porch.
     Mr.  Ramirez  looked  in  again  at  the huge kitchen, at the bright silver
cutlery  and  the young people eating and the shining waxed floor. He turned and
looked  for  a  long  moment  at  the apartment house next door, rising up three
stories,  high  and  beautiful.  He looked at the balconies and fire escapes and
back-porch stairs, at the lines of laundry snapping in the wind.
     "You've been a good tenant," said Mrs. O'Brian.
     "Thank you, thank you, Mrs. O'Brian," he said softly. He closed his eyes.
     Mrs. O'Brian stood holding the door half open. One of her sons, behind her,
said  that her dinner was getting cold, but she shook her head at him and turned
back  to  Mr.  Ramirez. She remembered a visit she had once made to some Mexican
border  towns-the  hot  days,  the endless crickets leaping and falling or lying
dead  and  brittle  like  the  small  cigars in the shop windows' and the canals
taking  river  water  out to the farms, the dirt roads, the scorched fields, the
little  adobe houses, the bleached clothes, the eroded landscape. She remembered
the  silent  towns, the warm beer, the hot, thick foods each day. She remembered
the  slow,  dragging  horses  and  the  parched  jack  rabbits  on the road. She
remembered  the  iron mountains and the dusty valleys and the ocean beaches that
spread  hundreds  of  miles  with no sound but the waves -no cars, no buildings,
nothing.
     "I'm sure sorry, Mr. Ramirez," she said.
     "I don't want to go back, Mrs. O'Brian," he said weakly. "I like it here. I
want to stay here. I've worked, I've got money. I look all right, don't I? And I
don't want to go back!"
     "I'm  sorry,  Mr.  Ramirez,"  she said. "I wish there was something I could
do."
     "Mrs.  O'Brian!"  he  cried  suddenly,  tears  rolling  out  from under his
eyelids.  He  reached  out  his  hands  and took her hand fervently, shaking it,
wringing it, holding to it. "Mrs. O'Brian, I see you never, I see you never!"
     The  policemen  smiled at this, but Mr. Ramirez did not notice it, and they
stopped smiling very soon.
     "Goodbye,  Mrs.  O'Brian.  You  have  been  good  to  me. Oh, goodbye, Mrs.
O'Brian. I see you never"
     The  policemen  waited  for  Mr. Ramirez to turn, pick up his suitcase, and
walk  away.  Then  they  followed  him,  tipping their caps to Mrs. O'Brian. She
watched  them  go  down the porch steps. Then she shut the door quietly and went
slowly  back  to  her chair at the table. She pulled the chair out and sat down.
She picked up the shining knife and fork and started once more upon her steak.
     "Hurry up, Mom," said one of the sons. "It'll be cold."
     Mrs. O'Brian took one bite and chewed on it for a long, slow time; then she
stared at the closed door. She laid down her knife and fork.
     "What's wrong, Ma?" asked her son.
     "I  just  realized,"  said  Mrs. O'Brian-she put her hand to her face-"I'll
never see Mr. Ramirez again."