                             
                                  The Emissary
                                      1947

     Martin  knew  it was autumn again, for Dog ran into the house bringing wind
and  frost  and  a  smell  of  apples  turned  to  cider  under  trees.  In dark
clock-springs   of   hair,  Dog  fetched  goldenrod,  dust  of  farewell-summer,
acornhusk,  hair  of squirrel, feather of departed robin, sawdust from fresh-cut
cordwood,  and  leaves  like  charcoals  shaken from a blaze of maple trees. Dog
jumped.  Showers  of  brittle fern, blackberry vine, marsh-grass sprang over the
bed where Martin shouted. No doubt, no doubt of it at all, this incredible beast
was October!

     "Here, boy, here!"

     And  Dog  settled  to  warm  Martin's body with all the bonfires and subtle
burnings of the season, to fill the room with soft or heavy, wet or dry odors of
far-traveling.  In  spring,  he  smelled  of lilac, iris, lawn-mowered grass; in
Summer,  ice-cream-mustached,  he  came  pungent with firecracker, Roman candle,
pinwheel, baked by the sun. But autumn! Autumn!

     "Dog, what's it like outside?"

     And  lying  there,  Dog  told  as he always told. Lying there, Martin found
autumn  as  in  the old days before sickness bleached him white on his bed. Here
was  his contact, his carry-all, the quick-moving part of himself he sent with a
yell  to  run  and  return,  circle  and scent, collect and deliver the time and
texture of worlds in town, country, by creek, river, lake, down-cellar, upattic,
in  closet or coal-bin. Ten dozen times a day he was gifted with sunflower seed,
cinder-path,  milkweed,  horse-chestnut, or full flame-smell of pumpkin. Through
the  loomings  of the universe Dog shuttled; the design was hid in his pelt. Put
out your hand, it was there. . . .

     "And where did you go this morning?"

     But  he  knew without hearing where Dog had rattled down hills where autumn
lay in cereal crispness, where children lay in funeral pyres, in rustling heaps,
the leaf-buried but watchful dead, as Dog and the world blew by. Martin trembled
as  his  fingers searched the thick fur, read the long journey. Through stubbled
fields,  over  glitters  of  ravine creek, down marbled spread of cemetery yard,
into  woods.  In  the  great  season  of spices and rare incense, now Martin ran
through his emissary, around, about, and home!

     The bedroom door opened.

     "That dog of yours is in trouble again."

     Mother  brought  in  a tray of fruit salad, cocoa, and toast, her blue eyes
snapping.

     "Mother . . ."

     "Always  digging  places.  Dug a hole in Miss Tarkin's garden this morning.
She's spittin' mad. That's the fourth hole he's dug there this week."

     "Maybe he's looking for something."

     "Fiddlesticks,  he's  too  darned  curious.  If  he doesn't behave he'll be
locked up."

     Martin looked at this woman as if she were a stranger. "Oh, you wouldn't do
that! How would I learn anything? How would I find things out if Dog didn't tell
me?"

     Mom's voice was quieter. "Is that what he does--tell you things?"

     "There's  nothing  I  don't  know  when  he  goes  out and around and back,
_nothing_ I can't find out from him!"

     They  both  sat  looking at Dog and the dry strewings of mold and seed over
the quilt.

     "Well,  if  he'll  just  stop digging where he shouldn't, he can run all he
wants," said Mother.

     "Here, boy, here!"

     And Martin snapped a tin note to the dog's collar:

     MY OWNER IS MARTIN SMITH--TEN YEARS OLD--SICK IN BED-- VISITORS WELCOME.

     Dog barked. Mother opened the downstairs door and let him out.

      

     Martin sat listening.

     Far  off  and away you could hear Dog run in the quiet autumn rain that was
falling now. You could hear the barkingjingling fade, rise, fade again as he cut
down  alley,  over lawn, to fetch back Mr. Holloway and the oiled metallic smell
of  the  delicate  snowflake-interiored watches he repaired in his home shop. Or
maybe  he  would  bring  Mr.  Jacobs,  the  grocer, whose clothes were rich with
lettuce,  celery,  tomatoes,  and  the secret tinned and hidden smell of the red
demons  stamped  on  cans  of  deviled  ham. Mr. Jacobs and his unseen pink-meat
devils  waved  often  from  the  yard  below.  Or  Dog brought Mr. Jackson, Mrs.
Gillespie,  Mr.  Smith,  Mrs.  Holmes, _any_ friend or near-friend, encountered,
cornered,   begged,   worried,  and  at  last  shepherded  home  for  lunch,  or
tea-and-biscuits.

     Now,  listening,  Martin  heard Dog below, with footsteps moving in a light
rain  behind  him.  The  downstairs bell rang, Mom opened the door, light voices
murmured.  Martin  sat  forward, face shining. The stair treads creaked. A young
woman's voice laughed quietly. Miss Haight, of course, his teacher from school!

     The bedroom door sprang open.

     Martin had company.

      

     Morning,  afternoon, evening, dawn and dusk, sun and moon circled with Dog,
who  faithfully  reported temperatures of turf and air, color of earth and tree,
consistency  of mist or rain, but--most important of all--brought back again and
again and again-- Miss Haight.

     On  Saturday,  Sunday  and  Monday  she  baked Martin orange-iced cupcakes,
brought him library books about dinosaurs and cavemen. On Tuesday, Wednesday and
Thursday  somehow  he  beat  her  at dominoes, somehow she lost at checkers, and
soon,  she  cried,  he'd defeat her handsomely at chess. On Friday, Saturday and
Sunday  they talked and never stopped talking, and she was so young and laughing
and  handsome and her hair was a soft, shining brown like the season outside the
window,  and  she  walked clear, clean and quick, a heartbeat warm in the bitter
afternoon  when  he  heard it. Above all, she had the secret of signs, and could
read  and  interpret Dog and the symbols she searched out and plucked forth from
his  coat  with her miraculous fingers. Eyes shut, softly laughing, in a gypsy's
voice, she divined the world from the treasures in her hands.

     And on Monday afternoon, Miss Haight was dead.

     Martin sat up in bed, slowly.

     "Dead?" he whispered.

     Dead,  said his mother, yes, dead, killed in an auto accident a mile out of
town.  Dead,  yes,  dead,  which  meant  cold to Martin, which meant silence and
whiteness  and  winter come long before its time. Dead, silent, cold, white. The
thoughts circled round, blew down, and settled in whispers.

     Martin  held  Dog,  thinking;  turned  to  the  wall.  The  lady  with  the
autumn-colored  hair.  The lady with the laughter that was very gentle and never
made  fun  and the eyes that watched your mouth to see everything you ever said.
The-other-half-of-autumn-lady,  who  told what was left untold by Dog, about the
world. The heartbeat at the still center of gray afternoon. The heartbeat fading
.

     "Mom?  What  do  they  do in the graveyard, Mom, under the ground? Just lay
there?"

     "_Lie_ there."

     "Lie there? Is that all they do? It doesn't sound like much fun."

     "For goodness sake, it's not made out to be fun."

     "Why  don't  they  jump up and run around once in a while if they get tired
lying there? God's pretty silly--"

     "Martin!"

     "Well,  you'd think He'd treat people better than to tell them to lie still
for  keeps. That's impossible. Nobody can do it! I tried once. Dog tries. I tell
him,  'dead  Dog!'  He  plays dead awhile, then gets sick and tired and wags his
tail  or  opens  one  eye  and  looks  at  me, bored. Boy, I bet sometimes those
graveyard people do the same, huh, Dog?"

     Dog barked.

     "Be still with that kind of talk!" said Mother.

     Martin looked off into space.

     "Bet that's exactly what they do," he said.

      

     Autumn  burnt  the  trees  bare  and  ran Dog still farther around, fording
creek,  prowling  graveyard  as was his custom, and back in the dusk to fire off
volleys of barking that shook windows wherever he turned.

     In  the  late  last  days  of  October, Dog began to act as if the wind had
changed  and blew from a strange country. He stood quivering on the porch below.
He  whined, his eyes fixed at the empty land beyond town. He brought no visitors
for  Martin.  He  stood  for hours each day, as if leashed, trembling, then shot
away  straight,  as if Someone had called. Each night he returned later, with no
one following. Each night, Martin sank deeper and deeper in his pillow.

     "Well,  people are busy," said Mother. "They haven't time to notice the tag
Dog carries. Or they mean to come visit, but forget."

     But  there was more to it than that. There was the fevered shining in Dog's
eyes, and his whimpering tic late at night, in some private dream. His shivering
in  the  dark, under the bed. The way he Sometimes stood half the night, looking
at  Martin  as if some great and impossible secret was his and he knew no way to
tell it save by savagely thumping his tail, or turning in endless circles, never
to lie down, spinning and spinning again.

     On  October  thirtieth,  Dog ran out and didn't come back at all, even when
after  supper  Martin  heard  his parents call and call. The hour grew late, the
streets  and sidewalks stood empty, the air moved cold about the house and there
was nothing, nothing.

     Long  after  midnight, Martin lay watching the world beyond the cool, clear
glass  windows.  Now there was not even autumn, for there was no Dog to fetch it
in.  There  would  be  no  winter,  for who could bring the snow to melt in your
hands?  Father,  Mother?  No, not the same. They couldn't play the game with its
special  secrets  and rules, its sounds and pantomimes. No more seasons. No more
time.  The  go-between,  the  emissary,  was  lost  to  the  wild  throngings of
civilization,  poisoned,  stolen, hit by a car, left somewhere in a culvert. . .
.

     Sobbing,  Martin  turned  his  face  to his pillow. The world was a picture
under glass, untouchable. The world was dead.

      

     Martin  twisted  in bed and in three days the last Hallowe'en pumpkins were
rotting  in trash cans, papier-maché skulls and witches were burnt on bonfires,
and ghosts were stacked on shelves with other linens until next year.

     To Martin, Hallowe'en had been nothing more than one evening when tin horns
cried  off  in the cold autumn stars, children blew like goblin leaves along the
flinty  walks, flinging their heads, or cabbages, at porches, soap-writing names
or  similar magic symbols on on icy windows. All of it as distant, unfathomable,
and  nightmarish  as a puppet show seen from so many miles away that there is no
sound or meaning.

     For  three days in November, Martin watched alternate light and shadow sift
across his ceiling. The fire-pageant was over forever; autumn lay in cold ashes.
Martin  sank  deeper,  yet  deeper  in  white  marble layers of bed, motionless,
listening always listening. . . .

     Friday  evening,  his  parents  kissed him good-night and walked out of the
house  into  the  hushed  cathedral  weather  toward a motion-picture show. Miss
Tarkins from next door stayed on in the parlor below until Martin called down he
was sleepy, then took her knitting off home.

     In  silence,  Martin lay following the great move of stars down a clear and
moonlit sky, remembering nights such as this when he'd spanned the town with Dog
ahead,  behind, around about, tracking the green-plush ravine, lapping slumbrous
streams  gone  milky  with the fullness of the moon, leaping cemetery tombstones
while  whispering the marble names; on, quickly on, through shaved meadows where
the  only  motion  was  the  off-on quivering of stars, to streets where shadows
would  not  stand  aside for you but crowded all the sidewalks for mile on mile.
Run  now  run!  chasing, being chased by bitter smoke, fog, mist, wind, ghost of
mind, fright of memory; home, safe, sound, snug-warm, asleep. . . .

     Nine o'clock.

     Chime. The drowsy clock in the deep stairwell below. Chime.

     Dog, come home, and run the world with you. Dog, bring a thistle with frost
on  it,  or  bring  nothing else but the wind. Dog, where _are_ you? Oh, listen,
now, I'll call.

     Martin held his breath.

     Way off somewhere--a sound.

     Martin rose up, trembling.

     There, again--the sound.

     So small a sound, like a sharp needle-point brushing the sky long miles and
many miles away.

     The dreamy echo of a dog--barking.

     The  sound of a dog crossing fields and farms, dirt roads and rabbit paths,
running,  running,  letting  out  great  barks of steam, cracking the night. The
sound  of  a circling dog which came and went, lifted and faded, opened up, shut
in,  moved  forward,  went  back,  as  if  the  animal were kept by someone on a
fantastically  long chain. As if the dog were running and someone whistled under
the  chestnut  trees,  in mold-shadow, tar-shadow, moon-shadow, walking, and the
dog circled back and sprang out again toward home.

     Dog!  Martin thought, oh Dog, come home, boy! Listen, oh, listen, where you
_been?_ Come on, boy, make tracks!

     Five,  ten,  fifteen  minutes; near, very near, the bark, the sound. Martin
cried out, thrust his feet from the bed, leaned to the window. Dog! Listen, boy!
Dog!  Dog!  He said it over and over. Dog! Dog! Wicked Dog, run off and gone all
these days! Bad Dog, good Dog, home, boy, hurry, and bring what you can!

     Near now, near, up the street, barking, to knock clapboard housefronts with
sound, whirl iron cocks on rooftops in the moon, firing off volleys--Dog! now at
the door below. . . .

     Martin shivered.

     Should  he  run--let  Dog in, or wait for Mom and Dad? Wait? Oh, God, wait?
But  what  if  Dog  ran off again? No, he'd go down, snatch the door wide, yell,
grab Dog in, and run upstairs so fast, laughing, crying, holding tight, that . .
.

     Dog stopped barking.

     Hey! Martin almost broke the window, jerking to it.

     Silence. As if someone had told Dog to hush now, hush, hush.

     A full minute passed. Martin clenched his fists.

     Below, a faint whimpering.

     Then,  slowly, the downstairs front door opened. Someone was kind enough to
have  opened  the  door  for  Dog.  Of course! Dog had brought Mr. Jacobs or Mr.
Gillespie or Miss Tarkins, or . . .

     The downstairs door shut.

     Dog raced upstairs, whining, flung himself on the bed.

     "Dog, Dog, where've you _been_, what've you _done!_ Dog, Dog!"

     And  he crushed Dog hard and long to himself, weeping. Dog, Dog. He laughed
and shouted. Dog! But after a moment he stopped laughing and crying, suddenly.

     He pulled back away. He held the animal and looked at him, eyes widening.

     The odor coming from Dog was different.

     It  was a smell of strange earth. It was a smell of night within night, the
smell  of  digging down deep in shadow through earth that had lain cheek by jowl
with  things  that were long hidden and decayed. A stinking and rancid soil fell
away in clods of dissolution from Dog's muzzle and paws. He had dug deep. He had
dug very deep indeed. That _was_ it, wasn't it? wasn't it? _wasn't_ it!

     What kind of message was this from Dog? What could such a message mean? The
stench--the ripe and awful cemetery earth.

     Dog  was  a bad dog, digging where he shouldn't. Dog was a good dog, always
making friends. Dog loved people. Dog brought them home.

     And  now,  moving  up the dark hall stairs, at intervals, came the sound of
feet, one foot dragged after the other, painfully, slowly, slowly, slowly.

     Dog shivered. A rain of strange night earth fell seething on the bed.

     Dog turned.

     The bedroom door whispered in.

     Martin had company.
