
                                    The Wind
                                      1943

     The phone rang at five-thirty that evening. It was December, and long since
dark as Thompson picked up the phone.
     "Hello."
     "Hello, _Herb?_"
     "Oh, it's you, Allin."
     "Is your wife home, Herb?"
     "Sure. Why?"
     "Damn it."
     Herb Thompson held the receiver quietly. "What's up? You sound funny."
     "I wanted you to come over tonight."
     "We're having company."
     "I wanted you to spend the night. When's your wife going away?"
     "That's  next week," said Thompson. "She'll be in Ohio for about nine days.
Her mother's sick. I'll come over then."
     "I wish you could come over tonight."
     "Wish I could. Company and all, my wife'd kill me."
     "I wish you could come over."
     "What's it? the wind again?"
     "Oh, no. No."
     "Is it the wind?" asked Thompson.
     The voice on the phone hesitated. "Yeah. Yeah, it's the wind."
     "It's a clear night, there's not much wind."
     "There's  enough.  It  comes  in the window and blows the curtains a little
bit. Just enough to tell me."
     "Look,  why  don't  you  come and spend the night here?" said Herb Thompson
looking around the lighted halt.
     "Oh,  no. It's too late for that. It might catch me on the way over. It's a
damned  long  distance.  I wouldn't dare, but thanks, anyway. It's thirty miles,
but thanks."
     "Take a sleeping-tablet."
     "I've  been  standing  in  the  door  for the past hour, Herb. I can see it
building  up in the west. There are some clouds there and I saw one of them kind
of rip apart. There's a wind coming, all right."
     "Well,  you just take a nice sleeping-tablet. And call me any time you want
to call. Later this evening if you want."
     "Any time?" said the voice on the phone.
     "Sure."
     "I'll do that, but I wish you could come out. Yet I wouldn't want you hurt.
You're  my  best  friend  and  I wouldn't want that. Maybe it's best I face this
thing alone. I'm sorry I bothered you."
     "Hell,  what's  a  friend  for? Tell you what you do, sit down and get some
writing  done  this  evening," said Herb Thompson, shifting from one foot to the
other  in  the  hall.  "You'll  forget about the Himalayas and the Valley of the
Winds  and  this  preoccupation of yours with storms and hurricanes. Get another
chapter done on your next travel book."
     "I  might  do  that.  Maybe  I will, I don't know. Maybe I will. I might do
that. Thanks a lot for letting me bother you."
     "Thanks, hell. Get off the line, now, you. My wife's calling me to dinner."
     Herb Thompson hung up.
     He  went and sat down at the supper table and his wife sat across from him.
"Was  that  Allin?"  she  asked.  He nodded. "Him and his winds that blow up and
winds  that  blow down and winds that blow hot and blow cold," she said, handing
him his plate heaped with food.
     "He did have a time in the Himalayas, during the war," said Herb Thompson.
     "You don't believe what he said about that valley, do you?"
     "It makes a good story."
     "Climbing  around, climbing up things. Why do men climb mountains and scare
themselves?"
     "It was snowing," said Herb Thompson.
     "Was it?"
     "And  raining  and hailing and blowing all at once, in that valley. Allin's
told me a dozen times. He tells it well. He was up pretty high. Clouds, and all.
The valley made a noise."
     "I _bet_ it did," she said.
     "Like  a  lot of winds instead of just one. Winds from all over the world."
He took a bite. "So says Allin."
     "He  shouldn't  have  gone there and looked, in the first place," she said.
"You  go  poking  around  and  first  thing  you know you get ideas. Winds start
getting angry at you for intruding, and they follow you."
     "Don't joke, he's my best friend," snapped Herb Thompson.
     "It's all so silly!"
     "Nevertheless he's been through a lot. That storm in Bombay, later, and the
typhoon off New Guinea two months after that. And that time, in Cornwall."
     "I  have  no  sympathy  for a man who continually runs into wind storms and
hurricanes, and then gets a persecution complex because of it."
     The phone rang just then.
     "Don't answer it," she said.
     "Maybe it's important."
     "It's only Allin, again."
     They  sat  there  and  the  phone  rang  nine times and they didn't answer.
Finally,  it  quieted.  They  finished  dinner.  Out  in the kitchen, the window
curtains gently moved in the small breeze from a slightly opened window.
     The phone rang again.
     "I can't let it ring," he said, and answered it. "Oh, hello, Allin."
     "Herb! It's here! It got here!"
     "You're too near the phone, back up a little."
     "I  stood  in  the  open  door  and waited for it. I saw it coming down the
highway,  shaking  all  the  trees,  one  by  one, until it shook the trees just
outside  the  house  and it dived down toward the door and I slammed the door in
its face!"
     Thompson  didn't  say  anything.  He couldn't think of anything to say, his
wife was watching him in the hail door.
     "How interesting," he said, at last.
     "It's all around the house, Herb. I can't get out now, I can't do anything.
But  I fooled it, I let it think it had me, and just as it came down to get me I
slammed  and  locked  the  door! I was ready for it, I've been getting ready for
weeks."
     "Have  you, now; tell me about it, Allin, old man." Herb Thompson played it
jovially into the phone, while his wife looked on and his neck began to sweat.
     "It began six weeks ago. . . ."
     "Oh, yes? Well, well."
     ".  .  . I thought I had it licked. I thought it had given up following and
trying  to  get  me.  But  it  was  just waiting. Six weeks ago I heard the wind
laughing  and  whispering  around the corners of my house, out here. Just for an
hour or so, not very long, not very loud. Then it went away."
     Thompson  nodded  into  the  phone. "Glad to hear it, glad to hear it." His
wife stared at him.
     "It  came  back,  the next night. It slammed the shutters and kicked sparks
out  of  the  chimney. It came back five nights in a row, a little stronger each
time.  When  I opened the front door, it came in at me and tried to pull me out,
but it wasn't strong enough. Tonight it _is_."
     "Glad to hear you're feeling better," said Thompson.
     "I'm not better, what's wrong with you? Is your wife listening to us?"
     "Yes."
     "Oh, I see. I know I sound like a fool."
     "Not at all. Go on."
     Thompson's  wife  went  back into the kitchen. He relaxed. He sat down on a
little  chair  near  the  phone.  "Go on, Allin, get it out of you, you'll sleep
better."
     "It's all around the house now, like a great big vacuum machine nuzzling at
all the gables. It's knocking the trees around."
     "That's funny, there's no wind _here_, Allin."
     "Of course not, it doesn't care about you, only about me."
     "I guess that's one way to explain it."
     "It's  a  killer,  Herb, the biggest damnedest prehistoric killer that ever
hunted  prey.  A big sniffling hound, trying to smell me out, find me. It pushes
its  big  cold  nose  up  to  the house, taking air, and when it finds me in the
parlor  it drives its pressure there, and when I'm in the kitchen it goes there.
It's  trying to get in the windows, now, but I had them reinforced and I put new
hinges  on  the doors, and bolts. It's a strong house. They built them strong in
the  old  days.  I've  got all the lights in the house on, now. The house is all
lighted  up, bright. The wind followed me from room to room, looking through all
the windows, when I switched them on. Oh!"
     "What's wrong?"
     "It just snatched off the front screen door!"
     "I wish you'd come over here and spend the night, Allin."
     "I  can't!  God,  I can't leave the house. I can't do anything. I know this
wind. Lord, it's big and it's clever. I tried to light a cigarette a moment ago,
and  a little draft sucked the match out. The wind likes to play games, it likes
to  taunt  me,  it's  taking its time with me; it's got all night. And now! God,
right  now,  one  of my old travel books, on the library table, I wish you could
see  it. A little breeze from God knows what small hole in the house, the little
breeze  is--  blowing  the pages one by one. I wish you could see it. There's my
introduction. Do you remember the introduction to my book on Tibet, Herb?"
     "Yes."
     "_This book is dedicated to those who lost the game of elements, written by
one who has seen, but who has always escaped_."
     "Yes, I remember."
     "The lights have gone out!"
     The phone crackled.
     "The power lines just went down. Are you there, Herb?"
     "I still hear you."
     "The  wind doesn't like all that light in my house, it tore the power lines
down.  The  telephone  will  probably go next. Oh, it's a real party, me and the
wind, I tell you! Just a second."
     "Allin?" A silence. Herb leaned against the mouthpiece. His wife glanced in
from the kitchen. Herb Thompson waited. "Allin?"
     "I'm  back,"  said the voice on the phone. "There was a draft from the door
and  I shoved some wadding under it to keep it from blowing on my feet. I'm glad
you didn't come out after all, Herb, I wouldn't want you in this mess. There! It
just  broke  one  of the living-room windows and a regular gale is in the house,
knocking pictures off the wall! Do you hear it?"
     Herb  Thompson  listened.  There  was  a  wild  sirening on the phone and a
whistling and banging. Allin shouted over it. "Do you hear it?"
     Herb Thompson swallowed drily. "I hear it."
     "It  wants me alive, Herb. It doesn't dare knock the house down in one fell
blow.  That'd  kill  me.  It  wants me alive, so it can pull me apart, finger by
finger. It wants what's inside me. My mind, my brain. It wants my life-power, my
psychic force, my ego. It wants intellect."
     "My wife's calling me, Allin. I have to go wipe the dishes."
     "It's  a  big cloud of vapors, winds from all over the world. The same wind
that  ripped  the Celebes a year ago, the same pampero that killed in Argentina,
the  typhoon  that fed on Hawaii, the hurricane that knocked the coast of Africa
early  this  year.  It's part of all those storms I escaped. It followed me from
the  Himalayas because it didn't want me to know what I know about the Valley of
the  Winds  where  it  gathers and plans its destruction. Something, a long time
ago,  gave  it  a  start in the direction of life. I know its feeding grounds, I
know  where  it  is born and where parts of it expire. For that reason, it hates
me;  and  my  books that tell how to defeat it. It doesn't want me preaching any
more.  It  wants  to incorporate me into its huge body, to give it knowledge. It
wants me on its own side!"
     "I have to hang up, Allin, my wife--"
     "What?" A pause, the blowing of the wind in the phone, distantly. "What did
you say?"
     "Call me back in an hour, Allin."
     He hung up.
     He went out to wipe the dishes. His wife looked at him and he looked at the
dishes, rubbing them with a towel.
     "What's it like out tonight?" he said.
     "Nice. Not very chilly. Stars," she said. "Why?"
     "Nothing."
     The  phone  rang three times in the next hour. At eight o'clock the company
arrived,  Stoddard  and his wife. They sat around until eight-thirty talking and
then got out and set up the card table and began to play Gin.
     Herb  Thompson  shuffled  the  cards  over  and  over,  with  a clittering,
shuttering  effect  and  clapped  them out, one at a time before the three other
players.  Talk  went back and forth. He lit a cigar and made it into a fine gray
ash  at  the  tip, and adjusted his cards in his hand and on occasion lifted his
head  and  listened.  There  was no sound outside the house. His wife saw him do
this, and he cut it out immediately, and discarded a Jack of Clubs.
     He  puffed  slowly on his cigar and they all talked quietly with occasional
small  eruptions  of  laughter,  and  the  clock in the hall sweetly chimed nine
o'clock.
     "Here  we all are," said Herb Thompson, taking his cigar out and looking at
it reflectively. "And life is sure funny."
     "Eh?" said Mr. Stoddard.
     "Nothing,  except  her?  we  are,  living our lives, and some place else on
earth a billion other people live their lives."
     "That's a rather obvious statement."
     "Life,"  he  put  his cigar back in his lips, "is a lonely thing. Even with
married  people.  Sometimes  when  you're  in a person's arms you feel a million
miles away from them."
     "I like _that_," said his wife.
     "I  didn't mean it that way," he explained, not with haste; because he felt
no  guilt, he took his time. "I mean we all believe what we believe and live our
own little lives while other people live entirely different ones. I mean, we sit
here  in  this  room  while a thousand people are dying. Some of cancer, some of
pneumonia, some of tuberculosis. I imagine someone in the United States is dying
right now in a wrecked car."
     "This isn't very stimulating conversation," said his wife.
     "I mean to say, we all live and don't think about how other people think or
live their lives or die. We wait until death comes to us. What I mean is here we
sit,  on  our  self-assured  butt-bones,  while, thirty miles away, in a big old
house, completely surrounded by night and God-knows-what, one of the finest guys
who ever lived is--"
     "Herb!"
     He puffed and chewed on his cigar and stared blindly at his cards. "Sorry."
He blinked rapidly and bit his cigar. "Is it my turn?"
     "It's your turn."
     The  playing  went  around  the table, with a flittering of cards, murmurs,
conversation. Herb Thompson sank lower into his chair and began to look ill.
     The phone rang. Thompson jumped and ran to it and jerked it off the hook.
     "Herb! I've been calling and calling. What's it like at your house, Herb?"
     "What do you mean, what's it like?"
     "Has the company come?"
     "Hell, yes, it has--"
     "Are you talking and laughing and playing cards?"
     "Christ, yes, but what has that got to do with--"
     "Are you smoking your ten-cent cigar?"
     "God damn it, yes, but. . ."
     "Swell,"  said  the voice on the phone. "That sure is swell. I wish I could
be there. I wish I didn't know the things I know. I wish lots of things."
     "Are you all right?"
     "So  far, so good. I'm locked in the kitchen now. Part of the front wall of
the  house  blew  in. But I planned my retreat: When the kitchen door gives, I'm
heading  for  the cellar. If I'm lucky I may hold out there until morning. It'll
have  to  tear the whole damned house down to get to me, and the cellar floor is
pretty solid. I have a shovel and I may dig--deeper. . . ."
     It sounded like a lot of other voices on the phone.
     "What's _that?_" Herb Thompson demanded, cold, shivering.
     "That?"  asked  the  voice  on  the  phone. "Those are the voices of twelve
thousand  killed  in  a  typhoon,  seven  thousand  killed by a hurricane, three
thousand  buried  by a cyclone. Am I boring you? That's what the wind is. It's a
lot  of  people  dead.  The  wind  killed  them, took their minds to give itself
intelligence.  It  took all their voices and made them into one voice. All those
millions  of people killed in the past ten thousand years, tortured and run from
continent  to  continent  on  the  backs  and  in  the  bellies  of monsoons and
whirlwinds. Oh, Christ, what a poem you could write about it!"
     The phone echoed and rang with voices and shouts and whinings.
     "Come on back, Herb," called his wife from the card table.
     "That's  how  the  wind gets more intelligent each year, it adds to itself,
body by body, life by life, death by death."
     "We're waiting for you, Herb," called his wife.
     "Damn  it!"  He  turned,  almost snarling. "Wait just a moment, won't you!"
Back  to  the  phone.  "Allin,  if  you want me to come out there now, I will! I
should have come earlier. . ."
     "Wouldn't  think  of it. This is a grudge fight, wouldn't do to have you in
it  now. I'd better hang up. The kitchen door looks bad; I'll have to get in the
cellar."
     "Call me back, later?"
     "Maybe,  if  I'm  lucky.  I  don't  think  I'll make it. I slipped away and
escaped  so many times, but I think it has me now. I hope I haven't bothered you
too much, Herb."
     "You haven't bothered anyone, damn it. Call me back."
     "I'll try. . . ."
     Herb  Thompson  went  back to the card game. His wife glared at him. "How's
Allin, your friend?" she asked, "Is he sober?"
     "He's  never  taken  a drink in his life," said Thompson, sullenly, sitting
down. "I should have gone out there hours ago."
     "But  he's  called  every  night for six weeks and you've been out there at
least ten nights to stay with him and nothing was wrong."
     "He needs help. He might hurt himself."
     "You were just out there, two nights ago, you can't always be running after
him."
     "First  thing  in  the morning I'll move him into a sanatorium. Didn't want
to. He seems so reasonable otherwise."
     At ten-thirty coffee was served. Herb Thompson drank his slowly, looking at
the phone. I wonder if he's in the cellar now, he thought.
     Herb Thompson walked to the phone, called long-distance, gave the number.
     "I'm  sorry," said the operator. "The lines are down in that district. When
the lines are repaired, we will put your call through."
     "Then  the  telephone  lines  _are_ down!" cried Thompson. He let the phone
drop.  Turning, he slammed open the closet door, pulled out his coat. "Oh Lord,"
he  said.  "Oh, Lord, Lord," he said, to his amazed guests and his wife with the
coffee urn in her hand. "Herb!" she cried. "I've got to get out there!" he said,
slipping into his coat.
     There was a soft, faint stirring at the door.
     Everybody in the room tensed and straightened up.
     "Who could that be?" asked his wife.
     The soft stirring was repeated, very quietly.
     Thompson hurried down the hall where he stopped, alert.
     Outside, faintly, he heard laughter.
     "I'll  be  damned,"  said  Thompson.  He  put  his  hand  on  the doorknob,
pleasantly  shocked  and relieved. "I'd know that laugh anywhere. It's Allin. He
came  on  over in his car, after all. Couldn't wait until morning to tell me his
confounded stories." Thompson smiled weakly. "Probably brought some friends with
him. Sounds like a lot of other. . ."
     He opened the front door.
     The porch was empty.
     Thompson  showed  no  surprise;  his  face grew amused and sly. He laughed.
"Allin?  None  of  your tricks now! Come on." He switched on the porch-light and
peered out and around. "Where are you, Allin? Come on, now."
     A breeze blew into his face.
     Thompson waited a moment, suddenly chilled to his marrow. He stepped out on
the porch and looked uneasily, and very carefully, about.
     A  sudden  wind  caught and whipped his coat flaps, disheveled his hair. He
thought  he  heard laughter again. The wind rounded the house and was a pressure
everywhere at once, and then, storming for a full minute, passed on.
     The  wind  died  down, sad, mourning in the high trees, passing away; going
back  out  to  the  sea, to the Celebes, to the Ivory Coast, to Sumatra and Cape
Horn, to Cornwall and the Philippines. Fading, fading, fading.
     Thompson  stood  there,  cold.  He  went  in and closed the door and leaned
against it, and didn't move, eyes closed.
     "What's wrong . . .?" asked his wife.