prose_contemporaryRayBradburyThe NightcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
The Night
YOU are a child in a small town. You are, to be exact, eight years old,
and it is growing late at night. Late, for you, accustomed to bedding in
at nine or nine-thirty; once in a while perhaps begging Mom or Dad to
let you stay up later to hear Sam and Henry on that strange radio that
is popular in this year of 1927. But most of the time you are in bed and
snug at this time of night.
It is a warm summer evening. You live in a small house on a small street
in the outer part of town where there are few street lights. There is
only one store open, about a block away; Mrs. Singer's. In the hot
evening Mother has been ironing the Monday wash and you have been
intermittently begging for ice-cream and staring into the dark.
You and your mother are all alone at home in the warm darkness of
summer. Finally, just before it is time for Mrs. Singer to close her
store, Mother relents and tells you:
'Run get a pint of ice-cream and be sure she packs it tight.'
You ask if you can get a scoop of chocolate ice-cream on top, because
you don't like vanilla, and mother agrees. You clutch the money and run
barefooted over the warm evening cement pavement, under the apple trees
and oak trees, towards the store. The town is so quiet and far off, you
can only hear the crickets sounding in the spaces beyond the hot indigo
trees that hold back the stars.
Your bare feet slap the pavement, you cross the street and find Mrs.
Singer moving ponderously about her store, singing Yiddish melodies.
'Pint ice-cream?' she says. 'Chocolate on top? Yes!'
You watch her fumble the metal top off the ice-cream freezer and
manipulate the scoop, packing the cardboard pint chock full with
'chocolate on top, yes!' You give the money, receive the chill, icy
pack, and rubbing it across your brow and cheek, laughing, you thump
barefootedly homeward. Behind you, the lights of the lonely little store
blink out and there is only a street light shimmering on the corner, and
the whole city seems to be going to sleep. . .
Opening the screen door you find Mom still ironing. She looks hot and
irritated, but she smiles just the same.
'When will Dad be home from lodge-meeting?' you ask.
'About eleven-thirty or twelve,' Mother replies. She takes the ice-cream
to the kitchen, divides it. Giving you your special portion of
chocolate, she dishes out some for herself and the rest is put away,
'For Skipper and your father when they come.'
Skipper is your brother. He is your older brother. He's twelve and
healthy, red-faced, hawk-nosed, tawny-haired, broad-shouldered for his
years, and always running. He is allowed to stay up later than you. Not
much later, but enough to make him feel it is worth while having been
born first. He is over on the other side of town this evening to a game
of kick-the-can and will be home soon. He and the kids have been
yelling, kicking, running for hours, having fun. Soon he will come
clomping in, smelling of sweat and green grass on his knees where he
fell, and smelling very much in all ways like Skipper; which is natural.
You sit enjoying the ice-cream. You are at the core of the deep quiet
summer night. Your mother and yourself and the night all around this
small house on this small street. You lick each spoon of ice-cream
thoroughly before digging for another, and Mom puts her ironing-board
away and the hot iron in its case, and she sits in the armchair by the
phonograph, eating her dessert and saying, 'My lands, it was a hot day
today. It's still hot. Earth soaks up all the heat and lets it out at
night. It'll be soggy sleeping.'
You both sit there listening to the summer silence. The dark is pressed
down by every window and door, there is no sound because the radio needs
a new battery, and you have played all the Knickerbocker Quartet records
and Al Jolson and Two Black Crows records to exhaustion; so you just sit
on the hardwood floor by the door and look out into the dark dark dark,
pressing your nose against the screen until the flesh of its tip is
moulded into small dark squares.
'I wonder where your brother is?' Mother says after a while. Her spoon
scrapes on the dish. 'He should be home by now. It's almost
nine-thirty.'
'He'll be here,' you say, knowing very well that he will be.
You follow Mom out to wash the dishes. Each sound, each rattle of spoon
or dish is amplified in the baked evening. Silently, you go to the
living-room, remove the couch cushions and, together, yank it open and
extend it down into the double bed that it secretly is. Mother makes the
bed, punching pillows neatly to flump them up for your head. Then, as
you are unbuttoning your shirt, she says:
'Wait a while, Doug.'
'Why?'
'Because. I say so.'
'You look funny, Mom.'
Mom sits down a moment, then stands up, goes to the door, and calls. You
listen to her calling and calling Skipper, Skipper, Skiiiiiiiiperrrrrrr
over and over. Her calling goes out into the summer-warm dark and never
comes back. The echoes pay no attention.
Skipper.
Skipper!
And as you sit on the floor a coldness that is not ice-cream and not
winter, and not part of summer's heat, goes through you. You notice
Mom's eyes sliding, blinking; the way she stands undecided and is
nervous. All of these things.
She opens the screen door. Stepping out into the night she walks down
the steps and down the front sidewalk under the lilac bush. You listen
to her moving feet.
She calls again. Silence.
She calls twice more. You sit in the room. Any moment now Skipper will
reply, from down the long, long narrow street:
'All right, Mom! All right, Mother! Hey!'
But he doesn't answer. And for two minutes you sit looking at the
made-up bed, the silent radio, the silent phonograph, at the chandelier
with its crystal bobbins gleaming quietly, at the rug with the scarlet
and purple curlicues on it. You stub your toe on the bed purposely to
see if it hurts. It does.
Whining, the screen door opens, and Mother says,
'Come on, Shorts. We'll take a walk.'
'Where to?'
'Just down the block. Come on. Better put your shoes on, though. You'll
catch cold.'
'No, I won't. I'll be all right.'
You take her hand. Together you walk down St. James street. You smell
lilacs in blossom; fallen apples lying crushed and odorous in the deep
grass. Underfoot, the concrete is still warm, and the crickets are
sounding louder against the darkening dark. You reach a corner, turn,
and walk towards the ravine.
Off somewhere, a car goes by, flashing its lights in the distance. There
is such a complete lack of life, light and activity. Here and there,
back off from where you are walking towards the ravine you see faint
squares of light where people are still up. But most of the houses,
darkened, are sleeping already, and there are a few lightless places
where the occupants of a dwelling sit talking low dark talk on their
front porches. You hear a porch swing squeaking as you walk near.
'I wish your father was home,' says Mother. Her large hand tightens
around your small one. 'Just wait'll I get that boy. I'll spank him
within an inch of his life.'
A razor strop hangs in the kitchen for this. You think of it, remember
when Dad has doubled and flourished it with muscled control over your
frantic limbs. You doubt Mother will carry out her promise.
Now you have walked another block and are standing by the holy black
silhouette of the German Baptist Church at the Corner of Chapel Street
and Glen Rock. In back of the church a hundred yards away, the ravine
begins. You can smell it. It has a dark sewer, rotten foliage, thick
green odour. It is a wide ravine that cuts and twists across the town, a
jungle by day, a place to let alone at night, Mother has often declared.
You should feel encouraged by the nearness of the German Baptist Church,
but you are not — because the building is not illumined, is cold and
useless as a pile of ruins on the ravine edge.
You are only eight years old, you know little of death, fear, or dread.
Death is the waxen effigy in the coffin when you were six and
Grandfather passed away — looking like a great fallen vulture in his
casket, silent, withdrawn, no more to tell you how to be a good boy, no
more to comment succinctly on politics. Death is your little sister one
morning when you awaken at the age of seven, look into her crib and see
her staring up at you with a blind blue, fixed and frozen stare until
the men came with a small wicker basket to take her away. Death is when
you stand by her high-chair four weeks later and suddenly realize she'll
never be in it again, laughing and crying and making you jealous of her
because she was born. That is death.
But this is more than death. This summer night wading deep in time and
stars and warm eternity. It is an essence of all the things you will
ever feel or see or hear in your life again, being brought steadily home
to you all at once.
Leaving the pavement, you walk along a trodden, pebbled, weed-fringed
path to the ravine's edge. Crickets, in loud full drumming chorus now,
are shouting to quiver the dead. You follow obediently behind brave,
fine, tall Mother who is defender of all the universe. You feel
braveness because she goes before, and you hang back a trifle for a
moment, and then hurry on, too. Together, then, you approach, reach and
pause at the very edge of civilization.
The ravine.
Here and now, down there in that pit of jungled blackness is suddenly
all the evil you will ever know. Evil you will never understand. All of
the nameless things are there. Later, when you have grown you'll be
given names to label them with. Meaningless syllables to describe the
waiting nothingness. Down there in the huddled shadow, among thick trees
and trailed vines, lives the odour of decay. Here, at this spot,
civilization ceases, reason ends, and a universal evil takes over.
You realize you are alone. You and your mother. Her hand trembles.
Her handtrembles.
Your belief in your private world is shattered. You feel Mother tremble.
Why? Is she, too, doubtful? But she is bigger, stronger, more
intelligent than yourself, isn't she? Does she, too, feel that
intangible menace, that groping out of darkness, that crouching
malignancy down below? Is there, then, no strength in growing up? no
solace in being an adult? no sanctuary in life? no flesh citadel strong
enough to withstand the scrabbling assault of midnights? Doubts flush
you. Ice-cream lives again in your throat, stomach, spine and limbs; you
are instantly cold as a wind out of December-gone.
You realize that all men are like this. That each person is to himself
one alone. One oneness, a unit in a society, but always afraid. Like
here, standing. If you should scream now, if you should holler for help,
would it matter?
You are so close to the ravine now that in the instant of your scream,
in the interval between someone hearing it and running to find you, much
could happen.
Blackness could come swiftly, swallowing; and in one titanically
freezing moment all would be concluded. Long before dawn, long before
police with flashlights might probe the disturbed pathway, long before
men with trembling brains could rustle down the pebbles to your help.
Even if they were within five hundred yards of you now, and
helpcertainlyis, in three seconds a dark tide could rise to take all
eight years of life away from you and —
The essential impact of life's loneliness crushes your
beginning-to-tremble body. Mother is alone, too. She cannot look to the
sanctity of marriage, the protection of her family's love, she cannot
look to the United States Constitution or the City Police, she cannot
look anywhere, in this very instant, save into her heart, and there
she'll find nothing but uncontrollable repugnance and a will to fear. In
this instant it is an individual problem seeking an individual solution.
You must accept being alone and work on from there.
You swallow hard, cling to her. Oh, Lord, don't let her die, please, you
think. Don't do anything to us. Father will be coming home from
lodge-meeting in an hour and if the house is empty. . .?
Mother advances down the path into the primeval jungle. Your voice
trembles. 'Mom. Skip's all right. Skip's all right. He's all right.
Skip's all right.'
Mother's voice is strained high. 'He always comes through here. I tell
him not to, but those darned kids, they come through here anyway. Some
night he'll come through and never come out again — '
Never come out again. That could mean anything. Tramps. Criminals.
Darkness. Accident. Most of all — death.
Alone in the universe.
There are a million small towns like this all over the world. Each as
dark, as lonely, each as removed, as full of shuddering and wonder. The
reedy playing of minor-key violins is the small towns' music, with no
lights but many shadows. Oh the vast swelling loneliness of them. The
secret damp ravines of them. Life is a horror lived in them at night,
when at all sides sanity, marriage, children, happiness, is threatened
by an ogre called Death.
Mother raises her voice into the dark.
'Skip! Skipper!' she calls. 'Skip! Skipper!'
Suddenly, both of you realize there is something wrong. Something very
wrong. You listen intently and realize what it is. The crickets have
stopped chirping.
Silence is complete.
Never in your life a silence like this one. One so utterly complete. Why
should the crickets cease? Why? What reason? They have never stopped
ever before. Not ever.
Unless. Unless —
Something is going to happen.
It is as if the whole ravine is tensing, bunching together its black
fibres, drawing in power from all about sleeping countrysides, for miles
and miles. From dew-sodden forest and dells and rolling hills where dogs
tilt heads to moons, from all around the great silence is sucked into
one centre, and you at the core of it. In ten seconds now, something
will happen, something will happen. The crickets keep their truce, the
stars are so low you can almost brush the tinsel. There are swarms of
them, hot and sharp.
Growing, growing, the silence. Growing, growing the tenseness. Oh it's
so dark, so far away from everything. Oh God!
And then, way way off across the ravine:
'Okay Mom! Coming, Mother!'
And again:
'Hi, Mom! Coming, Mom!'
And then the quick scuttering of tennis shoes padding down through the
pit of the ravine as three kids come dashing, giggling. Your brother
Skipper, Chuck Redman and Augie Bartz. Running, giggling.
The stars suck up like the stung antennae of ten million snails.
The crickets sing!
The darkness pulls back, startled, shocked, angry. Pulls back, losing
its appetite at being so rudely interrupted as it prepared to feed. As
the dark retreats like a wave on a shore, three kids pile out of it,
laughing.
'Hi, Mom! Hi, Shorts! Hey!'
It smells like Skipper all right. Sweat and grass and his oiled leather
baseball glove.
'Young man, you're going to get a licking,' declares Mother. She puts
away her fear instantly. You know she will never tell anybody of it,
ever. It will be in her heart though, for all time, as it is in your
heart, for all time.
You walk home to bed in the late summer night. You are glad Skipper is
alive. Very glad. For a moment there you thought —
Far off in the dim moonlit country, over a viaduct and down a valley, a
train goes rushing along and it whistles like a lost metal thing,
nameless and running. You go to bed, shivering, beside your brother,
listening to that train whistle, and thinking of a cousin who lived way
out in the country where that train is now; a cousin who died of
pneumonia late at night years and years ago. . . You smell the sweat of
Skip beside you. It is magic. You stop trembling. You hear footsteps
outside the house on the sidewalk, as Mother is turning out the lights.
A man clears his throat in a way you recognize.
Mom says, 'That's your father.'
It is.

