 
                                    Skeleton
                                      1945

     It  was past time for him to see the doctor again. Mr. Harris turned palely
in  at  the  stair  well,  and  on his way up the flight saw Dr. Burleigh's name
gilded  over  a pointing arrow. Would Dr. Burleigh sigh when he walked in? After
all,  this  would  make  the tenth trip so far this year. But Burleigh shouldn't
complain; he was paid for the examinations!

     The nurse looked Mr. Harris over and smiled, a bit amusedly, as she tiptoed
to  the  glazed  glass  door,  opened it, and put her head in. Harris thought he
heard  her say, "Guess who's here, Doctor." And didn't the doctor's voice reply,
faintly, "Oh, my God, _again?_" Harris swallowed uneasily.

     When  Harris  walked  in, Dr. Burleigh snorted. "Aches in your bones again!
Ah! !" He scowled and adjusted his glasses. "My dear Harris, you've been curried
with  the  finest-tooth combs and bacteria-brushes known to science. You're just
nervous.  Let's  see your fingers. Too many cigarettes. Let's smell your breath.
Too much protein. Let's see your eyes. Not enough sleep. My response? Go to bed,
stop the protein, no smoking. Ten dollars, please."

     Harris stood sulking.

     The  doctor  glanced  up  from  his  papers.  "_You_  still  here? You're a
hypochondriac! That's _eleven_ dollars, now."

     "But why should my bones ache?" asked Harris.

     Dr.  Burleigh  spoke  as  to a child. "You ever had a sore muscle, and kept
irritating  it,  fussing with it, rubbing it? It gets worse, the more you bother
it.  Then  you leave it alone and the pain vanishes. You realize you caused most
of  the  soreness,  yourself.  Well, son, that's what's with you. Leave yourself
alone.  Take  a  dose  of  salts.  Get out of here and take that trip to Phoenix
you've stewed about for months. Do you good to travel!"

      

     Five minutes later, Mr. Harris riffled through a classified phone directory
at  the  corner druggist's. A fine lot of sympathy one got from blind fools like
Burleigh!  He passed his finger down a list of BONE SPECIALISTS, found one named
M. Munigant. Munigant lacked an M.D., or any other academic lettering behind his
name, but his office was conveniently near. Three blocks down, one block over. .
. .

     M.  Munigant,  like  his  office,  was  small and dark. Like his office, he
smelled  of  iodoform,  iodine,  and  other  odd things. He was a good listener,
though,  and  listened with eager shiny moves of his eyes, and when he talked to
Harris,  his  accent  was  such  that  he softly whistled each word; undoubtedly
because of imperfect dentures.

     Harris told all.

     M.  Munigant  nodded.  He had seen cases like this before. The bones of the
body.  Man  was  not  aware of his bones. Ah, yes, the bones. The skeleton. Most
difficult.  Something  concerning  an  imbalance,  an unsympathetic coordination
between  soul,  flesh,  and  skeleton.  Very  complicated,  softly  whistled  M.
Munigant.  Harris  listened, fascinated. Now, _here_ was a doctor who understood
his  illness! Psychological, said M. Munigant. He moved swiftly, delicately to a
dingy  wall  and  slashed  down half a dozen X-rays to haunt the room with their
look  of  things  found  floating  in  an ancient tide. Here, here! The skeleton
surprised!  Here luminous portraits of the long, the short, the large, the small
bones. Mr. Harris must be aware of his position, his problem! M. Munigant's hand
tapped,  rattled,  whispered,  scratched at faint nebulae of flesh in which hung
ghosts  of  cranium,  spinal-cord,  pelvis,  lime, calcium, marrow, here, there,
this, that, these, those, and others! Look!

     Harris  shuddered.  The  X-rays  and  the  paintings  blew  in  a green and
phosphorescent wind from a land peopled by the monsters of Dali and Fuseli.

     M. Munigant whistled quietly. Did Mr. Harris wish his bones--treated?

     "That depends," said Harris.

     Well,  M.  Munigant  could  not help Harris unless Harris was in the proper
mood.  Psychologically,  one  had to _need_ help, or the doctor was useless. But
(shrugging) M. Munigant would "try."

     Harris  lay  on  a table with his mouth open. The lights were switched off,
the shades drawn. M. Munigant approached his patient.

     Something touched Harris's tongue.

     He  felt  his  jawbones  forced  out.  They creaked and made faint cracking
noises.  One of those skeleton charts on the dim wall seemed to quiver and jump.
A violent shudder seized Harris. Involuntarily, his mouth snapped shut.

     M.  Munigant  shouted. His nose had almost been bitten off! No use, no use!
Now  was  not  the  time!  M.  Munigant  whispered  the  shades  up,  dreadfully
disappointed.  When Mr. Harris felt he could cooperate psychologically, when Mr.
Harris  really  _needed_  help  and  trusted M. Munigant to help him, then maybe
something  could be done. M. Munigant held out his little hand. In the meantime,
the  fee was only two dollars. Mr. Harris must begin to think. Here was a sketch
for  Mr.  Harris to take home and study. It would acquaint him with his body. He
must  be  tremblingly  aware  of  himself.  He  must be on guard. Skeletons were
strange,  unwieldy things. M. Munigant's eyes glittered. Good day to Mr. Harris.
Oh, and would he care for a breadstick? M. Munigant proffered a jar of long hard
salty breadsticks to Harris, taking one himself, saying that chewing breadsticks
kept  him  in--ah--practice.  Good day, good day, to Mr. Harris! Mr. Harris went
home.

     The  next  day,  Sunday,  Mr. Harris discovered innumerable fresh aches and
pains  in  his  body.  He  spent  the  morning,  his eyes fixed staring with new
interest  at  the small, anatomically perfect painting of a skeleton M. Munigant
had given him.

     His wife, Clarisse, startled him at dinner when she cracked her exquisitely
thin  knuckles,  one  by  one, until he clapped his hands to his ears and cried,
"Stop!"

     The  rest  of  the  afternoon  he quarantined himself in his room. Clarisse
played  bridge in the parlor laughing and chatting with three other ladies while
Harris,  hidden  away,  fingered  and weighed the limbs of his body with growing
curiosity. After an hour he suddenly rose and called:

     "Clarisse!"

     She  had  a way of dancing into any room, her body doing all sorts of soft,
agreeable things to keep her feet from ever quite touching the nap of a rug. She
excused  herself  from  her friends and came to see him now, brightly. She found
him  re-seated in a far corner and she saw that he was staring at the anatomical
sketch. "Are you still brooding, sweet?" she asked. "Please don't." She sat upon
his knees.

     Her  beauty  could  not  distract him now in his absorption. He juggled her
lightness,  he  touched  her  kneecap, suspiciously. It seemed to move under her
pale,  glowing  skin.  "Is  it  supposed  to  do that?" he asked, sucking in his
breath.

     "Is what supposed to do what?" she laughed. "You mean my kneecap?"

     "Is it supposed to run around on top your knee that way?"

     She experimented. "So it _does_," she marveled.

     "I'm glad yours slithers, too," he sighed. "I was beginning to worry."

     "About what?"

     He  patted  his ribs. "My ribs don't go all the way down, they stop _here_.
And I found some confounded ones that dangle in midair!"

     Beneath the curve of her small breasts, Clarisse clasped her hands.

     "Of  course, silly, everybody's ribs stop at a given point. And those funny
short ones are floating ribs."

     "I  hope  they don't float around too much." The joke was most uneasy. Now,
above  all,  he  wished  to  be  alone.  Further discoveries, newer and stranger
archaeological diggings, lay within reach of his trembling hands, and he did not
wish to be laughed at.

     "Thanks for coming in, dear," he said.

     "Any time." She rubbed her small nose softly against his.

     "Wait!  Here,  now. . ." He put his finger to touch his nose and hers. "Did
you  realize?  The  nose-bone grows down only _this_ far. From there on a lot of
gristly tissue fills out the rest!"

     She wrinkled hers. "Of course, darling!" And she danced from the room.

     Now,  sitting  alone,  he  felt  the  perspiration  rise from the pools and
hollows  of his face, to flow in a thin tide down his cheeks. He licked his lips
and  shut his eyes. Now. . . now. . . next on the agenda, what . . .? The spinal
cord,  yes.  Here.  Slowly, he examined it, in the same way he operated the many
push-buttons  in  his  office, thrusting them to summon secretaries, messengers.
But  now,  in  these  pushings of his spinal column, fears and terrors answered,
rushed  from  a  million  doors in his mind to confront and shake him! His spine
felt horribly--unfamiliar. Like the brittle shards of a fish, freshly eaten, its
bones  left  strewn  on  a  cold  china  platter.  He  seized the little rounded
knobbins. "Lord! Lord!"

     His  teeth  began  to  chatter.  God  All-Mighty! he thought, why haven't I
realized   it   all   these  years?  All  these  years  I've  gone  around  with
a--SKELETON--inside  me!  How  is it we take ourselves for granted? How is it we
never question our bodies and our being?

     A  skeleton.  One  of those jointed, snowy, hard things, one of those foul,
dry, brittle, gouge-eyed, skull-faced, shake-fingered, rattling things that sway
from  neck-chains  in abandoned webbed closets, one of those things found on the
desert all long and scattered like dice!

     He  stood  upright,  because  he could not bear to remain seated. Inside me
now,  he grasped his stomach, his head, inside my head is a--skull. One of those
curved  carapaces  which  holds  my brain like an electrical jelly, one of those
cracked  shells  with  the  holes  in  front like two holes shot through it by a
double-barreled  shotgun!  With its grottoes and caverns of bone, its revetments
and  placements for my flesh, my smelling, my seeing, my hearing, my thinking! A
skull,  encompassing  my  brain, allowing it exit through its brittle windows to
see the outside world!

     He  wanted to dash into the bridge party, upset it, a fox in a chickenyard,
the cards fluttering all around like chicken feathers burst upward in clouds! He
stopped  himself  only  with a violent, trembling effort. Now, now, man, control
yourself.  This  is  a  revelation,  take it for what it's worth, understand it,
savor  it. BUT A SKELETON! screamed his subconscious. I won't stand for it. It's
vulgar,  it's  terrible, it's frightening. Skeletons are horrors; they clink and
tinkle and rattle in old castles, hung from oaken beams, making long, indolently
rustling pendulums on the wind. . . .

     "Darling,  will  you  come  meet the ladies?" His wife's clear, sweet voice
called from far away.

     Mr.  Harris  stood.  His  SKELETON  held  him  up!  This thing inside, this
invader,  this  horror,  was  supporting  his  arms, legs, and head! It was like
feeling  someone  just  behind  you  who shouldn't be there. With every step, he
realized how dependent he was on this other Thing.

     "Darling,  I'll  be  with you in a moment," he called weakly. To himself he
said, Come on, brace up! You've got to go back to work tomorrow. Friday you must
make  that  trip  to  Phoenix.  It's a long drive. Hundreds of miles. Must be in
shape  for  that  trip  or  you won't get Mr. Creldon to invest in your ceramics
business. Chin up, now!

     A moment later he stood among the ladies, being introduced to Mrs. Withers,
Mrs. Abblematt, and Miss Kirthy, all of whom had skeletons inside them, but took
it  very  calmly,  because  nature  had  carefully  clothed  the  bare nudity of
clavicle,  tibia,  and  femur  with  breasts,  thighs, calves, with coiffure and
eyebrow   satanic,   with   bee-stung   lips   and--LORD!   shouted  Mr.  Harris
inwardly--when  they talk or eat, part of their skeleton shows--their _teeth!_ I
never  thought  of  that.  "Excuse me," he gasped, and ran from the room only in
time to drop his lunch among the petunias over the garden balustrade.

      

     That  night, seated on the bed as his wife undressed, he pared his toenails
and  fingernails  scrupulously.  These  parts,  too, were where his skeleton was
shoving,  indignantly  growing  out.  He must have muttered part of this theory,
because next thing he knew his wife, in negligee, was on the bed, her arms about
his  neck,  yawning,  "Oh,  my darling, fingernails are _not_ bone, they're only
hardened epidermis!"

     He  threw the scissors down. "Are you certain? I hope so. I'd feel better."
He  looked  at the curve of her body, marveling. "I hope all people are made the
same way."

     "If  you  aren't the darndest hypochondriac!" She held him at arm's length.
"Come on. What's wrong? Tell mama."

     "Something inside me," he said. "Something--I ate."

      

     The  next  morning  and  all  afternoon  at his downtown office, Mr. Harris
sorted out the sizes, shapes, and construction of various bones in his body with
displeasure.  At  ten  A.M.  he  asked to feel Mr. Smith's elbow one moment. Mr.
Smith  obliged,  but  scowled  suspiciously. And after lunch Mr. Harris asked to
touch  Miss  Laurel's  shoulder  blade  and  she immediately pushed herself back
against him, purring like a kitten and shutting her eyes.

     "Miss Laurel!" he snapped. "Stop that!"

     Alone, he pondered his neuroses. The war was just over, the pressure of his
work,  the  uncertainty  of  the future, probably had much to do with his mental
outlook.  He  wanted  to leave the office, get into business for himself. He had
more  than  a little talent for ceramics and sculpture. As soon as possible he'd
head  for  Arizona,  borrow that money from Mr. Creldon, build a kiln and set up
shop.  It  was  a  worry.  What  a  case he was. But luckily he had contacted M.
Munigant,  who  seemed  eager  to understand and help him. He would fight it out
with  himself,  not  go  back  to  either Munigant or Dr. Burleigh unless he was
forced to. The alien feeling would pass. He sat staring into space.

      

     The alien feeling did not pass. It grew.

     On  Tuesday  and Wednesday it bothered him terrifically that his epidermis,
hair  and  other  appendages  were  of  a  high disorder, while his integumented
skeleton  of  himself  was  a  slick  clean structure of efficient organization.
Sometimes,  in  certain  lights with his lips drawn morosely down, weighted with
melancholy, he imagined he saw his skull grinning at him behind the flesh.

     Let go! he cried. Let go of me! My lungs! Stop!

     He gasped convulsively, as if his ribs were crushing the breath from him.

     My brain--stop squeezing it!

     And terrifying headaches burnt his brain to a blind cinder.

     My insides, let them be, for God's sake! Stay away from my heart!

     His  heart  cringed  from  the  fanning  motion  of  ribs like pale spiders
crouched and fiddling with their prey.

     Drenched  with  sweat, he lay upon the bed one night while Clarisse was out
attending  a  Red  Cross meeting. He tried to gather his wits but only grew more
aware  of  the conflict between his dirty exterior and this beautiful cool clean
calciumed thing inside. 

     His complexion: wasn't it oily and lined with worry?

     _Observe the flawless, snow-white perfection of the skull_.

     His nose: wasn't it too large?

     _Then  observe  the  tiny  bones  of the skull's nose before that monstrous
nasal cartilage begins forming the lopsided proboscis_.

     His body: wasn't it plump?

     _Well,  consider  the  skeleton;  slender,  svelte,  economical of line and
contour.  Exquisitely  carved  oriental  ivory! Perfect, thin as a white praying
mantis!_

     His eyes: weren't they protuberant, ordinary, numb-looking?

     _Be  so  kind as to note the eye-sockets of the skull; so deep and rounded,
somber,  quiet  pools,  all-knowing,  eternal. Gaze deep and you never touch the
bottom of their dark understanding. All irony, all life, all everything is there
in the cupped darkness_.

     Compare. Compare. Compare.

     He   raged  for  hours.  And  the  skeleton,  ever  the  frail  and  solemn
philosopher,  hung  quietly inside, saying not a word, suspended like a delicate
insect within a chrysalis, waiting and waiting.

     Harris sat slowly up.

     "Wait  a  minute.  Hold  on!" he exclaimed. "You're helpless, too. I've got
you,  too.  I  can make you do anything I want! You can't prevent it! I say move
your  carpales,  metacarpales,  and phalanges and_sswtt_up they go, as I wave to
someone!"  He  laughed. "I order the fibula and femur to locomote and _Hunn_ two
three four, _Hunn_ two three four--we walk around the block. There!"

     Harris grinned.

     "It's  a  fifty-fifty  fight. Even-Stephen. And we'll fight it out, we two!
After  all,  I'm the part that _thinks!_ Yes, by God! yes. Even if I didn't have
you, I could still think!"

     Instantly,  a  tiger's  jaw snapped shut, chewing his brain in half. Harris
screamed.  The  bones  of  his  skull grabbed hold and gave him nightmares. Then
slowly,  while he shrieked, nuzzled and ate the nightmares one by one, until the
last one was gone and the light went out.

      

     At the end of the week he postponed the Phoenix trip because of his health.
Weighing  himself  on  a penny scale he saw the slow gliding red arrow point to:
165.

     He  groaned. Why, I've weighed 175 for years. I can't have lost ten pounds!
He  examined  his  cheeks  in the fly-dotted mirror. Cold, primitive fear rushed
over him in odd little shivers. You, you! I know what you're about, _you!_

     He  shook his fist at his bony face, particularly addressing his remarks to
his  superior  maxillary,  his  inferior  maxillary,  to  his cranium and to his
cervical vertebrae.

     "You  damn  thing,  you!  Think you can starve me, make me lose weight, eh?
Peel  the flesh off, leave nothing, but skin on bone. Trying to ditch me, so you
can be supreme, ah? No, no!"

     He fled into a cafeteria.

     Turkey,  dressing,  creamed  potatoes,  four vegetables, three desserts, he
could  eat  none of it, he was sick to his stomach. He forced himself. His teeth
began  to ache. Bad teeth, is it? he thought angrily. I'll eat in spite of every
tooth clanging and banging and rattling so they fall in my gravy.

     His  head  blazed, his breath jerked in and out of a constricted chest, his
teeth raged with pain, but he knew one small victory. He was about to drink milk
when he stopped and poured it into a vase of nasturtiums. No calcium for you, my
boy,  no  calcium  for  you. Never again shall I eat foods with calcium or other
bonefortifying minerals. I'll eat for one of us, not both, my lad.

     "One  hundred  and  fifty pounds," he said, the following week to his wife.
"Do you _see_ how I've changed?"

     "For  the  better," said Clarisse. "You were always a little plump for your
height,  darling."  She stroked his chin. "I like your face. It's so much nicer;
the lines of it are so firm and strong now."

     "They're  not my lines, they're his, damn him! You mean to say you like him
better than you like me?"

     "Him? Who's '_him_'?"

     In  the parlor mirror, beyond Clarisse, his skull smiled back at him behind
his fleshy grimace of hatred and despair.

     Fuming,  he popped malt tablets into his mouth. This was one way of gaining
weight  when  you  couldn't  keep  other  foods  down. Clarisse noticed the malt
pellets.

     "But,  darling,  really,  you  don't have to regain the weight for me," she
said.

     Oh, shut up! he felt like saying.

     She  made  him  lie  with  his  head in her lap. "Darling," she said, "I've
watched  you  lately.  You're  so--badly  off.  You  don't say anything, but you
look--hunted.  You  toss in bed at night. Maybe you should go to a psychiatrist.
But  I  think  I  can tell you everything he would say. I've put it all together
from  hints you've let escape you. I can tell you that you and your skeleton are
one  and  the same, 'one nation, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.'
United  you  stand, divided you fall. If you two fellows can't get along like an
old  married  couple  in  the  future, go back and see Dr. Burleigh. But, first,
relax.  You're  in  a  vicious  circle; the rnore you worry, the more your bones
stick  out,  the  more  you worry. After all, who picked this fight--you or that
anonymous entity you claim is lurking around behind your alimentary canal?"

     He closed his eyes. "I did. I guess I did. Go on Clarisse, keep talking."

     "You rest now," she said softly. "Rest and forget."

      

     Mr.  Harris felt buoyed up for half a day, then he began to sag. It was all
very  well  to  blame his imagination, but this particular skeleton, by God, was
fighting back.

     Harris  set  out for M. Munigant's office late in the day. Walking for half
an  hour  until  he found the address, he caught sight of the name "M. Munigant"
initialed  in ancient, flaking gold on a glass plate outside the building. Then,
his  bones seemed to explode from their moorings, blasted and erupted with pain.
Blinded,  he  staggered  away.  When  he  opened his eyes again he had rounded a
corner. M. Munigant's office was out of sight.

     The pains ceased.

     M.  Munigant  was the man to help him. If the sight of his name could cause
so titanic a reaction of course M. Munigant _must_ be just the man.

     But,  not  today. Each time he tried to return to that office, the terrible
pains took hold. Perspiring, he had to give up and swayed into a cocktail bar.

     Moving  across  the  dim  lounge,  he  wondered  briefly  if a lot of blame
couldn't  be  put  on  M. Munigant's shoulders. After all, it was Munigant who'd
first drawn specific attention to his skeleton, and let the psychological impact
of  it slam home! Could M. Munigant be using him for some nefarious purpose? But
what  purpose? Silly to suspect him. Just a little doctor. Trying to be helpful.
Munigant  and his jar of breadsticks. Ridiculous. M. Munigant was okay, okay . .
.

      

     There was a sight within the cocktail lounge to give him hope. A large, fat
man,  round  as  a  butterball, stood drinking consecutive beers at the bar. Now
_there_  was  a successful man. Harris repressed a desire to go up, clap the fat
man's shoulder, and inquire as to how he'd gone about impounding his bones. Yes,
the fat man's skeleton was luxuriously closeted. There were pillows of fat here,
resilient  bulges  of  it there, with several round chandeliers of fat under his
chin. The poor skeleton was lost; it could never fight clear of that blubber. It
might  have  tried  once--but  not  now, overwhelmed, not a bony echo of the fat
man's supporter remained.

     Not without envy, Harris approached the fat man as one might cut across the
bow  of  an  ocean  liner.  Harris  ordered a drink, drank it, and then dared to
address the fat man:

     "Glands?"

     "You talking to me?" asked the fat man.

     "Or  is there a special diet?" wondered Harris. "I beg your pardon, but, as
you see, I'm down. Can't seem to put on any weight. I'd like a stomach like that
one of yours. Did you grow it because you were afraid of something?"

     "You,"  announced  the  fat  man,  "are  drunk.  But--I like drunkards." He
ordered more drinks. "Listen close, I'll tell you. Layer by layer," said the fat
man,  "twenty years, man and boy, I built this." He held his vast stomach like a
globe  of  the world, teaching his audience its gastronomical geography. "It was
no  overnight  circus.  The  tent  was  not  raised  before  dawn on the wonders
installed within. I have cultivated my inner organs as if they were thoroughbred
dogs, cats, and other animals. My stomach is a fat pink Persian torn slumbering,
rousing  at intervals to purr, mew, growl, and cry for chocolate titbits. I feed
it well, it will 'most sit up for me. And, my dear fellow, my intestines are the
rarest  pure_bred Indian anacondas you ever viewed in the sleekest, coiled, fine
and  ruddy  health. Keep 'em in prime, I do, all my pets. For fear of something?
Perhaps."

     This called for another drink for everyone.

     "Gain  weight?"  The  fat man savored the words on his tongue. "Here's what
you  do:  get yourself a quarreling bird of a wife, a baker's dozen of relatives
who  can  flush a covey of troubles out from behind the veriest molehill. Add to
these  a  sprinkling  of business associates whose prime motivation is snatching
your  last  lonely quid, and you are well on your way to getting fat. How so? In
no  time  you'll  begin subconsciously building fat betwixt yourself and them. A
buffer  epidermal  state,  a  cellular wall. You'll soon find that eating is the
only  fun  on  earth.  But one needs to be bothered by outside sources. Too many
people  in  this world haven't enough to worry about, then they begin picking on
themselves,  and they lose weight. Meet all of the vile, terrible people you can
possibly meet, and pretty soon you'll be adding the good old fat!"

     And  with  that advice, the fat man launched himself out into the dark tide
of night, swaying mightily and wheezing.

     "That's  exactly  what Dr. Burleigh told me, slightly changed," said Harris
thoughtfully. "Perhaps that trip to Phoenix, now, at this time--"

      

     The  trip from Los Angeles to Phoenix was a sweltering one, crossing, as it
did,  the  Mojave  desert  on  a  broiling  yellow  day.  Traffic  was  thin and
inconstant,  and  for  long  stretches  there would not be a car on the road for
miles  ahead  or  behind.  Harris  twitched  his  fingers on the steering wheel.
Whether  or  not  Creldon, in Phoenix, lent him the money he needed to start his
business, it was still a good thing to get away, to put distance behind.

     The  car  moved in the hot sluice of desert wind. The one Mr. H. sat inside
the other Mr. H. Perhaps both perspired. Perhaps both were miserable.

     On a curve, the inside Mr. H. suddenly constricted the outer flesh, causing
him to jerk forward on the hot steering wheel.

     The car plunged off the road into boiling sand and turned half over.

     Night  came, a wind rose, the road was lonely and silent. The few cars that
passed  went  swiftly  on  their  way,  their  view  obstructed.  Mr. Harris lay
unconscious,  until very late he heard a wind rising out of the desert, felt the
sting of little sand needles on his cheeks, and opened his eyes.

     Morning  found  him  gritty-eyed  and  wandering  in  thoughtless senseless
circles, having, in his delirium, got away from the road. At noon he sprawled in
the  poor  shade  of  a bush. The sun struck him with a keen sword edge, cutting
through to his--bones. A vulture circled.

     Harris'  parched lips cracked open. "So that's it?" he whispered, red-eyed,
bristle-cheeked.  "One way or another you'll walk me, starve me, thirst me, kill
me." He swallowed dry burrs of dust. "Sun cook off my flesh so you can peek out.
Vultures  lunch  off  me, and there you'll lie, grinning. Grinning with victory.
Like  a  bleached  xylophone  strewn  and played by vultures with an ear for odd
music. You'd like that. Freedom."

     He  walked  on  through a landscape that shivered and bubbled in the direct
pour  of  sunlight; stumbling, falling flat, lying to feed himself little mouths
of  fire.  The  air was blue alcohol flame, and vultures roasted and steamed and
glittered  as  they  flew  in glides and circles. Phoenix. The road. Car. Water.
Safety.

     "Hey!"

     Someone called from way off in the blue alcohol flame.

     Mr. Harris propped himself up.

     "Hey!"

     The call was repeated. A crunching of footsteps, quick.

     With a cry of unbelievable relief, Harris rose, only to collapse again into
the arms of someone in a uniform with a badge.

      

     The  car  tediously hauled, repaired, Phoenix reached, Harris found himself
in  such  an  unholy  state  of  mind  that  the business transaction was a numb
pantomime.  Even  when  he got the loan and held the money in his hand, it meant
nothing. This Thing within him like a hard white sword in a scabbard tainted his
business,  his eating, colored his love for Clarisse, made it unsafe to trust an
automobile;  all  in  all  this  Thing  had  to  be put in its place. The desert
incident  had brushed too close. Too near the bone, one might say with an ironic
twist  of one's mouth. Harris heard himself thanking Mr. Creldon, dimly, for the
money.  Then he turned his car and motored back across the long miles, this time
cutting  across  to  San  Diego, so he would miss that desert stretch between El
Centro  and  Beaumont.  He  drove  north  along  the coast. He didn't trust that
desert.  But--careful!  Salt  waves boomed, hissing on the beach outside Laguna.
Sand,  fish  and  crustacea would cleanse his bones as swiftly as vultures. Slow
down on the curves over the surf.

     Damn, he was sick!

     Where  to  turn?  Clarisse?  Burleigh? Munigant? Bone specialist. Munigant.
Well?

     "Darling!" Clarisse kissed him. He winced at the solidness of the teeth and
jaw behind the passionate exchange.

     "Darling," he said, slowly, wiping his lips with his wrist, trembling.

     "You look thinner; oh, darling, the business deal--?"

     "It went through. I guess. Yes, it did."

     She  kissed  him  again.  They  ate  a  slow, falsely cheerful dinner, with
Clarisse  laughing  and  encouraging him. He studied the phone; several times he
picked it up indecisively, then laid it down.

     His  wife  walked in, putting on her coat and hat. "Well, sorry, but I have
to  leave."  She  pinched him on the cheek. "Come on now, cheer up! I'll be back
from  Red  Cross  in  three hours. You lie around and snooze. I simply _have_ to
go."

     When Clarisse was gone, Harris dialed the phone, nervously.

     "M. Munigant?"

      

     The  explosions  and  the  sickness in his body after he set the phone down
were  unbelievable. His bones were racked with every kind of pain, cold and hot,
he had ever thought of or experienced in wildest nightmare. He swallowed all the
aspirin  he  could  find,  in  an  effort to stave off the assault; but when the
doorbell  finally  rang  an  hour  later,  he  could  not  move; he lay weak and
exhausted, panting, tears streaming down his cheeks.

     "Come in! Come in, for God's sake!"

     M. Munigant came in. Thank God the door was unlocked.

     Oh,  but Mr. Harris looked terrible. M. Munigant stood in the center of the
living  room,  small  and  dark.  Harris  nodded.  The pains rushed through him,
hitting  him  with large iron hammers and hooks. M. Munigant's eyes glittered as
he  saw  Harris'  protuberant  bones.  Ah,  he  saw  that  Mr.  Harris  was  now
psychologically  prepared  for  aid. Was it not so? Harris nodded again, feebly,
sobbing.  M.  Munigant still whistled when he talked; something about his tongue
and  the  whistling. No matter. Through his shimmering eyes Harris seemed to see
M.  Munigant  shrink, get smaller. Imagination, of course. Harris sobbed out his
story  of  the  Phoenix  trip.  M.  Munigant sympathized. This skeleton was a--a
traitor! They would fix him for once and for all!

     "Mr.  Munigant,"  sighed  Harris, faintly, "I--I never noticed before. Your
tongue. Round, tube-like. Hollow? My eyes. Delirious. What do I do?"

     M.  Munigant  whistled softly, appreciatively, coming closer. If Mr. Harris
would  relax  in his chair, and open his mouth? The lights were switched off. M.
Munigant  peered  into  Harris' dropped jaw. Wider, please? It had been so hard,
that first visit, to help Harris, with both body and bone in revolt. Now, he had
cooperation  from  the flesh of the man, anyway, even if the skeleton protested.
In the darkness, M. Munigant's voice got small, small, tiny, tiny. The whistling
became high and shrill. Now. Relax, Mr. Harris. NOW!

     Harris  felt  his  jaw  pressed  violently  in  all  directions, his tongue
depressed as with a spoon, his throat clogged. He gasped for breath. Whistle. He
couldn't  breathe!  Something squirmed, corkscrewed his cheeks out, bursting his
jaws.  Like  a  hot-water  douche, something squirted into his sinuses, his ears
clanged!  "Ahhhh!"  shrieked  Harris,  gagging.  His  head, its carapaces riven,
shattered, hung loose. Agony shot fire through his lungs.

     Harris  could  breathe  again, momentarily. His watery eyes sprang wide. He
shouted.  His  ribs,  like  sticks  picked up and bundled, were loosened in him.
Pain! He fell to the floor, wheezing out his hot breath.

     Lights  flickered in his senseless eyeballs, he felt his limbs swiftly cast
loose and free. Through streaming eyes he saw the parlor.

     The room was empty.

     "M. Munigant? In God's name, where are you, M. Munigant? Come help me!"

     M. Munigant was gone.

     "Help!"

     Then he heard it.

     Deep   down   in  the  subterranean  fissures  of  his  body,  the  minute,
unbelievable noises; little smackings and twistings and little dry chippings and
grindings  and nuzzling sounds--like a tiny hungry mouse down in the red-blooded
dimness, gnawing ever so earnestly and expertly at what might have been, but was
not, a submerged timber . . . !

      

     Clarisse,  walking  along  the  sidewalk,  held  her  head high and marched
straight  toward  her  house  on  Saint James Place. She was thinking of the Red
Cross  as  she  turned  the  corner and almost ran into this little dark man who
smelled of iodine.

     Clarisse  would  have  ignored  him if it were not for the fact that as she
passed,  he  took  something  long,  white  and oddly familiar from his coat and
proceeded  to  chew  on  it,  as  on  a  peppermint stick. Its end devoured, his
extraordinary  tongue  darted  within  the  white  confection,  sucking  out the
filling,  making  contented  noises.  He  was  still  crunching his goody as she
proceeded up the sidewalk to her house, turned the doorknob and walked in.

     "Darling?"  she  called, smiling around. "Darling, where are you?" She shut
the door, walked down the hall and into the living room. "Darling. . ."

     She stared at the floor for twenty seconds, trying to understand.

     She screamed.

     Outside in the sycamore darkness, the little man pierced a long white stick
with  intermittent  holes;  then,  softly,  sighing, his lips puckered, played a
little sad tune upon the improvised instrument to accompany the shrill and awful
singing of Clarisse's voice as she stood in the living room.

     Many times as a little girl Clarisse had run on the beach sands, stepped on
a  jellyfish and screamed. It was not so bad, finding an intact, gelatin-skinned
jellyfish in one's living room. One could step back from it.

     It was when the jellyfish _called you by name_ ...