antiqueRayBradburyDandelion WineundRayBradburycalibre
0.8.6522.8.2012bf7555e3-5691-4532-a153-3e133359ea101.0
        Dandelion Wine</p>

By
Ray Bradbury
For Walter I. Bradbury neither uncle nor cousin but most decidedly
editor and friend.
JUST THIS SIDE OF BYZANTIUM
an introduction
        <emphasis>This book like most of my books and stories, was a surprise. I began to learn the nature of such surprises, thank God, when I was fairly young as a writer. Before that, like every beginner, I thought you could beat, pummel, and thrash an idea into existence. Under such treatment, of course, any decent idea folds up its paws, turns on its back, fixes its eyes on eternity, and dies.</emphasis></p>

It was with great relief, then, that in my early twenties I floundered
into a word-association process in which I simply got out of bed each
morning, walked to my desk, and put down any word or series of words
that happened along in my head.
I would then take arms against the word, or for it, and bring on an
assortment of characters to weigh the word and show me its meaning in my
own life. An hour or two hours later, to my amazement, a new story would
be finished and done. The surprise was total and lovely. I soon found
that I would have to work this way for the rest of my life.
First I rummaged my mind for words that could describe my personal
nightmares, fears of night and time from my childhood, and shaped
stories from these.
Then I took a long look at the green apple trees and the old house I was
born in and the house next door where lived my grandparents, and all the
lawns of the summers I grew up in, and I began to try words for all
that.
What you have here in this book then is a gathering of dandelions from
all those years. The wine metaphor which appears again and again in
these pages is wonderfully apt. I was gathering images all of my life,
storing them away, and forgetting them. Somehow I had to send myself
back, with words as catalysts, to open the memories out and see what
they had to offer.
So from the age of twenty-four to thirty-six hardly a day passed when I
didn't stroll myself across a recollection of my grandparents' northern
Illinois grass, hoping to come across some old half-burnt firecracker, a
rusted toy, or a fragment of letter written to myself in some young year
hoping to contact the older person I became to remind him of his past,
his life, his people, his joys, and his drenching sorrows.
It became a game that I took to with immense gusto: to see how much I
could remember about dandelions themselves, or picking wild grapes with
my father and brother, rediscovering the mosquito-breeding ground rain
barrel by the side bay window, or searching out the smell of the
goldfuzzed bees that hung around our back porch grape arbor. Bees do
have a smell, you know, and if they don't they should, for their feet
are dusted with spices from a million flowers.
And then I wanted to call back what the ravine was like, especially on
those nights when walking home late across town, after seeing Lon
Chaney's delicious fright The Phantom of the Opera, my brother Skip
would run ahead and hide under the ravine-creek bridge like the Lonely
One and leap out and grab me, shrieking, so I ran, fell, and ran again,
gibbering all the way home. That was great stuff.
Along the way I came upon and collided, through word-association, with
old and true friendships. I borrowed my friend John Huff from my
childhood in Arizona and shipped him East to Green Town so that I could
say good-bye to him properly.
Along the way, I sat me down to breakfasts, lunches, and dinners with
the long dead and much loved. For I was a boy who did indeed love his
parents and grandparents and his brother, even when that brother
"ditched" him.
Along the way, I found myself in the basement working the wine-press for
my father, or on the front porch Independence night helping my Uncle
Bion load and fire his homemade brass cannon.
Thus I fell into surprise. No one told me to surprise myself, I might
add. I came on the old and best ways of writing through ignorance and
experiment and was startled when truths leaped out of bushes like quail
before gunshot. I blundered into creativity as blindly as any child
learning to walk and see. I learned to let my senses and my Past tell me
all that was somehow true.
So, I turned myself into a boy running to bring a dipper of clear
rainwater out of that barrel by the side of the house. And, of course,
the more water you dip out the more flows in. The flow has never ceased.
Once I learned to keep going back and back again to those times, I had
plenty of memories and sense impressions to play with, not work with,
no, play with. Dandelion Wine is nothing if it is not the
boy-hid-in-the-man playing in the fields of the Lord on the green grass
of other Augusts in the midst of starting to grow up, grow old, and
sense darkness waiting under the trees to seed the blood.
I was amused and somewhat astonished at a critic a few years back who
wrote an article analyzing Dandelion Wine plus the more realistic works
of Sinclair Lewis, wondering how I could have been born and raised in
Waukegan, which I renamed Green Town for my novel, and not noticed how
ugly the harbor was and how depressing the coal docks and railyards down
below the town.
But, of course, I had noticed them and, genetic enchanter that I was,
was fascinated by their beauty. Trains and boxcars and the smell of coal
and fire are not ugly to children. Ugliness is a concept that we happen
on later and become selfconscious about. Counting boxcars is a prime
activity of boys. Their elders fret and fume and jeer at the train that
holds them up, but boys happily count and cry the names of the cars as
they pass from far places.
And again, that supposedly ugly railyard was where carnivals and
circuses arrived with elephants who washed the brick pavements with
mighty steaming acid waters at five in the dark morning.
As for the coal from the docks, I went down in my basement every autumn
to await the arrival of the truck and its metal chute, which clanged
down and released a ton of beauteous meteors that fell out of far space
into my cellar and threatened to bury me beneath dark treasures.
In other words, if your boy is a poet, horse manure can only mean
flowers to him; which is, of course, what horse manure has always been
about.
Perhaps a new poem of mine will explain more than this introduction
about the germination of all the summers of my life into one book.
Here's the start of the poem:
Byzantium, I come not from,
But from another time and place
Whose race was simple, tried and true;
As boy I dropped me forth in Illinois.
A name with neither love nor grace
Was Waukegan, there I came from
And not, good friends, Byzantium.
The poem continues, describing my lifelong relationship to my
birthplace:
And yet in looking back I see
From topmost part of farthest tree
A land as bright, beloved and blue
As any Yeats found to be true.
Waukegan, visited by me often since, is neither homelier nor more
beautiful than any other small midwestern town. Much of it is green. The
trees do touch in the middle of streets. The street in front of my old
home is still paved with red bricks. In what way then was the town
special? Why, I was born there. It was my life. I had to write of it as
I saw fit:
So we grew up with mythic dead
To spoon upon midwestern bread
And spread old gods' bright marmalade
To slake in peanut-butter shade,
Pretending there beneath our sky
That it was Aphrodite's thigh ...
While by the porch-rail calm and bold
His words pure wisdom, stare pure gold
My grandfather, a myth indeed,
Did all of Plato supersede
While Grandmama in rockingchair
Sewed up the raveled sleeve of care
Crocheted cool snowflakes rare and bright
To winter us on summer night.
And uncles, gathered with their smokes
Emitted wisdoms masked as jokes,
And aunts as wise as Delphic maids
Dispensed prophetic lemonades
To boys knelt there as acolytes
To Grecian porch on summer nights;
Then went to bed, there to repent
The evils of the innocent;
The gnat-sins sizzling in their ears
Said, through the nights and through the years
Not Illinois nor Waukegan
But blither sky and blither sun.
Though mediocre all our Fates
And Mayor not as bright as Yeats
Yet still we knew ourselves. The sum?
Byzantium.
Byzantium.
Waukegan/Green Town/Byzantium.
Green Town did exist, then? Yes, and again, yes. Was there a real boy
named John Huff?
There was. And that was truly his name. But he didn't go away from me, I
went away from him. But, happy ending, he is still alive, forty-two
years later, and remembers our love.
Was there a Lonely One?
There was, and that was his name. And he moved around at night in my
home town when I was six years old and he frightened everyone and was
never captured.
Most importantly, did the big house itself, with Grandpa and Grandma and
the boarders and uncles and aunts in it exist? I have already answered
that.
Is the ravine real and deep and dark at night? It was, it is. I took my
daughters there a few years back, fearful that the ravine might have
gone shallow with time. I am relieved and happy to report that the
ravine is deeper, darker, and more mysterious than ever. I would not,
even now, go home through there after seeing The Phantom of the Opera.
So there you have it. Waukegan was Green Town was Byzantium, with all
the happiness that that means, with all the sadness that these names
imply. The people there were gods and midgets and knew themselves mortal
and so the midgets walked tall so as not to embarrass the gods and the
gods crouched so as to make the small ones feel at home. And, after all,
isn't that what life is all about, the ability to go around back and
come up inside other people's heads to look out at the damned fool
miracle and say: oh, so that's how you see it!? Well, now, I must
remember that.
Here is my celebration, then, of death as well as life, dark as well as
light, old as well as young, smart and dumb combined, sheer joy as well
as complete terror written by a boy who once hung upside down in trees,
dressed in his bat costume with candy fangs in his mouth, who finally
fell out of the trees when he was twelve and went and found a toy-dial
typewriter and wrote his first "novel."
A final memory.
Fire balloons.
You rarely see them these days, though in some countries, I hear, they
are still made and filled with warm breath from a small straw fire hung
beneath.
But in 1925 Illinois, we still had them, and one of the last memories I
have of my grandfather is the last hour of a Fourth of July night
forty-eight years ago when Grandpa and I walked out on the lawn and lit
a small fire and filled the pear-shaped red-white-and-blue-striped paper
balloon with hot air, and held the flickering bright-angel presence in
our hands a final moment in front of a porch lined with uncles and aunts
and cousins and mothers and fathers, and then, very softly, let the
thing that was life and light and mystery go out of our fingers up on
the summer air and away over the beginning-to-sleep houses, among the
stars, as fragile, as wondrous, as vulnerable, as lovely as life itself.
I see my grandfather there looking up at that strange drifting light,
thinking his own still thoughts. I see me, my eyes filled with tears,
because it was all over, the night was done, I knew there would never be
another night like this.
No one said anything. We all just looked up at the sky and we breathed
out and in and we all thought the same things, but nobody said. Someone
finally had to say, though, didn't they? And that one is me.
The wine still waits in the cellars below.
My beloved family still sits on the porch in the dark.
The fire balloon still drifts and burns in the night sky of an as yet
unburied summer.
Why and how?
Because I say it is so.
Ray Bradbury Summer, 1974
Dandelion Wine
It was a quiet morning, the town covered over with darkness and at ease
in bed. Summer gathered in the weather, the wind had the proper touch,
the breathing of the world was long and warm and slow. You had only to
rise, lean from your window, and know that this indeed was the first
real time of freedom and living, this was the first morning of summer.
Douglas Spaulding, twelve, freshly wakened, let summer idle him on its
early-morning stream. Lying in his third-story cupola bedroom, he felt
the tall power it gave him, riding high in the June wind, the grandest
tower in town. At night, when the trees washed together, he flashed his
gaze like a beacon from this lighthouse in all directions over swarming
seas of elm and oak and maple. Now ...
"Boy," whispered Douglas.
A whole summer ahead to cross off the calendar, day by day. Like the
goddess Siva in the travel books, he saw his hands jump everywhere,
pluck sour apples, peaches, and midnight plums. He would be clothed in
trees and bushes and rivers. He would freeze, gladly, in the hoarfrosted
icehouse door. He would bake, happily, with ten thousand chickens, in
Grandma's kitchen.
But now--a familiar task awaited him.
One night each week he was allowed to leave his father, his mother, and
his younger brother Tom asleep in their small house next door and run
here, up the dark spiral stairs to his grandparents' cupola, and in this
sorcerer's tower sleep with thunders and visions, to wake before the
crystal jingle of milk bottles and perform his ritual magic.
He stood at the open window in the dark, took a deep breath and exhaled.
The street lights, like candles on a black cake, went out. He exhaled
again and again and the stars began to vanish.
Douglas smiled. He pointed a finger.
There, and there. Now over here, and here ...
Yellow squares were cut in the dim morning earth as house lights winked
slowly on. A sprinkle of windows came suddenly alight miles off in dawn
country.
"Everyone yawn. Everyone up."
The great house stirred below.
"Grandpa, get your teeth from the water glass!" He waited a decent
interval. "Grandma and Great-grandma, fry hot cakes!"
The warm scent of fried batter rose in the drafty halls to stir the
boarders, the aunts, the uncles, the visiting cousins, in their rooms.
"Street where all the Old People live, wake up! Miss Helen Loomis,
Colonel Freeleigh, Miss Bentley! Cough, get up, take pills, move around!
Mr. Jonas, hitch up your horse, get your junk wagon out and around!"
The bleak mansions across the town ravine opened baleful dragon eyes.
Soon, in the morning avenues below, two old women would glide their
electric Green Machine, waving at all the dogs. "Mr. Tridden, run to the
carbarn!" Soon, scattering hot blue sparks above it, the town trolley
would sail the rivering brick streets.
"Ready John Huff, Charlie Woodman?" whispered Douglas to the Street of
Children. "Ready!" to baseballs sponged deep in wet lawns, to rope
swings hung empty in trees.
"Mom, Dad, Tom, wake up."
Clock alarms tinkled faintly. The courthouse clock boomed. Birds leaped
from trees like a net thrown by his hand, singing. Douglas, conducting
an orchestra, pointed to the eastern sky.
The sun began to rise.
He folded his arms and smiled a magician's smile. Yes, sir, he thought,
everyone jumps, everyone runs when I yell. It'll be a fine season. He
gave the town a last snap of his fingers.
Doors slammed open; people stepped out.
Summer 1928 began.
Crossing the lawn that morning, Douglas Spaulding broke a spider web
with his face. A single invisible line on the air touched his brow and
snapped without a sound.
So, with the subtlest of incidents, he knew that this day was going to
be different. It would be different also, because, as his father
explained, driving Douglas and his ten-year-old brother Tom out of town
toward the country, there were some days compounded completely of odor,
nothing but the world blowing in one nostril and out the other. And some
days, he went on, were days of hearing every trump and trill of the
universe. Some days were good for tasting and some for touching. And
some days were good for all the senses at once. This day now, he nodded,
smelled as if a great and nameless orchard had grown up overnight beyond
the hills to fill the entire visible land with its warm freshness. The
air felt like rain, but there were no clouds. Momentarily, a stranger
might laugh off in the woods, but there was silence. ...
Douglas watched the traveling land. He smelled no orchards and sensed no
rain, for without apple trees or clouds he knew neither could exist. And
as for that stranger laughing deep in the woods ... ?
Yet the fact remained--Douglas shivered--this, without reason, was a
special day.
The car stopped at the very center of the quiet forest.
"All right, boys, behave."
They had been jostling elbows.
"Yes, sir."
They climbed out, carrying the blue tin pails away from the lonely dirt
road into the smell of fallen rain.
"Look for bees," said Father. "Bees hang around grapes like boys around
kitchens, Doug?" Douglas looked up suddenly.
"You're off a million miles," said Father. "Look alive. Walk with us."
"Yes, sir."
And they walked through the forest, Father very tall, Douglas moving in
his shadow, and Tom, very small, trotting in his brother's shade. They
came to a little rise and looked ahead. Here, here, did they see? Father
pointed. Here was where the big summer-quiet winds lived and passed in
the green depths, like ghost whales, unseen.
Douglas looked quickly, saw nothing, and felt put upon by his father
who, like Grandpa, lived on riddles. But ... But, still ... Douglas
paused and listened.
Yes, something's going to happen, he thought, I know it!
"Here's maidenhair fern," Dad walked, the tin pail belling in his fist.
"Feel this?" He scuffed the earth. "A million years of good rich
leafmold laid down. Think of the autumns that got by to make this."
"Boy, I walk like an Indian," said Tom. "Not a sound."
Douglas felt but did not feel the deep loam, listening, watchful. We're
surrounded! he thought. It'll happen! What? He stopped. Come out,
wherever you are, whatever you are! he cried silently.
Tom and Dad strolled on the hushed earth ahead.
"Finest lace there is," said Dad quietly.
And he was gesturing up through the trees above to show them how it was
woven across the sky or how the sky was woven into the trees, he wasn't
sure which. But there it was, he smiled, and the weaving went on, green
and blue, if you watched and saw the forest shift its humming loom. Dad
stood comfortably saying this and that, the words easy in his mouth. He
made it easier by laughing at his own declarations just so often. He
liked to listen to the silence, he said, if silence could be listened
to, for, he went on, in that silence you could hear wildflower pollen
sifting down the bee-fried air, by God, the bee-fried air! Listen! the
waterfall of birdsong beyond those trees!
Now, thought Douglas, here it comes! Running! I don't see it! Running!
Almost on me!
"Fox grapes!" said Father. "We're in luck, look here!"
Don't! Douglas gasped.
But Tom and Dad bent down to shove their hands deep in rattling bush.
The spell was shattered. The terrible prowler, the magnificent runner,
the leaper, the shaker of souls, vanished.
Douglas, lost and empty, fell to his knees. He saw his fingers sink
through green shadow and come forth stained with such color that it
seemed he had somehow cut the forest and delved his hand in the open
wound.
"Lunch time, boys!
With buckets half burdened with fox grapes and wild strawberries,
followed by bees which were, no more, no less, said Father, the world
humming under its breath, they sat on a green-mossed log, chewing
sandwiches and trying to listen to the forest the same way Father did.
Douglas felt Dad watching him, quietly amused. Dad started to say
something that had crossed his mind, but instead tried another bite of
sandwich and mused over it.
"Sandwich outdoors isn't a sandwich anymore. Tastes different than
indoors, notice? Got more spice. Tastes like mint and pinesap. Does
wonders for the appetite."
Douglas's tongue hesitated on the texture of bread and deviled ham. No
... no ... it was just a sandwich.
Tom chewed and nodded. "Know just what you mean, Dad!"
It almost happened, thought Douglas. Whatever it was it was Big, my
gosh, it was Big! Something scared it off. Where is it now? Back of that
bush! No, behind me! No here ... almost here ... He kneeded his stomach
secretly.
If I wait, it'll come back. It won't hurt; somehow I know it's not here
to hurt me. What then? What? What?
"You know how many baseball games we played this year, last year, year
before?" said Tom, apropos of nothing. Douglas watched Tom's quickly
moving lips.
"Wrote it down! One thousand five hundred sixty-eight games! How many
times I brushed my teeth in ten years? Six thousand! Washing my hands:
fifteen thousand. Slept: four thousand some-odd times, not counting
naps. Ate six hundred peaches, eight hundred apples. Pears: two hundred.
I'm not hot for pears. Name a thing, I got the statistics! Runs to the
billion millions, things I done, add 'em up, in ten years."
Now, thought Douglas, it's coming close again. Why? Tom talking? But why
Tom? Tom chatting along, mouth crammed with sandwich, Dad there, alert
as a mountain cat on the log, and Tom letting the words rise like quick
soda bubbles in his mouth:
"Books I read: four hundred. Matinees I seen: forty Buck Joneses, thirty
Jack Hoxies, forty-five Tom Mixes, thirty-nine Hoot Gibsons, one hundred
and ninety-two single and separate Felix-the-Cat cartoons, ten Douglas
Fairbankses, eight repeats on Lon Chaney in The Phantom of the Opera,
four Milton Sillses, and one Adolph Menjou thing about love where I
spent ninety hours in the theater toilet waiting for the mush to be over
so I could see The Cat and the Canary or The Bat, where everybody held
onto everybody else and screamed for two hours without letting go.
During that time I figure four hundred lollipops, three hundred Tootsie
Rolls, seven hundred ice-cream cones ...
Tom rolled quietly along his way for another five minutes and then Dad
said, "How many berries you picked so far, Tom?"
"Two hundred fifty-six on the nose!" said Tom instantly.
Dad laughed and lunch was over and they moved again into the shadows to
find fox grapes and the tiny wild strawberries, bent down, all three of
them, hands coming and going, the pails getting heavy, and Douglas
holding his breath, thinking, Yes, yes, it's near again! Breathing on my
neck, almost! Don't look! Work. Just pick, fill up the pail. If you look
you'll scare it off. Don't lose it this time! But how do you bring it
around here where you can see it, stare it right in the eye? How? How?
"Got a snowflake in a matchbox," said Tom, smiling at the wine-glove on
his hand.
Shut up! Douglas wanted to yell. But no, the yell would scare the
echoes, and run the Thing away!
And, wait.., the more Tom talked, the closer the great Thing came, it
wasn't scared of Tom, Tom drew it with his breath, Tom was part of it!
"Last February," said Tom, and chuckled. "Held a matchbox up in a
snowstorm, let one old snowflake fall in, shut it up, ran inside the
house, stashed it in the icebox!"
Close, very close. Douglas stared at Tom's flickering lips. He wanted to
jump around, for he felt a vast tidal wave lift up behind the forest. In
an instant it would smash down, crush them forever ...
"Yes, sir," mused Tom, picking grapes, "I'm the only guy in all Illinois
who's got a snowflake in summer. Precious as diamonds, by gosh. Tomorrow
I'll open it. Doug, you can look, too....
Any other day Douglas might have snorted, struck out, denied it all. But
now, with the great Thing rushing near, falling down in the clear air
above him, he could only nod, eyes shut.
Tom, puzzled, stopped picking berries and turned to stare over at his
brother.
Douglas, hunched over, was an ideal target. Tom leaped, yelling, landed.
They fell, thrashed, and rolled.
No! Douglas squeezed his mind shut. No! But suddenly ... Yes, it's all
right! Yes! The tangle, the contact of bodies, the falling tumble had
not scared off the tidal sea that crashed now, flooding and washing them
along the shore of grass deep through the forest. Knuckles struck his
mouth. He tasted rusty warm blood, grabbed Tom hard, held him tight, and
so in silence they lay, hearts churning, nostrils hissing. And at last,
slowly, afraid he would find nothing, Douglas opened one eye.
And everything, absolutely everything, was there.
The world, like a great iris of an even more gigantic eye, which has
also just opened and stretched out to encompass everything, stared back
at him.
And he knew what it was that had leaped upon him to stay and would not
run away now.
I'm alive, he thought.
His fingers trembled, bright with blood, like the bits of a strange flag
now found and before unseen, and him wondering what country and what
allegiance he owed to it. Holding Tom, but not knowing him there, he
touched his free hand to that blood as if it could be peeled away, held
up, turned over. Then he let go of Tom and lay on his back with his hand
up in the sky and he was a head from which his eyes peered like
sentinels through the portcullis of a strange castle out along a bridge,
his arm, to those fingers where the bright pennant of blood quivered in
the light. "You all right, Doug?" asked Tom.
His voice was at the bottom of a green moss well somewhere underwater,
secret, removed.
The grass whispered under his body. He put his arm down, feeling the
sheath of fuzz on it, and, far away, below, his toes creaking in his
shoes. The wind sighed over his shelled ears. The world slipped bright
over the glassy round of his eyeballs like images sparked in a crystal
sphere. Flowers were sun and fiery spots of sky strewn through the
woodland. Birds flickered like skipped stones across the vast inverted
pond of heaven. His breath raked over his teeth, going in ice, coming
out fire. Insects shocked the air with electric clearness. Ten thousand
individual hairs grew a millionth of an inch on his head. He heard the
twin hearts beating in each ear, the third heart beating in his throat,
the two hearts throbbing his wrists, the real heart pounding his chest.
The million pores on his body opened.
I'm really alive! he thought. I never knew it before, or if I did I
don't remember!
He yelled it loud but silent, a dozen times! Think of it, think of it!
Twelve years old and only now! Now discovering this rare timepiece, this
clock gold-bright and guaranteed to run threescore and ten, left under a
tree and found while wrestling.
"Doug, you okay?"
Douglas yelled, grabbed Tom, and rolled.
"Doug, you're crazy!"
"Crazy!"
They spilled downhill, the sun in their mouths, in their eyes like
shattered lemon glass, gasping like trout thrown out on a bank, laughing
till they cried.
"Doug, you're not mad?"
"No, no, no, no, no!"
Douglas, eyes shut, saw spotted leopards pad in the dark.
"Tom!" Then quieter. "Tom ... does everyone in the world ... know he's
alive?"
"Sure. Heck, yes!"
The leopards trotted soundlessly off through darker lands where eyeballs
could not turn to follow.
"I hope they do," whispered Douglas. "Oh, I sure hope they know."
Douglas opened his eyes. Dad was standing high above him there in the
green-leaved sky, laughing, hands on hips. Their eyes met. Douglas
quickened. Dad knows, he thought. It was all planned. He brought us here
on purpose, so this could happen to me! He's in on it, he knows it all.
And now he knows that I know.
A hand came down and seized him through the air. Swayed on his feet with
Tom and Dad, still bruised and rumpled, puzzled and awed, Douglas held
his strange-boned elbows tenderly and licked the fine cut lip with
satisfaction. Then he looked at Dad and Tom.
"I'll carry all the pails," he said. "This once, let me haul
everything."
They handed over the pails with quizzical smiles.
He stood swaying slightly, the forest collected, full-weighted and heavy
with syrup, clenched hard in his down-slung hands. I want to feel all
there is to feel, he thought. Let me feel tired, now, let me feel tired.
I mustn't forget, I'm alive, I know I'm alive, T mustn't forget it
tonight or tomorrow or the day after that.
The bees followed and the smell of fox grapes and yellow summer followed
as he walked heavy-laden and half drunk, his fingers wonderously
callused, arms numb, feet stumbling so his father caught his shoulder.
"No," mumbled Douglas, "I'm all right. I'm fine...."
It took half an hour for the sense of the grass, the roots, the stones,
the bark of the messy log, to fade from where they had patterned his
arms and legs and back. While he pondered this, let it slip, slide,
dissolve away, his brother and his quiet father followed behind,
allowing him to pathfind the forest alone out toward that incredible
highway which would take them back to the town....
The town, then, later in the day.
And yet another harvest.
Grandfather stood on the wide front porch like a captain surveying the
vast unmotioned calms of a season dead ahead. He questioned the wind and
the untouchable sky and the lawn on which stood Douglas and Tom to
question only him.
"Grandpa, are they ready? Now?"
Grandfather pinched his chin. "Five hundred, a thousand, two thousand
easy. Yes, yes, a good supply. Pick 'em easy, pick 'em all. A dime for
every sack delivered to the press!"
"Hey!"
The boys bent, smiling. They picked the golden flowers. The flowers that
flooded the world, dripped off lawns onto brick streets, tapped softly
at crystal cellar windows and agitated themselves so that on all sides
lay the dazzle and glitter of molten sun.
"Every year," said Grandfather. "They run amuck; I let them. Pride of
lions in the yard. Stare, and they burn a hole in your retina. A common
flower, a weed that no one sees, yes. But for us, a noble thing, the
dandelion."
So, plucked carefully, in sacks, the dandelions were carried below. The
cellar dark glowed with their arrival. The wine press stood open, cold.
A rush of flowers warmed it. The press, replaced, its screw rotated,
twirled by Grandfather, squeezed gently on the crop.
"There... so..."
The golden tide, the essence of this fine fair month ran, then gushed
from the spout below, to be crocked, skimmed of ferment, and bottled in
clean ketchup shakers, then ranked in sparkling rows in cellar gloom.
Dandelion wine.
The words were summer on the tongue. The wine was summer caught and
stoppered. And now that Douglas knew, he really knew he was alive, and
moved turning through the world to touch and see it all, it was only
right and proper that some of his new knowledge, some of this special
vintage day would be sealed away for opening on a January day with snow
falling fast and the sun unseen for weeks or months and perhaps some of
the miracle by then forgotten and in need of renewal. Since this was
going to be a summer of unguessed wonders, he wanted it all salvaged and
labeled so that any time he wished, he might tiptoe down in this dank
twilight and reach up his fingertips.
And there, row upon row, with the soft gleam of flowers opened at
morning, with the light of this June sun glowing through a faint skin of
dust, would stand the dandelion wine. Peer through it at the wintry
day--the snow melted to grass, the trees were reinhabitated with bird,
leaf, and blossoms like a continent of butterflies breathing on the
wind. And peering through, color sky from iron to blue.
Hold summer in your hand, pour summer in a glass, a tiny glass of
course, the smallest tingling sip for children; change the season in
your veins by raising glass to lip and tilting summer in.
"Ready, now, the rain barrel!"
Nothing else in the world would do but the pure waters which had been
summoned from the lakes far away and the sweet fields of grassy dew on
early morning, lifted to the open sky, carried in laundered clusters
nine hundred miles, brushed with wind, electrified with high voltage,
and condensed upon cool air. This water, falling, raining, gathered yet
more of the heavens in its crystals. Taking something of the east wind
and the west wind and the north wind and the south, the water made rain
and the rain, within this hour of rituals, would be well on its way to
wine.
Douglas ran with the dipper. He plunged it deep in the rain barrel.
"Here we go!"
The water was silk in the cup; clear, faintly blue silk. It softened the
lip and the throat and the heart, if drunk. This water must be carried
in dipper and bucket to the cellar, there to be leavened in freshets, in
mountain streams, upon the dandelion harvest.
Even Grandma, when snow was whirling fast, dizzying the world, blinding
windows, stealing breath from gasping mouths, even Grandma, one day in
February, would vanish to the cellar.
Above, in the vast house, there would be coughings, sneezings,
wheezings, and groans, childish fevers, throats raw as butcher's meat,
noses like bottled cherries, the stealthy microbe everywhere.
Then, rising from the cellar like a June goddess, Grandma would come,
something hidden but obvious under her knitted shawl. This, carried to
every miserable room upstairs-and-down would be dispensed with aroma and
clarity into neat glasses, to be swigged neatly. The medicines of
another time, the balm of sun and idle August afternoons, the faintly
heard sounds of ice wagons passing on brick avenues, the rush of silver
skyrockets and the fountaining of lawn mowers moving through ant
countries, all these, all these in a glass.
Yes, even Grandma, drawn to the cellar of winter for a June adventure,
might stand alone and quietly, in secret conclave with her own soul and
spirit, as did Grandfather and Father and Uncle Pert, or some of the
boarders, communing with a last touch of a calendar long departed, with
the picnics and the warm rains and the smell of fields of wheat and new
popcorn and bending hay. Even Grandma, repeating and repeating the fine
and golden words, even as they were said now in this moment when the
flowers were dropped into the press, as they would be repeated every
winter for all the white winters in time. Saying them over and over on
the lips, like a smile, like a sudden patch of sunlight in the dark.
Dandelion wine. Dandelion wine. Dandelion wine.
You did not hear them coming. You hardly heard them go. The grass bent
down, sprang up again. They passed like cloud shadows downhill ... the
boys of summer, running.
Douglas, left behind, was lost. Panting, he stopped by the rim of the
ravine, at the edge of the softly blowing abyss. Here, ears pricked like
a deer, he snuffed a danger that was old a billion years ago. Here the
town, divided, fell away in halves. Here civilization ceased. Here was
only growing earth and a million deaths and rebirths every hour.
And here the paths, made or yet unmade, that told of the need of boys
traveling, always traveling, to be men.
Douglas turned. This path led in a great dusty snake to the ice house
where winter lived on the yellow days. This path raced for the
blast-furnace sands of the lake shore in July. This to trees where boys
might grow like sour and still-green crab apples, hid among leaves. This
to peach orchard, grape arbor, watermelons lying like tortoise-shell
cats slumbered by sun. That path, abandoned, but wildly swiveling, to
school! This, straight as an arrow, to Saturday cowboy matinees. And
this, by the creek waters, to wilderness beyond town....
Douglas squinted.
Who could say where town or wideness began? Who could say which owned
what and what owned which? There was always and forever that indefinable
place where the two struggled and one of them won for a season to
possess a certain avenue, a deli, a glen, a tree, a bush. The thin
lapping of the great continental sea of grass and flower, starting far
out in lonely farm country, moved inward with the thrust of seasons.
Each night the wilderness, the meadows, the far country flowed
down-creek through ravine and welled up in town with a smell of grass
and water, and the town was disinhabited and dead and gone back to
earth. And each morning a little more of the ravine edged up into town,
threatening to swamp garages like leaking rowboats, devour ancient cars
which had been left to the flaking mercies of rain and therefore rust.
"Hey! Hey!" John Huff and Charlie Woodman ran through the mystery of
ravine and town and time. "Hey!"
Douglas moved slowly down the path. The ravine was indeed the place
where you came to look at the two things of life, the ways of man and
the ways of the natural world. The town was, after all, only a large
ship filled with constantly moving survivors, bailing out the grass,
chipping away the rust. Now and again a lifeboat, a shanty, kin to the
mother ship, lost out to the quiet storm of seasons, sank down in silent
waves of termite and ant into swallowing ravine to feel the flicker of
grasshoppers rattling like dry paper in hot weeds, become soundproofed
with spider dust and finally, in avalanche of shingle and tar, collapse
like kindling shrines into a bonfire, which thunderstorms ignited with
blue lightning, while flash-photographing the triumph of the wilderness.
It was this then, the mystery of man seizing from the land and the land
seizing back, year after year, that drew Douglas, knowing the towns
never really won, they merely existed in calm peril, fully accoutered
with lawn mower, bug spray and hedge shears, swimming steadily as long
as civilization said to swim, but each house ready to sink in green
tides, buried forever, when the last man ceased and his trowels and
mowers shattered to cereal flakes of rust.
The town. The wideness. The houses. The ravine. Douglas blinked back and
forth. But how to relate the two, make sense of the interchange when...
His eyes moved down to the ground.
The first rite of summer, the dandelion picking, the starting of the
wine, was over. Now the second rite waited for him to make the motions,
but he stood very still.
"Doug ... come on ... Doug ...!" The running boys faded.
"I'm alive," said Douglas. "But what's the use? They're more alive than
me. How come? How come?" And standing alone, he knew the answer, staring
down at his motionless feet ...
Late that night, going home from the show with his mother and father and
his brother Tom, Douglas saw the tennis shoes in the bright store
window. He glanced quickly away, but his ankles were seized, his feet
suspended, then rushed. The earth spun; the shop awnings slammed their
canvas wings overhead with the thrust of his body running. His mother
and father and brother walked quietly on both sides of him. Douglas
walked backward, watching the tennis shoes in the midnight window left
behind.
"It was a nice movie," said Mother.
Douglas murmured, "It was ..."
It was June and long past time for buying the special shoes that were
quiet as a summer rain falling on the walks. June and the earth full of
raw power and everything everywhere in motion. The grass was still
pouring in from the country, surrounding the sidewalks, stranding the
houses. Any moment the town would capsize, go down and leave not a stir
in the clover and weeds. And here Douglas stood, trapped on the dead
cement and the red-brick streets, hardly able to move.
"Dad!" He blurted it out. "Back there in that window, those Cream-Sponge
Para Litefoot Shoes ..."
His father didn't even turn. "Suppose you tell me why you need a new
pair of sneakers. Can you do that?"
"Well.. ."
It was because they felt the way it feels every summer when you take off
your shoes for the first time and run in the grass. They felt like it
feels sticking your feet out of the hot covers in wintertime to let the
cold wind from the open window blow on them suddenly and you let them
stay out a long time until you pull them back in under the covers again
to feel them, like packed snow. The tennis shoes felt like it always
feels the first time every year wading in the slow waters of the creek
and seeing your feet below, half an inch further downstream, with
refraction, than the real part of you above water.
"Dad," said Douglas, "it's hard to explain."
Somehow the people who made tennis shoes knew what boys needed and
wanted. They put marshmallows and coiled springs in the soles and they
wove the rest out of grasses bleached and fired in the wilderness.
Somewhere deep in the soft loam of the shoes the thin hard sinews of the
buck deer were hidden. The people that made the shoes must have watched
a lot of winds blow the trees and a lot of rivers going down to the
lakes. Whatever it was, it was in the shoes, and it was summer.
Douglas tried to get all this in words.
"Yes," said Father, "but what's wrong with last year's sneakers? Why
can't you dig them out of the closet?"
Well, he felt sorry for boys who lived in California where they wore
tennis shoes all year and never knew what it was to get winter off your
feet, peel off the iron leather shoes all full of snow and rain and run
barefoot for a day and then lace on the first new tennis shoes of the
season, which was better than barefoot. The magic was always in the new
pair of shoes. The magic might die by the first of September, but now in
late June there was still plenty of magic, and shoes like these could
jump you over trees and rivers and houses. And if you wanted, they could
jump you over fences and sidewalks and dogs.
"Don't you see?" said Douglas. "I just can't use last year's pair."
For last year's pair were dead inside. They had been fine when he
started them out, last year. But by the end of summer, every year, you
always found out, you always knew, you couldn't really jump over rivers
and trees and houses in them, and they were dead. But this was a new
year, and he felt that this time, with this new pair of shoes, he could
do anything, anything at all.
They walked up on the steps to their house. "Save your money," said Dad.
"In five or six weeks--"
"Summer'll be over!"
Lights out, with Tom asleep, Douglas lay watching his feet, far away
down there at the end of the bed in the moonlight, free of the heavy
iron shoes, the big chunks of winter fallen away from them.
"Reasons. I've got to think of reasons for the shoes."
Well, as anyone knew, the hills around town were wild with friends
putting cows to riot, playing barometer to the atmospheric changes,
taking sun, peeling like calendars each day to take more sun. To catch
those friends, you must run much faster than foxes or squirrels. As for
the town, it steamed with enemies grown irritable with heat, so
remembering every winter argument and insult. Find friends, ditch
enemies! That was the Cream-Sponge Para Litefoot motto. Does the world
run too fast? Want to catch up? Want to be alert, stay alert? Litefoot,
then! Litefoot!"
He held his coin bank up and heard the faint small tinkling, the airy
weight of money there.
Whatever you want, he thought, you got to make your own way. During the
night now, let's find that path through the forest....
Downtown, the store lights went out, one by one. A wind blew in the
window. It was like a river going downstream and his feet wanting to go
with it.
In his dreams he heard a rabbit running running running in the deep warm
grass.
Old Mr. Sanderson moved through his shoe store as the proprietor of a
pet shop must move through his shop where are kenneled animals from
everywhere in the world, touching each one briefly along the way. Mr.
Sanderson brushed his hands over the shoes in the window, and some of
them were like cats to him and some were like dogs; he touched each pair
with concern, adjusting laces, fixing tongues. Then he stood in the
exact center of the carpet and looked around, nodding.
There was a sound of growing thunder.
One moment, the door to Sanderson's Shoe Emporium was empty. The next,
Douglas Spaulding stood clumsily there, staring down at his leather
shoes as if these heavy things could not be pulled up out of the cement.
The thunder had stopped when his shoes stopped. Now, with painful
slowness, daring to look only at the money in his cupped hand, Douglas
moved out of the bright sunlight of Saturday noon. He made careful
stacks of nickels, dimes, and quarters on the counter, like someone
playing chess and worried if the next move carried him out into sun or
deep into shadow. "Don't say a word!" said Mr. Sanderson.
Douglas froze.
"First, I know just what you want to buy," said Mr. Sanderson. "Second,
I see you every afternoon at my window; you think I don't see? You're
wrong. Third, to give it its full name, you want the Royal Crown
Cream-Sponge Para Litefoot Tennis Shoes: 'LIKE MENTHOL ON YOUR FEET!'
Fourth, you want credit."
"No!" cried Douglas, breathing hard, as if he'd run all night in his
dreams. "I got something better than credit to offer!" he gasped.
"Before I tell, Mr. Sanderson, you got to do me one small favor. Can you
remember when was the last time you yourself wore a pair of Litefoot
sneakers, sir?"
Mr. Sanderson's face darkened. "Oh, ten, twenty, say, thirty years ago.
Why ... ?"
"Mr. Sanderson, don't you think you owe it to your customers, sir, to at
least try the tennis shoes you sell, for just one minute, so you know
how they feel? People forget if they don't keep testing things. United
Cigar Store man smokes cigars, don't he? Candy-store man samples his own
stuff, I should think. So ..."
"You may have noticed," said the old man, "I'm wearing shoes."
"But not sneakers, sir! How you going to sell sneakers unless you can
rave about them and how you going to rave about them unless you know
them?"
Mr. Sanderson backed off a little distance from the boy's fever, one
hand to his chin. "Well ..."
"Mr. Sanderson," said Douglas, "you sell me something and I'll sell you
something just as valuable."
"Is it absolutely necessary to the sale that I put on a pair of the
sneakers, boy?" said the old man.
"I sure wish you could, sir!"
The old man sighed. A minute later, seated panting quietly, he laced the
tennis shoes to his long narrow feet. They looked detached and alien
down there next to the dark cuffs of his business suit. Mr. Sanderson
stood up.
"How do they feel?" asked the boy.
"How do they feel, he asks; they feel fine." He started to sit down.
"Please!" Douglas held out his hand. "Mr. Sanderson, now could you kind
of rock back and forth a little, sponge around, bounce kind of, while I
tell you the rest? It's this: I give you my money, you give me the
shoes, I owe you a dollar. But, Mr. Sanderson, but--soon as I get those
shoes on, you know what happens?"
"What?"
"Bang! I deliver your packages, pick up packages, bring you coffee, bum
your trash, run to the post office, telegraph office, library! You'll
see twelve of me in and out, in and out, every minute. Feel those shoes,
Mr. Sanderson, feel how fast they'd take me? All those springs inside?
Feel all the running inside? Feel how they kind of grab hold and can't
let you alone and don't like you just standing there? Feel how quick I'd
be doing the things you'd rather not bother with? You stay in the nice
cool store while I'm jumping all around town! But it's not me really,
it's the shoes. They're going like mad down alleys, cutting corners, and
back! There they go!"
Mr. Sanderson stood amazed with the rush of words. When the words got
going the flow carried him; he began to sink deep in the shoes, to flex
his toes, limber his arches, test his ankles. He rocked softly,
secretly, back and forth in a small breeze from the open door. The
tennis shoes silently hushed themselves deep in the carpet, sank as in a
jungle grass, in loam and resilient clay. He gave one solemn bounce of
his heels in the yeasty dough, in the yielding and welcoming earth.
Emotions hurried over his face as if many colored lights had been
switched on and off. His mouth hung slightly open. Slowly he gentled and
rocked himself to a halt, and the boy's voice faded and they stood there
looking at each other in a tremendous and natural silence.
A few people drifted by on the sidewalk outside, in the hot sun.
Still the man and boy stood there, the boy glowing, the man with
revelation in his face.
"Boy," said the old man at last, "in five years, how would you like a
job selling shoes in this emporium?"
"Gosh, thanks, Mr. Sanderson, but I don't know what I'm going to be
yet."
"Anything you want to be, son," said the old man, "you'll be. No one
will ever stop you."
The old man walked lightly across the store to the wall of ten thousand
boxes, came back with some shoes for the boy, and wrote up a list on
some paper while the boy was lacing the shoes on his feet and then
standing there, waiting.
The old man held out his list. "A dozen things you got to do for me this
afternoon. Finish them, we're even Stephen, and you're fired."
"Thanks, Mr. Sanderson!" Douglas bounded away.
"Stop!" cried the old man.
Douglas pulled up and turned.
Mr. Sanderson leaned forward.
"How do they feel?" The boy looked down at his feet deep in the rivers,
in the fields of wheat, in the wind that already was rushing him out of
the town. He looked up at the old man, his eyes burning, his mouth
moving, but no sound came out.
"Antelopes?" said the old man, looking from the boy's face to his shoes.
"Gazelles?"
The boy thought about it, hesitated, and nodded a quick nod. Almost
immediately he vanished. He just spun about with a whisper and went off.
The door stood empty. The sound of the tennis shoes faded in the jungle
heat.
Mr. Sanderson stood in the sun-blazed door, listening. From a long time
ago, when he dreamed as a boy, he remembered the sound. Beautiful
creatures leaping under the sky, gone through brush, under trees, away,
and only the soft echo of their running left behind.
"Antelopes," said Mr. Sanderson. "Gazelles."
He bent to pick up the boy's abandoned winter shoes, heavy with
forgotten rains and long-melted snows. Moving out of the blazing sun,
walking softly, lightly, slowly, he headed back toward civilization....
He brought out a yellow nickel tablet. He brought out a yellow
Ticonderoga pencil. He opened the tablet. He licked the pencil.
"Tom," he said, "you and your statistics gave me an idea. I'm going to
do the same, keep track of things. For instance: you realize that every
summer we do things over and over we did the whole darn summer before?"
"Like what, Doug?"
"Like making dandelion wine, like buying these new tennis shoes, like
shooting off the first firecracker of the year, like making lemonade,
like getting slivers in our feet, like picking wild fox grapes. Every
year the same things, same way, no change, no difference. That's one
half of summer, Tom."
"What's the other half?"
"Things we do for the first time ever."
"Like eating olives?"
"Bigger than that. Like finding out maybe that Grandpa or Dad don't know
everything in the world."
"They know every dam thing there is to know, and don't you forget it!"
"Tom, don't argue, I already got it written down under Discoveries and
Revelations. They don't know everything. But it's no crime. That I
discovered, too."
"What other new crazy stuff you got in there?"
"I'm alive."
"Heck, that's old!"
"Thinking about it, noticing it, is new. You do things and don't watch.
Then all of a sudden you look and see what you're doing and it's the
first time, really. I'm going to divide the summer up in two parts.
First part of this tablet is titled: RITES AND CEREMONIES. The first
root beer pop of the year. The first time running barefoot in the grass
of the year. First time almost drowning in the lake of the year. First
watermelon. First mosquito. First harvest of dandelions. Those are the
things we do over and over and over and never think. Now here in back,
like I said, is DISCOVERIES AND REVELATIONS or maybe ILLUMINATIONS,
that's a swell word, or INTUITIONS, okay? In other words you do an old
familiar thing, like bottling dandelion wine, and you put that under
RITES AND CEREMONIES. And then you think about it, and what you think,
crazy or not, you put under DISCOVERIES AND REVELATIONS. Here's what I
got on the wine: Every rime you bottle it, you got a whole chunk of 1928
put away, safe. How you like that, Tom?"
"I got lost a mile back somewhere."
"Let me show you another. Up front under CEREMONIES I got: First
argument and licking of Summer 1928 by Dad, morning of June 24th. In
back under REVELATIONS I got: The reason why grownups and kids fight is
because they belong to separate races. Look at them, different from us.
Look at us, different from them. Separate races, and 'never the twain
shall meet. Put that in your pipe and smoke it, Tom!"
"Doug, you hit it, you hit it! That's right! That's exactly why we don't
get along with Mom or Dad. Trouble, trouble, from sunrise to supper!
Boy, you're a genius!"
"Any time this next three months you see something done over and over,
tell me. Think about it, and tell me that. Come Labor Day, we'll add up
the summer and see what we got!"
"I got a statistic for you right now. Grab your pencil, Doug. There are
five billion trees in the world. I looked it up. Under every tree is a
shadow, right? So, then, what makes night? I'll tell you: shadows
crawling out from under five billion trees! Think of it! Shadows running
around in the air, muddying the waters you might say. If only we could
figure a way to keep those dam five billion shadows under those trees,
we could stay up half the night, Doug, because there'd be no night!
There you are; something old, something new."
"That's old and new, all right." Douglas licked the yellow Ticonderoga
pencil, whose name he dearly loved. "Say it again."
"Shadows are under five billion trees ..."
Yes, summer was rituals, each with its natural time and place. The
ritual of lemonade or ice-tea making, the ritual of wine, shoes, or no
shoes, and at last, swiftly following the others, with quiet dignity,
the ritual of the front-porch swing.
On the third day of summer in the late afternoon Grandfather reappeared
from the front door to gaze serenely at the two empty eye rings in the
ceiling of the porch. Moving to the geranium-pot-lined rail like Ahab
surveying the mild mild day and mild-looking sky, he wet his finger to
test the wind, and shucked his coat to see how shirt sleeves felt in the
westering hours. He acknowledged the salutes of other captains on yet
other flowered porches, out themselves to discern the gentle ground
swell of weather, oblivious to their wives chirping or snapping like
fuzzball hand dogs hidden behind black porch screens.
"All right, Douglas, let's set it up."
In the garage they found, dusted, and carried forth the howdah, as it
were, for the quiet summer-night festivals, the swing chair which
Grandpa chained to the porch-ceiling eyelets.
Douglas, being lighter, was first to sit in the swing. Then, after a
moment, Grandfather gingerly settled his pontifical weight beside the
boy. Thus they sat, smiling at each other, nodding, as they swung
silently back and forth, back and forth.
Ten minutes later Grandma appeared with water buckets and brooms to wash
down and sweep off the porch. Other chairs, rockers and straight-backs,
were summoned from the house.
"Always like to start sitting early in the season," said Grandpa,
"before the mosquitoes thicken."
About seven o'clock you could hear the chairs scraping back from the
tables, someone experimenting with a yellow-toothed piano, if you stood
outside the dining-room window and listened. Matches being struck, the
first dishes bubbling in the suds and tinkling on the wall racks,
somewhere, faintly, a phonograph playing. And then as the evening
changed the hour, at house after house on the twilight streets, under
the immense oaks and elms, on shady porches, people would begin to
appear, like those figures who tell good or bad weather in rain-or-shine
clocks.
Uncle Bert, perhaps Grandfather, then Father, and some of the cousins;
the men all coming out first into the syrupy evening, blowing smoke,
leaving the women's voices behind in the cooling-warm kitchen to set
their universe aright. Then the first male voices under the porch brim,
the feet up, the boys fringed on the worn steps or wooden rails where
sometime during the evening something, a boy or a geranium pot, would
fall off.
At last, like ghosts hovering momentarily behind the door screen,
Grandma, Great-grandma, and Mother would appear, and the men would
shift, move, and offer seats. The women carried varieties of fans with
them, folded newspapers, bamboo whisks, or perfumed kerchiefs, to start
the air moving about their faces as they talked.
What they talked of all evening long, no one remembered next day. It
wasn't important to anyone what the adults talked about; it was only
important that the sounds came and went over the delicate ferns that
bordered the porch on three sides; it was only important that the
darkness filled the town like black water being poured over the houses,
and that the cigars glowed and that the conversations went on, and on.
The female gossip moved out, disturbing the first mosquitoes so they
danced in frenzies on the air. The male voices invaded the old house
timbers; if you closed your eyes and put your head down against the
floor boards you could hear the men's voices rumbling like a distant,
political earthquake, constant, unceasing, rising or falling a pitch.
Douglas sprawled back on the dry porch planks, completely contented and
reassured by these voices, which would speak on through eternity, flow
in a stream of murmurings over his body, over his closed eyelids, into
his drowsy ears, for all time. The rocking chairs sounded like crickets,
the crickets sounded like rocking chairs, and the moss-covered rain
barrel by the dining-room window produced another generation of
mosquitoes to provide a topic of conversation through endless summers
ahead.
Sitting on the summer-night porch was so good, so easy and so reassuring
that it could never be done away with. These were rituals that were
right and lasting; the lighting of pipes, the pale hands that moved
knitting needles in the dimness, the eating of foil-wrapped, chilled
Eskimo Pies, the coming and going of all the people. For at some time or
other during the evening, everyone visited here; the neighbors down the
way, the people across the street; Miss Fern and Miss Roberta humming by
in their electric runabout, giving Tom or Douglas a ride around the
block and then coming up to sit down and fan away the fever in their
cheeks; or Mr. Jonas, the junkman, having left his horse and wagon
hidden in the alley, and ripe t, bursting with words, would come up the
steps looking as fresh as if his talk had never been said before, and
somehow it never had. And last of all, the children, who had been off
squinting their way through a last hide-and-seek or kick-the-can,
panting, glowing, would sickle quietly back like boomerangs along the
soundless lawn, to sink beneath the talking talking talking of the porch
voices which would weigh and gentle them down....
Oh, the luxury of lying in the fern night and the grass night and the
night of susurrant, slumbrous voices weaving the dark together. The
grownups had forgotten he was there, so still, so quiet Douglas lay,
noting the plans they were making for his and their own futures. And the
voices chanted, drifted, in moonlit clouds of cigarette smoke while the
moths, like late appleblossoms come alive, tapped faintly about the far
street lights, and the voices moved on into the coming years....
In front of the United Cigar Store this evening the men were gathered to
burn dirigibles, sink battleships, blow up dynamite works and, all in
all, savor the very bacteria in their porcelain mouths that would
someday stop them cold. Clouds of annihilation loomed and blew away in
their cigar smoke about a nervous figure who could be seen dimly
listening to the sound of shovels and spades and the intonations of
"ashes to ashes, dust to dust." This figure was that of Leo Auffmann,
the town jeweler, who, widening his large liquid-dark eyes, at last
threw up his childlike hands and cried out in dismay.
"Stop! In God's name, get out of that graveyard!"
"Lee, how right you are," said Grandfather Spaulding, passing on his
nightly stroll with his grandsons Douglas and Tom. "But, Lee, only you
can shut these doom-talkers up Invent something that will make the
future brighter, well rounded, infinitely joyous. You've invented
bicycles, fixed the penny-arcade contraptions, been our town movie
projectionist, haven't you?"
"Sure," said Douglas. "invent us a happiness machine!"
The men laughed.
"Don't," said Leo Auffmann. "How have we used machines so far, to make
people cry? Yes! Every time man and the machine look like they will get
on all right--boom! Someone adds a cog, airplanes drop bombs on us, cars
run us off cliffs. So is the boy wrong to ask? No! No ..."
His voice faded as Leo Auffmann moved to the curb to touch his bicycle
as if it were an animal.
"What can I lose?" he murmured. "A little skin off my fingers, a few
pounds of metal, some sleep? I'll do it, so help me!"
"Lee," said Grandfather, "we didn't mean--"
But Leo Auffmann was gone, pedaling off through the warm summer evening,
his voice drifting back. "... I'll do it...."
"You know," said Tom, in awe, "I bet he will."
Watching him cycle the brick streets of evening, you could see that Leo
Auffmann was a man who coasted along, enjoying the way the thistles
ticked in the hot grass when the wind blew like a furnace, or the way
the electric power lines sizzled on the rain-wet poles. He was a man who
did not suffer but pleasured in sleepless nights of brooding on the
great clock of the universe running down or winding itself up, who could
tell? But many nights, listening, he decided first one way and then the
other ...
The shocks of life, he thought, biking along, what were they? Getting
born, growing up, growing old, dying. Not much to do about the first.
But--the other three?
The wheels of his Happiness Machine spun whirling golden light spokes
along the ceiling of his head. A machine, now, to help boys change from
peach fuzz to briar bramble, girls from toadstool to nectarine. And in
the years when your shadow leaned clear across the land as you lay abed
nights with your heartbeat mounting to the billions, his invention must
let a man drowse easy in the falling leaves like the boys in autumn who,
comfortably strewn in the dry stacks, are content to be a part of the
death of the world....
"Papa!"
His six children, Saul, Marshall, Joseph, Rebecca, Ruth, Naomi, all ages
from five to fifteen, came rushing across the lawn to take his bike,
each touching him at once.
"We waited. We got ice cream!"
Moving toward the porch, he could feel his wife's smile there in the
dark.
Five minutes passed in comfortable eating silence, then, holding a
spoonful of moon-colored ice cream up as if it were the whole secret of
the universe to be tasted carefully he said, "Lena? What would you think
if I tried to invent a Happiness Machine?"
"Something's wrong?" she asked quickly.
Grandfather walked Douglas and Tom home. Halfway there, Charlie Woodman
and John Huff and some other boys rushed by like a swarm of meteors,
their gravity so huge they pulled Douglas away from Grandfather and Tom
and swept him off toward the ravine.
"Don't get lost, son!"
"I won't... I won't.. ."
The boys plunged into darkness.
Tom and Grandfather walked the rest of the way in silence, except when
they turned in at home and Tom said, "boy, a Happiness Machine--hot
diggety!"
"Don't hold your breath," said Grandpa.
The courthouse clock struck eight.
The courthouse clock struck nine and it was getting late and it was
really night on this small street in a small town in a big state on a
large continent on a planet earth hurtling down the pit of space toward
nowhere or somewhere and Tom feeling every mile of the long drop. He sat
by the front-door screen looking out at that rushing blackness that
looked very innocent as if it was holding still. Only when you closed
your eyes and lay down could you feel the world spinning under your bed
and hollowing your ears with a black sea that came in and broke on
cliffs that weren't there.
There was a smell of rain. Mother was ironing and sprinkling water from
a corked ketchup bottle over the crackling dry clothes behind Tom.
One store was still open about a block away--Mrs. Singer's.
Finally, just before it was time for Mrs. Singer to close her store,
Mother relented and told Tom, "Run get a pint of ice cream and be sure
she packs it tight."
He asked if he could get a scoop of chocolate on top, because he didn't
like vanilla, and Mother agreed. He clutched the money and ran
barefooted over the warm evening cement sidewalk, under the apple and
oak trees, toward the store. The town was so quiet and far off you could
hear only the crickets sounding in the spaces beyond the hot indigo
trees that hold back the stars.
His bare feet slapped the pavement. He crossed the street and found Mrs.
Singer moving ponderously about her store, singing Yiddish melodies.
"Pint ice cream?" she said. "Chocolate on top? Yes!"
He watched her fumble the metal top off the ice-cream freezer and
manipulate the scoop, packing the cardboard pint chock-full with
"chocolate on top, yes!" He gave the money, received the chill, icy
pack, and rubbing it across his brow and cheek, laughing, thumped
barefootedly homeward. Behind him the lights of the lonely little store
blinked out and there was only a street light shimmering on the corner,
and the whole city seemed to be going to sleep.
Opening the screen door, he found Mom still ironing. She looked hot and
irritated but she smiled just the same.
"When will Dad be home from lodge meeting?" he asked.
"About eleven or eleven-thirty," Mother replied. She took the ice cream
to the kitchen, divided it. Giving him his special portion of chocolate,
she dished out some for herself and the rest was put away, "for Douglas
and your father when they come."
They sat enjoying the ice cream, wrapped at the core of the deep quiet
summer night. His mother and himself and the night all around their
small house on the small street. He licked each spoonful of ice cream
thoroughly before digging for another, and Mom put her ironing board
away and the hot iron in its open case cooling, and she sat in the
armchair by the phonograph, eating her dessert and saying, "My land, it
was a hot day today. Earth soaks up all the heat and lets it out at
night. It'll be soggy sleeping.
They both sat listening to the night, pressed down by every window and
door and complete silence because the radio needed a new battery, and
they had played all the Knickerbocker Quartet records and Al Jolson and
Two Black Crows records to exhaustion; so Tom just sat on the hardwood
floor and looked out into the dark dark dark, pressing his nose against
the screen until the flesh of its tip was molded into small dark
squares.
"I wonder where Doug is? It's almost nine-thirty."
"He'll be here," Tom said, knowing very well that Douglas would be.
He followed Mom out to wash the dishes. Each sound, each rattle of spoon
or dish was amplified in the baked evening. Silently they went to the
living room, removed the couch cushions and, together, yanked it open
and extended it down into the double bed it secretly was. Mother made
the bed, punching pillows neatly to flump them up for their heads. Then,
as he was unbuttoning his shirt, she said, "Wait awhile, Tom."
"Why?"
"Because I say so."
"You look funny, Mom."
Mom sat down a moment, then stood up, went to the door and called. He
listened to her calling and calling, "Douglas, Douglas, oh Doug!
Douglasssssss!" over and over. Her calling floated out into the summer
warm dark and never came back. The echoes paid no attention.
Douglas. Douglas. Douglas.
Douglas!
And as he sat on the floor, a coldness that was not ice cream and not
winter, and not part of summer's heat, went through Tom. He noticed
Mom's eyes sliding, blinking; the way she stood undecided and was
nervous. All of these things.
She opened the screen door. Stepping out into the night, she walked down
the steps and down the front sidewalk under the lilac bush. He listened
to her moving feet.
She called again.
Silence.
She called twice more. Tom sat in the room. Any moment now, Douglas
would answer from down the long long narrow street, "All right, Mom! All
right, Mother! Hey!"
But he didn't answer. And for two minutes Tom sat looking at the made-up
bed, the silent radio, the silent phonograph, at the chandelier with the
crystal bobbins gleaming quietly, at the rug with the scarlet and purple
curlicues on it. He stubbed his toe on the bed purposely to see if it
hurt. It did.
Whining, the screen door opened and Mother said, "Come on, Tom. We'll
take a walk." "Where to?"
"Just down the block. Come on."
He took her hand. Together they walked down St. James Street. Underfoot
the concrete was still warm, and the crickets were sounding louder
against the darkening dark. They reached a corner, turned, and walked
toward the West Ravine.
Off somewhere a car floated by, flashing its lights in the distance.
There was such a complete lack of life, light, and activity. Here and
there, back off from where they were walking, faint squares of light
glowed where people were still up. But most of the houses, darkened,
were sleeping already, and there were a few lightless places where the
occupants of a dwelling sat talking low night talk on their front
porches. You heard a porch swing squeaking as you walked by.
"I wish your father was home," said Mother. Her large hand squeezed
around his small one. "Just wait'll I get that boy. The Lonely One's
around again. Killing people. No one's safe anymore. You never know when
the Lonely One'll turn up or where. So help me, when Doug gets home I'I1
spank him within an inch of his life."
Now they had walked another block and were standing by the holy black
silhouette of the German Baptist Church at the corner of Chapel Street
and Glen Rock. In back of the church, a hundred yards away, the ravine
began. He could smell it. It had a dark-sewer, rotten-foliage,
thick-green odor. It was a wide ravine that cut and twisted across
town--a jungle by day, a place to let alone at night, Mother often
declared.
He should have felt encouraged by the nearness of the German Baptist
Church but he was not, because the building was not illumined, was cold
and useless as a pile of ruins on the ravine edge.
He was only ten years old. He knew little of death, fear, or dread.
Death was the waxen effigy in the coffin when he was six and
Great-grandfather passed away, looking like a great fallen vulture in
his casket, silent, withdrawn, no more to tell him how to be a good boy,
no more to comment succinctly on politics. Death was his little sister
one morning when he awoke at the age of seven, looked into her crib, and
saw her staring up at him with a blind, blue, fixed and frozen stare
until the men came with a small wicker basket to take her away. Death
was when he stood by her high chair four weeks later and suddenly
realized she'd never be in it again, laughing and crying and making him
jealous of her because she was born. That was death. And Death was the
Lonely One, unseen, walking and standing behind trees, waiting in the
country to come in, once or twice a year, to this town, to these
streets, to these many places where there was little light, to kill one,
two, three women in the past three years. That was Death....
But this was more than Death. This summer night deep down under the
stars was all things you would ever feel or see or hear in your life,
drowning you all at once.
Leaving the sidewalk, they walked along a trodden, pebbled, weed-fringed
path while the crickets rose in a loud full drumming chorus. He followed
obediently behind brave, fine, tall Mother--defender of the universe.
Together, then, they approached, reached, and paused at the very end of
civilization.
The Ravine.
Here and now, down in that pit of jungled blackness were suddenly all
the things he would never know or understand; all the things without
names lived in the huddled tree shadow, in the odor of decay.
He realized he and his mother were alone.
Her hand trembled.
He felt the tremble. ... Why? But she was bigger, stronger, more
intelligent than himself, wasn't she? Did she, too, feel that intangible
menace, that groping out of darkness, that crouching malignancy down
below? Was there, then, no strength in growing up? No solace in being an
adult? No sanctuary in life? No fleshly citadel strong enough to
withstand the scrabbling assault of midnights? Doubts flushed him. Ice
cream lived again in his throat, stomach, spine and limbs; he was
instantly cold as a wind out of December gone.
He realized that all men were like this; that each person was to himself
one alone. One oneness, a unit in a society, but always afraid. Like
here, standing. If he should scream, if he should holler for help, would
it matter?
Blackness could come swiftly, swallowing; in one titanically freezing
moment all would be concluded. Long before dawn, long before police with
flashlights might probe the dark, disturbed pathway, long before men
with trembling brains could rustle down the pebbles to his help. Even if
they were within five hundred yards of him now, and help certainly was,
in three seconds a dark tide could rise to take all ten years from him
and-
The essential impact of life's loneliness crushed his
beginning-to-tremble body. Mother was alone, too. She could not look to
the sanctity of marriage, the protection of her family's love, she could
not look to the United States Constitution or the City Police, she could
not look anywhere, in this very instant, save into her heart, and there
she would find nothing but uncontrollable repugnance and a will to fear.
In this instant it was an individual problem seeking an individual
solution. He must accept being alone and work on from there.
He swallowed hard, clung to her. Oh, Lord, don't let her die, please, he
thought. Don't do anything to us. Father will be coming home from lodge
meeting in an hour and if the house is empty--
Mother advanced down the path into the primeval jungle. His voice
trembled. "Mom, Doug's all right. Doug's all right. He's all right.
Doug's all right!"
Mother's voice was strained, high. "He always comes through here. I tell
him not to, but those darned kids, they come through here anyway. Some
night he'll come through and never come out again--"
Never come out again. That could mean anything. Tramps. Criminals.
Darkness. Accident. Most of all death!
Alone in the universe.
There were a million small towns like this all over the world. Each as
dark, as lonely, each as removed, as full of shuddering and wonder. The
reedy playing of minor-key violins was the small towns' music, with no
lights, but many shadows. Oh, the vast swelling loneliness of them. The
secret damp ravines of them. Life was a horror lived in them at night,
when at all sides sanity, marriage, children, happiness, were threatened
by an ogre called Death.
Mother raised her voice into the dark. "Doug! Douglas!"
Suddenly both of them realized something was wrong.
The crickets had stopped chirping. Silence was complete.
Never in his life a silence like this one. One so utterly complete. Why
should the crickets cease? Why? What reason? They'd never stopped ever
before. Not ever.
Unless. Unless-
Something was going to happen.
It was as if the whole ravine was tensing, bunching together its black
fibers, drawing in power from sleeping countrysides all about, for miles
and miles. From dew-sodden forest and dells and rolling hills where dogs
tilted heads to moons, from all around the great silence was sucked into
one center, and they were the core of it. In ten seconds now, something
would happen, something would happen. The crickets kept their truce, the
stars were so low he could almost brush the tinsel. There were swarms of
them, hot and sharp.
Growing, growing, the silence. Growing, growing, the tenseness. Oh, it
was so dark, so far away from everything. Oh, God!
And then, way way off across the ravine:
"Okay, Mom! Coming, Mother!"
And again: "Hi, Mom! Coming, Mom!"
And then the quick scuttering of tennis shoes padding down through the
pit of the ravine as three kids came dashing, giggling. His brother
Douglas, Chuck Woodman, and John Huff. Running, giggling ...
The stars sucked up like the stung antennae of ten million snails.
The crickets sang!
The darkness pulled back, startled, shocked, angry. Pulled back, losing
its appetite at being so rudely interrupted as it prepared to feed. As
the dark retreated like a wave on the shore, three children piled out of
it, laughing.
"Hi, Mom! Hi, Tom! Hey!"
It smelled like Douglas, all right. Sweat and grass and the odor of
trees and branches and the creek about him.
"Young man, you're going to get a licking," declared Mother. She put
away her fear instantly. Tom knew she would never tell anyone of it,
ever. It would be in her heart, though, for all time, as it was in his
heart for all time.
They walked home to bed in the late summer night. He was glad Douglas
was alive. Very glad. For a moment there he had thought--
Far off in the dim moonlit country, over a viaduct and down a valley, a
train rushed along whistling like a lost metal thing, nameless and
running. Tom went to bed shivering, beside his brother, listening to
that train whistle, and thinking of a cousin who lived way out in the
country where that train ran now; a cousin who died of pneumonia late at
night years and years ago-
He smelled the sweat of Doug beside him. It was magic. Tom stopped
trembling.
"Only two things I know for sure, Doug," he whispered.
"What?"
"Nighttime's awful dark--is one."
"What's the other?"
"The ravine at night don't belong in Mr. Auffmann's Happiness Machine,
if he ever builds it."
Douglas considered this awhile. "You can say that again."
They stopped talking. Listening, suddenly they heard footsteps coming
down the street, under the trees, outside the house now, on the
sidewalk. From her bed Mother called quietly, "That's your father." It
was.
Late at night on the bent parch Leo Auffmann wrote a list he could not
see in the dark, exclaiming, "Ah!" or, "That's another!" when he hit
upon a fine component. Then the front-door screen made a moth sound,
tapping.
"Lena?" he whispered.
She sat down next to him on the swing, in her nightgown, not slim the
way girls get when they are not loved at seventeen, not fat the way
women get when they are not loved at fifty, but absolutely right, a
roundness, a firmness, the way women are at any age, he thought, when
there is no question.
She was miraculous. Her body, like his, was always thinking for her, but
in a different way, shaping the children, or moving ahead of him into
any room to change the atmosphere there to fit any particular mood he
was in. There seemed no long periods of thought for her; thinking and
doing moved from her head to her hand and back in a natural and gentle
circuiting he could not and cared not to blueprint.
"That machine," she said at last, "... we don't need it."
"No," he said, "but sometimes you got to build for others. I been
figuring, what to put in. Motion pictures? Radios? Stereoscopic viewers?
All those in one place so any man can run his hand over it and smile and
say,'Yes, sir, that's happiness.' II
Yes, he thought, to make a contraption that in spite of wet feet, sinus
trouble, rumpled beds, and those three-in-the-morning hours when
monsters ate your soul, would manufacture happiness, like that magic
salt mill that, thrown in the ocean, made salt forever and turned the
sea to brine. Who wouldn't sweat his soul out through his pores to
invent a machine like that? he asked the world, he asked the town, he
asked his wife!
In the porch swing beside him, Lena's uneasy silence was an opinion.
Silent now, too, head back, he listened to the elm leaves above hissing
in the wind.
Don't forget, he told himself, that sound, too, must be in the machine.
A minute later the porch swing, the porch, stood empty in the dark.
Grandfather smiled in his sleep.
Feeling the smile and wondering why it was there, he awoke. He lay
quietly listening, and the smile was explained.
For he heard a sound which was far more important than birds or the
rustle of new leaves. Once each year he woke this way and lay waiting
for the sound which meant that summer had officially begun. And it began
on a morning such as this when a boarder, a nephew, a cousin, a son or a
grandson came out on the lawn below and moved in consecutively smaller
quadrangles north and east and south and west with a clatter of rotating
metal through the sweet summer grass. Clover blossoms, the few
unharvested dandelion fires, ante, sticks, pebbles, remnants of last
year's July Fourth squibs and punks, but predominantly clear green, a
fount leaped up from the chattering mower. A cool soft fount;
Grandfather imagined it tickling his legs, spraying his warm face,
filling his nostrils with the timeless scent of a new season begun, with
the promise that, yes, we'll all live another twelve months.
God bless the lawn mower, he thought. Who was the fool who made January
first New Year/s Day' No, they should set a man to watch the grasses
across a million Illinois, Ohio, and Iowa lawns, and on that morning
when it was long enough for cutting, instead of rachets and hems and
yelling, there should be a great swelling symphony of lawn mowers
reaping fresh grass upon the prairie lands. Instead of confetti and
serpentine, people should throw grass spray at each other on the one day
each year that really represents Beginning!
He snorted at his own lengthy discussion of the affair, went to the
window and leaned out into the mellow sun shine, and sure enough, there
was a boarder, a young newspaperman named Forrester, just finishing a
row.
"Morning, Mr. Spaulding!"
"Give 'em hell, Bill!" cried Grandpa heartily, and soon downstairs
eating Grandma's breakfast, with the window open so the rattling buzz of
the lawn mower lolled about his eating.
"It gives you confidence," Grandpa said. "That lawn mower. Listen to
it!"
"Won't be using the lawn mower much longer." Grandma set down a stack of
wheat cakes. "They got a new kind of grass Bill Forrester's putting in
this morning, never needs cutting. Don't know what they call it, but it
just grows so long and no longer."
Grandpa stared at the woman. "You're finding a poor! way to joke with
me."
"Go look for yourself. Land's sake," said Grandma, "it was Bill
Forrester's idea. The new grass is waiting in little flats by the side
of the house. You just dig small holes here and there and put the new
grass in spots. By the end of the year the new grass kills off the old,
and you sell your lawn mower."
Grandpa was up from his chair, through the hall, and out the front door
in ten seconds.
Bill Forrester left his machine and came over, smiling, squinting in the
sun. "That's right," he said. "Bought the grass yesterday. Thought,
while I'm on vacation I'd just plant it for you."
"Why wasn't I consulted about this? It's my lawn!" cried Grandfather.
"Thought you'd appreciate it, Mr. Spaulding."
"Well, I don't think I do appreciate it. Let's see this confounded grass
of yours."
They stood by the little square pads of new grass. Grandpa toed at it
with one end of his shoe suspiciously. "Looks like plain old grass to
me. You sure some horse trader didn't catch you early in the morning
when you weren't fully awake?"
"I've seen the stuff growing in California. Only so high and no higher.
If it survives our climate it'll save us getting out here next year,
once a week, to keep the darned stuff trimmed."
"That's the trouble with your generation," said Grandpa. "Bill, I'm
ashamed of you, you a newspaperman All the things in life that were put
here to savor, you eliminate. Save time, save work, you say." He nudged
the grass trays disrespectfully. "Bill, when you're my age, you'll find
out it's the little savors and little things that count more than big
ones. A walk on a spring morning is better than an eighty-mile ride in a
hopped-up car, you know why? Because it's full of flavors, full of a lot
of things growing. You've time to seek and find. I know--you're after
the broad effect now, and I suppose that's fit and proper. But for a
young man working on a newspaper, you got to look for grapes as well as
watermelons. You greatly admire skeletons and I like fingerprints; well
and good. Right now such things are bothersome to you, and I wonder if
it isn't because you've never learned to use them. If you had your way
you'd pass a law to abolish all the little jobs, the little things. But
then you'd leave yourselves nothing to do between the big jobs and you'd
have a devil of a time thinking up things to do so you wouldn't go
crazy. Instead of that, why not let nature show you a few things?
Cutting grass and pulling weeds can be a way of life, son."
Bill Forrester was smiling quietly at him.
"I know," said Grandpa, "I talk too much."
"There's no one I'd rather hear."
"Lecture continued, then. Lilacs on a bush are better than orchids. And
dandelions and devil grass are better! Why? Because they bend you over
and turn you away from all the people and the town for a little while
and sweat you and get you down where you remember you got a nose again.
And when you're all to yourself that way, you're really yourself for a
little while; you get to thinking things through, alone. Gardening is
the handiest excuse for being a philosopher. Nobody guesses, nobody
accuses, nobody knows, but there you are, Plate in the peonies, Socrates
force-growing his own hemlock. A man toting a sack of blood manure
across his lawn is kin to Atlas letting the world spin easy on his
shoulder. As Samuel Spaulding, Esquire, once said,'Dig in the earth,
delve in the soul.' Spin those mower blades, Bill, and walk in the spray
of the Fountain of Youth. End of lecture. Besides, a mess of dandelion
greens is good eating once in a while."
"How many years since you had dandelion greens for supper, sir?"
"We won't go into that!"
Bill kicked one of the grass flats slightly and nodded. "About this
grass now. I didn't finish telling. It grows so close it's guaranteed to
kill off clover and dandelions--"
"Great God in heaven! That means no dandelion wine next year! That means
no bees crossing our lot! You're out of your mind, son! Look here, how
much did all this cost you?"
"A dollar a flat. I bought ten flats as a surprise."
Grandpa reached into his pocket, took out the old deep-mouthed purse,
unclasped the silver clasp, and removed from it three five-dollar bills.
"Bill, you've just made a great profit of five dollars on this
transaction. I want you to deliver this load of unromantic grass into
the ravine, the garbage dump--anywhere--but I ask you in a civil and
humble voice not to plant it in my yard. Your motives are above
reproach, but my motives, I feel, because I'm approaching my tenderest
years, must be considered first."
"Yes, sir." Bill pocketed the bills reluctantly.
"Bill, you just plant this new grass some other year. The day after I
die, Bill, you're free to tear up the whole damn lawn. Think you can
wait another five years or so for an old orator to kick off?"
"I know dam well I can wait," Bill said.
"There's a thing about the lawn mower I can't even tell you, but to me
it's the most beautiful sound in the world, the freshest sound of the
season, the sound of summer, and I'd miss it fearfully if it wasn't
there, and I'd miss the smell Of cut grass."
Bill bent to pick up a flat. "Here I go to the ravine."
"You're a good, understanding young man, and will make a brilliant and
sensitive reporter," said Grandfather, helping him. "This I predict!"
The morning passed, noon came on, Grandpa retired after lunch, read a
little Whittier, and slept well on through the day. When he awoke at
three the sun was streaming through the windows, bright and fresh. He
lay in bed and was startled to hear the old, the familiar, the memorable
sound.
"Why," he said, "someone's using the lawn mower! But the lawn was just
cut this morning!"
He listened again. And yes, there it was, the endless droning chatter up
and down, up and down.
He leaned out the window and gaped. "Why, it's Bill. Bill Forrester, you
there! Has the sun got you? You're cutting the lawn again!"
Bill looked up, smiled a white smile, and waved. "I know! I think I
missed a few spots!"
And while Grandpa lay in bed for the next five minutes, smiling and at
ease, Bill Forrester cut the lawn north, then west, then south, and
finally, in a great green spraying fountain, toward the east.
On Sunday morning Leo Auffmann moved slowly through his garage,
expecting some wood, a curl of wire, a hammer or wrench to leap up
crying, "Start here!" But nothing leaped, nothing cried for a beginning.
Should a Happiness Machine, he wondered, be something you can carry in
your pocket?
Or, he went on, should it be something that carries you in its pocket?
"One thing I absolutely know," he said aloud. "It should be bright!"
He set a can of orange paint in the center of the workbench, picked up a
dictionary, and wandered into the house.
"Lena?" He glanced at the dictionary. "Are you 'pleased, contented,
joyful, delighted'? Do you feel 'Lucky, fortunate'? Are things 'clever
and fitting,' 'successful and suitable' for you?"
Lena stopped slicing vegetables and closed her eyes. "Read me the list
again, please," she said.
He shut the book.
"What have I done, you got to stop and think an hour before you can tell
me. All I ask is a simple yes or no! You're not contented, delighted,
joyful?"
"Cows are contented, babies and old people in second childhood are
delighted, God help them," she said. "As for 'joyful,' Lee? Look how I
laugh scrubbing out the sink...."
He peered closely at her and his face relaxed. "Lena, it's true. A man
doesn't appreciate. Next month, maybe, we'll get away."
"I'm not complaining!" she cried. "I'm not the one comes in with a list
saying,'Stick out your tongue. Lee, do you ask what makes your heart
beat all night? No! Next will you ask, What's marriage? Who knows, Lee?
Don't ask. A man who thinks like that, how it runs, how things work,
falls off the trapeze in the circus, chokes wondering how the muscles
work in the throat. Eat, sleep, breathe, Lee, and stop staring at me
like I'm something new in the house!"
Lena Auffmann froze. She sniffed the air.
"Oh, my God, look what you done!"
She yanked the oven door open. A great cloud of smoke poured through the
kitchen.
"Happiness!" she wailed. "And for the first time in six months we have a
fight! Happiness, and for the first time in twenty years it's not bread,
it's charcoal for supper!"
When the smoke cleared, Leo Auffmann was gone.
The fearful clangor, the collision of man and inspiration, the flinging
about of metal, lumber, hammer, nails, T square, screwdriver, continued
for many days. On occasion, defeated, Leo Auffmann loitered out through
the streets, nervous, apprehensive, jerking his head at the slightest
sound of distant laughter, listened to children's jokes, watching what
made them smile. At night he sat on neighbors' crowded porches,
listening to the old folks weigh and balance life, and at each explosion
of merriment Leo Auffmann quickened like a general who has seen the
forces of darkness routed and whose strategy has been reaffirmed. On his
way home he felt triumphant until he was in his garage with the dead
tools and the inanimate lumber. Then his bright face fell away in a pale
funk, and to cover his sense of failure he banged and crashed the parts
of his machine about as if they really did make sense. At last it began
to shape itself and at the end of the ten days and nights, trembling
with fatigue, self-dedicated, half starved, fumbling and looking as if
he had been riven by lightning Leo Auffmann wandered into his house.
The children, who had been screaming horribly at each other, fell
silent, as if the Red Death had entered at the chiming of the clock.
"The Happiness Machine," husked Leo Auffmann, "is ready."
"Lee Auffmann," said his wife, "has lost fifteen pounds. He hasn't
talked to his children in two weeks, they are nervous, they fight,
listen! His wife is nervous, she's gained ten pounds, she'll need new
clothes, look! Sure--the machine is ready. But happy? Who can say? Lee,
leave off with the clock you're building. You'll never find a cuckoo big
enough to go in it! Man was not made to tamper with such things. It's
not against God, no, but it sure looks like it's against Leo Auffmann.
Another week of this and we'll bury him in his machine!"
But Leo Auffmann was too busy noticing that the room was falling swiftly
up.
How interesting, he thought, lying on the floor.
Darkness closed in a great wink on him as someone screamed something
about that Happiness Machine, three times.
The first thing he noticed the next morning was dozens of birds
fluttering around in the air stirring up ripples like colored stones
thrown into an incredibly clear stream, gonging the tin roof of the
garage softly.
A pack of multibred dogs pawfooted one by one into the yard to peer and
whine gently through the garage door; four boys, two girls, and some men
hesitated in the driveway and then edged along under the cherry trees.
Leo Auffmann, listening, knew what it was that had reached out and
called them all into the yard.
The sound of the Happiness Machine.
It was the sort of sound that might be heard coming from a giant's
kitchen on a summer day. There were all kinds of hummings, low and high,
steady and then changing. Incredible foods were being baked there by a
host of whirring golden bees as big as teacups. The giantess herself,
humming contentedly under her breath, might glide to the door, as vast
as all summer, her face a huge peach-colored moon gazing calmly out upon
smiling dogs, corn-haired boys and flour-haired old men.
"Wait," said Leo Auffmann out loud. "I didn't turn the machine on this
morning! Saul!"
Saul, standing in the yard below, looked up.
"Saul, did you turn it on?"
"You told me to warm it up half an hour ago!"
"All right, Saul, I forgot. I'm not awake." He fell back in bed.
His wife, bringing his breakfast up, paused by the window, looking down
at the garage.
"Tell me," she said quietly. "If that machine is like you say, has it
got an answer to making babies in it somewhere? Can that machine make
seventy-year-old people twenty? Also, how does death look when you hide
in there with all that happiness?"
"Hide!"
"If you died from overwork, what should I do today, climb in that big
box down there and be happy? Also tell me, Lee, how is our life? You
know how our house is. Seven in the morning, breakfast, the kids; all of
you gone by eight thirty and it's just me and washing and me and cooking
and socks to be darned, weeds to be dug, or I run to the store or polish
silver. Who's complaining? I'm just reminding you how the house is put
together, Lee, what's in it! So now answer: How do you get all those
things I said in one machine?"
"That's not how it's built!"
"I'm sorry. I got no time to look, then."
And she kissed his cheek and went from the room and he lay smelling the
wind that blew from the hidden machine below, rich with the odor of
those roasted chestnuts that sold in the autumn streets of a Paris he
had never known....
A cat moved unseen among the hypnotized dogs and boys to purr against
the garage door, in the sound of snow-waves crumbling down a faraway and
rhythmically breathing shore.
Tomorrow, thought Leo Auffmann, we'll try the machine, all of us,
together.
Late that night he awoke and knew something had wakened him. Far away in
another room he heard someone crying. "Saul?" he whispered, getting out
of bed.
In his room Saul wept, his head buried in his pillow. "No ... no ..." he
sobbed. "Over... over.... "
Saul, you had a nightmare? Tell me about it, son." But the boy only
wept.
And sitting there on the boy's bed, Leo Auffmann suddenly thought to
look out the window. Below, the garage doors stood open.
He felt the hairs rise along the back of his neck.
When Saul slept again, uneasily, whimpering, his father went downstairs
and out to the garage where, not breathing, he put his hand out.
In the cool night the Happiness Machine's metal was too hot to touch.
So, he thought, Saul was here tonight.
Why? Was Saul unhappy, in need of the machine? No, happy, but wanting to
hold onto happiness always. Could you blame a boy wise enough to know
his position who tried to keep it that way? No! And yet ...
Above, quite suddenly, something white was exhaled from Saul's window.
Leo Auffmann's heart thundered. Then he realized the window curtain had
blown out into the open night. But it had seemed as intimate and
shimmering a thing as a boy's soul escaping his room. And Leo Auffmann
had flung up his hands as if to thwart it, push it back into the
sleeping house.
Cold, shivering, he moved back into the house and up to Saul's room
where he seized the blowing curtain in and locked the window tight so
the pale thing could not escape again. Then he sat on the bed and put
his hand on Saul's back.
A Tale of Two Cities? Mine. The Old Curiosity Shop? Ha, that's Leo
Auffmann's all right! Great Expectations? That used to be mine. But let
Great Expectations be his, now!"
"What's this?" asked Leo Auffmann, entering.
"This," said his wife, "is sorting out the community property! When a
father scares his son at night it's time to chop everything in half! Out
of the way, Mr. Bleak House, Old Curiosity Shop. In all these books, no
mad scientist lives like Leo Auffmann, none!"
"You're leaving, and you haven't even tried the machine!" he protested.
"Try it once, you'll unpack, you'll stay!"
"Tom Swift and His Electric Annihilator--whose is that?" she asked.
"Must I guess?"
Snorting, she gave Tom Swift to Leo Auffmann.
Very late in the day all the books, dishes, clothes, linens had been
stacked one here, one there, four here, four there, ten here, ten there.
Lena Auffmann, dizzy with counting, had to sit down. "All right," she
gasped. "Before I go, Lee, prove you don't give nightmares to innocent
sons!"
Silently Leo Auffmann led his wife into the twilight. She stood before
the eight-foot-tall, orange-colored box.
"That's happiness?" she said. "Which button do I press to be overjoyed,
grateful, contented, and much-obliged?"
The children had gathered now.
"Mama," said Saul, "don't!"
"I got to know what I'm yelling about, Saul." She got in the machine,
sat down, and looked out at her husband, shaking her head. "It's not me
needs this, it's you, a nervous wreck, shouting."
"Please," he said, "you'll see!"
He shut the door.
"Press the button!" he shouted in at his unseen wife.
There was a click. The machine shivered quietly, like a huge dog
dreaming in its sleep.
"Papa!" said Saul, worried.
"Listen!" said Leo Auffmann.
At first there was nothing but the tremor of the machine's own secretly
moving cogs and wheels.
"Is Mama all right?" asked Naomi.
"All right, she's fine! There, now.., there!"
And inside the machine Lena Auffmann could be heard saying, "Oh!" and
then again, "Ah!" in a startled voice. "Look at that!" said his hidden
wife. "Paris!" and later, "London! There goes Rome! The Pyramids! The
Sphinx!" "The Sphinx, you hear, children?" Leo Auffmann whispered and
laughed.
"Perfume!" cried Lena Auffmann, surprised.
Somewhere a phonograph played "The Blue Danube" faintly.
"Music! I'm dancing!"
"Only thinks she's dancing" the father confided to the world.
"Amazing!" said the unseen woman.
Leo Auffmann blushed. "What an understanding wife."
And then inside the Happiness Machine, Lena Auffmann began to weep.
The inventor's smile faded.
"She's crying" said Naomi.
"She can't be!"
"She is," said Saul.
"She simply can't be crying!" Leo Auffmann, blinking, pressed his ear to
the machine. "But ... yes ... like a baby.. ."
He could only open the door.
"Wait." There his wife sat, tears rolling down her cheeks. "Let me
finish." She cried some more.
Leo Auffmann turned off the machine, stunned.
"Oh, it's the saddest thing in the world!" she wailed. "I feel awful,
terrible." She climbed out through the door "First, there was Paris..."
"What's wrong with Paris?"
"I never even thought of being in Paris in my life. But now you got me
thinking: Paris! So suddenly I want to be in Paris and I know I'm not!"
"It's almost as good, this machine."
"No. Sitting in there, I knew. I thought, it's not real!"
"Stop crying, Mama."
She looked at him with great dark wet eyes. "You had me dancing. We
haven't danced in twenty years."
"I'll take you dancing tomorrow night!"
"No, no! It's not important, it shouldn't be important. But your machine
says it's important! So I believe! It'll be all right, Lee, after I cry
some more."
"What else?"
"What else? The machine says,'You're young.' I'm not. It lies, that
Sadness Machine!"
"Sad in what way?"
His wife was quieter now. "Lee, the mistake you made is you forgot some
hour, some day, we all got to climb out of that thing and go back to
dirty dishes and the beds not made. While you're in that thing, sure, a
sunset lasts forever almost, the air smells good, the temperature is
fine. All the things you want to last, last. But outside, the children
wait on lunch, the clothes need buttons. And then let's be frank, Lee,
how long can you look at a sunset? Who wants a sunset to last? Who wants
perfect temperature? Who wants air smelling good always? So after
awhile, who would notice? Better, for a minute or two, a sunset. After
that, let's have something else. People are like that, Lee. How could
you forget?"
"Did I?"
"Sunsets we always liked because they only happen once and go away."
"But Lena, that's sad."
"No, if the sunset stayed and we got bored, that would be a real
sadness. So two things you did you should never have. You made quick
things go slow and stay around. You brought things faraway to our
backyard where they don't belong, where they just tell you,'No, you'll
never travel, Lena Auffmann, Paris you'll never see! Pome you'll never
visit.' But I always knew that, so why tell me? Better to forget and
make do, Lee, make do, eh?"
Leo Auffmann leaned against the machine for support. He snatched his
burned hand away, surprised.
"So now what, Lena?" he said.
"It's not for me to say. I know only so long as this thing is here I'll
want to come out, or Saul will want to come out like he did last night,
and against our judgment sit in it and look at all those places so far
away and every time we will cry and be no fit family for you."
"I don't understand," he said, "how I could be so wrong. Just let me
check to see what you say is true." He sat down inside the machine. "You
won't go away?"
His wife nodded. "We'll wait, Lee."
He shut the door. In the warm darkness he hesitated, pressed the button,
and was just relaxing back in color and music, when he heard someone
screaming.
"Fire, Papa! The machine's on fire!"
Someone hammered the door. He leaped up, bumped his head, and fell as
the door gave way and the boys dragged him out. Behind him he heard a
muffled explosion. The entire family was running now. Leo Auffmann
turned and gasped, "Saul, call the fire department!"
Lena Auffmann caught Saul as he ran. "Saul," she said. "Wait."
There was a gush of flame, another muffled explosion. When the machine
was burning very well indeed, Lena Auffmann nodded.
"All right, Saul," she said. "Run call the fire department."
Everybody who was anybody came to the fire. There was Grandpa Spaulding
and Douglas and Tom and most of the boarders and some of the old men
from across the ravine and all the children from six blocks around. And
Leo Auffmann's children stood out front, proud of how fine the flames
looked jumping from the garage roof.
Grandfather Spaulding studied the smoke ball in the sky and said,
quietly, "Lee, was that it? Your Happiness Machine?"
"Some year," said Leo Auffmann "I'll figure it and tell you."
Lena Auffmann, standing in the dark now, watched as the firemen ran in
and out of the yard; the garage, roaring, settled upon itself.
"Leo," she said, "it won't take a year to figure. Look around. Think.
Keep quiet a little bit. Then come tell me. I'll be in the house,
putting books back on shelves, and clothes back in closets, fixing
supper, supper's late, look how dark. Come, children, help Mama."
When the firemen and the neighbors were gone Leo Auffmann was left with
grandfather Spaulding and Douglas and Tom, brooding over the smoldering
ruin. He stirred his foot in the wet ashes and slowly said what he had
to say.
"The first thing you learn in life is you're a fool. The last thing you
learn in life is you're the same fool. In one hour, I've done a lot of
thinking. I thought, Leo Auffmann is blind! ... You want to see the real
Happiness Machine? The one they patented a couple thousand years ago, it
still runs, not good all the time, no! but it runs. It's been here all
along."
"But the fire--" said Douglas.
"Sure, the fire, the garage! But like Lena said, it don't take a year to
figure; what burned in the garage don't count!" They followed him up the
front-porch steps.
"Here," whispered Leo Auffmann, "the front window. Quiet, and you'll see
it."
Hesitantly, Grandfather, Douglas, and Tom peered through the large
windowpane.
And there, in small warm pools of lamplight, you could see what Leo
Auffmann wanted you to see. There sat Saul and Marshall, playing chess
at the coffee table. In the dining room Rebecca was laying out the
silver. Naomi was cutting paper-doll dresses. Ruth was painting water
colors. Joseph was running his electric train. Through the kitchen door,
Lena Auffmann was sliding a pot roast from the steaming oven. Every
hand, every head, every mouth made a big or little motion. You could
hear their faraway voices under glass. You could hear someone singing in
a high sweet voice. You could smell bread baking, too, and you knew it
was real bread that would soon be covered with real butter. Everything
was there and it was working.
Grandfather, Douglas, and Tom turned to look at Leo Auffmann, who gazed
serenely through the window, the pink light on his cheeks.
"Sure," he murmured. "There it is." And he watched with now-gentle
sorrow and now-quick delight, and at last quiet acceptance as all the
bits and pieces of this house mixed, stirred, settled, poised, and ran
steadily again. "The Happiness Machine," he said. "The Happiness
Machine."
A moment later he was gone.
Inside, Grandfather, Douglas, and Tom saw him tinkering, making a minor
adjustment here, eliminate friction there, busy among all those warm,
wonderful, infinitely delicate, forever mysterious, and ever-moving
parts.
Then smiling, they went down the steps into the fresh summer night.
Twice a year they brought the big flapping rugs oui into the yard and
laid them where they looked out of place and uninhabited, on the lawn.
Then Grandma and Mother came from the house with what looked to be the
back rungs of those beautiful looped wire chairs downtown in the
soda-fountain place. These great wire wands were handed around so they
stood, Douglas, Tom, Grandma, Great-grandma, and Mother poised like a
collection of witches and familiars over the duty pattens of old
Armenia. Then at a signal from Great-grandma, a blink of the eyes or a
gumming of the lips, the flails were raised, the harping wires banged
down again and again upon the rugs.
"Take that! And that!" said Great-grandma. "Get the flies, boys, kill
the cooties!"
"Oh, you!" said Grandma to her mother.
They all laughed. The dust storm puffed up about them. Their laughing
became choked.
Showers of lint, tides of sand, golden flakes of pipe tobacco fluttered,
shivered on the exploded and re-exploded air. Pausing, the boys saw the
tread of their shoes and the older people's shoes pressed a billion
times in the warp and woof of this rug, now to be smoothed clean as the
tide of their beating swept again and again along the oriental shore.
"There's where your husband spilled that coffee!" Grandma gave the rug a
blow.
"Here's where you dropped the cream!" Great-grandma whacked up a great
twister of dust.
"Look at the scuff marks. Boys, boys!"
"Double-Grandma, here's the ink from your pen!"
"Pshaw! Mine was purple ink. That's common blue!"
Bang!
"Look at the path worn from the hall door here to the kitchen door.
Food. That's what brings the lions to the water hole. Let's shift it,
put it back the other way around."
"Better yet, lock the men out of the house."
"Make them leave their shoes outside the door."
Bang, bang!
They hung the rugs on the wash line now, to finish the job. Tom looked
at the intricate scrolls and loops, the flowers, the mysterious figures,
the shuttling patterns.
"Tom, don't stand there. Strike, boy!"
"It's fun, seeing things," said Tom.
Douglas glanced up suspiciously. "What do you see?" "The whole dam town,
people, houses, here's our house!" Bang! "Our street!" Bang! "That black
part there's the ravine!" Bang! "There's school!" Bang! "This funny
cartoon here's you, Doug!" Bang! "Here's Great-grandma, Grandma, Mom."
Bang! "How many years this rug been down?"
"Fifteen."
"Fifteen years of people stomping across it; I see every shoe print,"
gasped Tom.
"Land, boy, you got a tongue," said Great-grandma.
"I see all the things happened in that house in all those years right
here!" Bang! "All the past, sure, but I can see the future, too. Just
squinch up my eyes and peek around at the patterns, there, to see where
we'll be walking, running around, tomorrow."
Douglas stopped swinging the beater. "What else you see in the rug?"
"Threads mostly," said Great-grandma. "Not much left but the underskin.
See how the manufacturer wove the thing."
"Right!" said Tom mysteriously. "Threads one way, threads another. I see
it all. Dire fiends. Deadly sinners. There's bad weather, there's good.
Picnics. Banquets. Strawberry festivals." He tapped the beater from
place to place portentously.
"That's some boardinghouse you got me running," said Grandma, glowing
with exertion.
"It's all there, fuzzylike. Hold your head on one side, Doug, get one
eye almost shut. It's better at night, of course, inside, the rug on the
floor, lamplight and all. Then you get shadows all shapes, light and
dark, and watch the threads running off, feel the nap, run your hand
around on the fur. Smells just like a desert, I bet. All hot and sandy,
like inside a mummy case, maybe. Look, that red spot, that's the
Happiness Machine burning up!"
"Catsup from somebody's sandwich, no doubt," said Mom.
"No, Happiness Machine," said Douglas, and was sad to see it burning
there. He had been counting on Leo Auffmann to keep things in order,
keep everybody smiling, keep the small gyroscope he often felt inside
himself tilting toward the sun every time the earth tilted toward outer
space and darkness. But no, there was Auffmann's folly, ashes and
cinders. Bang! Bang! Douglas struck.
"Look, there's the green electric runabout! Miss Fern! Miss Roberta!"
said Tom. "Honk, Honk!" Bang!
They all laughed.
"There's your life-strings, Doug, running along in knots. Too many sour
apples. Pickles at bedtime!"
"Which one, where?" cried Douglas, peering.
"This one, one year from now, this one, two years from now, and this
one, three, four, five years from now!"
Bang! The wire beater hissed like a snake in the blind sky.
"And one to grow on!" said Tom.
He hit the rug so hard all the dust of five thousand centuries jumped
from the shocked texture, paused on the air a terrible moment, and even
as Douglas stood, eyes squinted to see the warp, the woof, the shivering
pattern, the Armenian avalanche of dust roared soundless upon, over,
down and around, burying him forever before their eyes....
How it began with the children, old Mrs. Bentley never knew. She often
saw them, like moths and monkeys, at the grocer's, among the cabbages
and hung bananas, and she smiled at them and they smiled back. Mrs.
Bentley watched them making footprints in winter snow, filling their
lungs with autumn smoke, shaking down blizzards of spring
apple-blossoms, but felt no fear of them. As for herself, her house was
in extreme good order, everything set to its station, the floors briskly
swept, the foods neatly tinned, the hatpins thrust through cushions, and
the drawers of her bedroom bureaus crisply filled with the paraphernalia
of years.
Mrs. Bentley was a saver. She saved tickets, old theater programs, bits
of lace, scarves, rail transfers; all the tags and tokens of existence.
"I've a stack of records," she often said. "Here's Caruso. That was in
1916, in New York; I was sixty and John was still alive. Here's Tune
Moon, 1924, I think, right after John died."
That was the huge regret of her life, in a way. The one thing she had
most enjoyed touching and listening to and looking at she hadn't saved.
John was far out in the meadow country, dated and boxed and hidden under
grasses, and nothing remained of him but his high silk hat and his cane
and his good suit in the closet. So much of the rest of him had been
devoured by moths.
But what she could keep she had kept. Her pink-flowered dresses crushed
among moth balls in vast black trunks, and cut-glass dishes from her
childhood--she had brought them all when she moved to this town five
years ago. Her husband had owned rental property in a number of towns,
and, like a yellow ivory chess piece, she had moved and sold one after
another, until now she was here in a strange town, left with only the
trunks and furniture, dark and ugly, crouched about her like the
creatures of a primordial zoo.
The thing about the children happened in the middle of summer. Mrs.
Bentley, coming out to water the ivy upon her front porch, saw two
cool-colored sprawling girls and a small boy lying on her lawn, enjoying
the immense prickling of the grass.
At the very moment Mrs. Bentley was smiling down upon them with her
yellow mask face, around a corner like an elfin band came an ice-cream
wagon. It jingled out icy melodies, as crisp and rimmed as crystal
wineglasses tapped by an expert, summoning all. The children sat up,
turning their heads, like sunflowers after the sun.
Mrs. Bentley called, "Would you like some? Here!" The ice-cream wagon
stopped and she exchanged money for pieces of the original Ice Age. The
children thanked her with snow in their mouths, their eyes darting from
her buttoned-up shoes to her white hair.
"Don't you want a bite?" said the boy.
"No, child. I'm old enough and cold enough; the hottest day won't thaw
me," laughed Mrs. Bentley.
They carried the miniature glaciers up and sat, three in a row, on the
shady porch glider.
"I'm Alice, she's Jane, and that's Tom Spaulding."
"How nice. And I'm Mrs. Bentley. They called me Helen."
They stared at her.
"Don't you believe they called me Helen?" said the old lady.
"I didn't know old ladies had first names," said Tom, blinking.
Mrs. Bentley laughed dryly.
"You never hear them used, he means," said Jane.
"My dear, when you are as old as I, they won't call you Jane, either.
Old age is dreadfully formal. It's always 'Mrs.' Young People don't like
to call you 'Helen.' It seems much too flip." "How old are you?" asked
Alice.
"I remember the pterodactyl." Mrs. Bentley smiled.
"No, but how old?"
"Seventy-two."
They gave their cold sweets an extra long suck, deliberating.
"That's old," said Tom.
"I don't feel any different now than when I was your age," said the old
lady.
"Our age?"
"Yes. Once I was a pretty little girl just like you, Jane, and you,
Alice."
They did not speak. "What's the matter?"
"Nothing." Jane got up.
"Oh, you don't have to go so soon, I hope. You haven't finished
eating.... Is something the matter?"
"My mother says it isn't nice to fib," said Jane.
"Of course it isn't. It's very bad," agreed Mrs. Bentley.
"And not to listen to fibs."
"Who was fibbing to you, Jane?"
Jane looked at her and then glanced nervously away. "You were."
"I?" Mrs. Bentley laughed and put her withered claw to her small bosom.
"About what?" "About your age. About being a little girl."
Mrs. Bentley stiffened. "But I was, many years ago, a little girl just
like you."
"Come on, Alice, Tom."
"Just a moment," said Mrs. Bentley. "Don't you believe me?"
"I don't know," said Jane. "No."
"But how ridiculous! It's perfectly obvious. Everyone was young once!"
"Not you," whispered Jane, eyes down, almost to herself. Her empty ice
stick had fallen in a vanilla puddle on the porch floor.
"But of course I was eight, nine, ten years old, like all of you."
The two girls gave a short, quickly-sealed-up laugh.
Mrs. Bentley's eyes glittered. "Well, I can't waste a morning arguing
with ten-year-olds. Needless to say, I was ten myself once and just as
silly."
The two girls laughed. Tom looked uneasy.
"You're joking with us," giggled Jane. "You weren't really ten ever,
were you, Mrs. Bentley?"
"You run on home!" the woman cried suddenly, for she could not stand
their eyes. "I won't have you laughing."
"And your name's not really Helen?"
"Of course it's Helen!"
"Good-bye," said the two girls, giggling away across the lawn under the
seas of shade, Tom followed them slowly.
"Thanks for the ice cream!"
"Once I played hopscotch!" Mrs. Bentley cried after them, but they were
gone.
Mrs Bentley spent the rest of the day slamming teakettles about, loudly
preparing a meager lunch, and from time to time going to the front door,
hoping to catch those insolent fiends on their laughing excursions
through the late day. But if they had appeared, what could she say to
them, why should she worry about them?
"The idea!" said Mrs. Bentley to her dainty, rose-clustered teacup. "No
one ever doubted I was a girl before. What a silly, horrible thing to
do. I don't mind being old--not really--but I do resent having my
childhood taken away from me."
She could see the children racing off under the cavernous trees with her
youth in their frosty fingers, invisible as air.
After supper, for no reason at all, with a senseless certainty of
motion, she watched her own hands, like a pair of ghostly gloves at a
seance, gather together certain items in a perfumed kerchief. Then she
went to her front porch and stood there stiffly for half an hour.
As suddenly as night birds the children flew by, and Mrs. Bentley's
voice brought them to a fluttering rest.
"Yes, Mrs. Bentley?"
"Come up on this porch!" she commanded them, and the girls climbed the
steps, Tom trailing after.
"Yes, Mrs. Bentley?" They thumped the "Mrs." like a bass piano chord,
extra heavily, as if that were her first name.
"I've some treasures to show you." She opened the perfumed kerchief and
peered into it as if she herself might be surprised. She drew forth a
hair comb, very small and delicate, its rim twinkling with rhinestones.
"I wore this when I was nine," she said.
Jane turned it in her hand and said, "How nice."
"Let's see!" cried Alice.
"And here is a tiny ring I wore when I was eight," said Mrs. Bentley.
"It doesn't fit my finger now. You look through it and see the Tower of
Pisa ready to fall."
"Let's see it lean!" The girls passed it back and forth between them
until Tome fitted it to her hand. "Why, it's just my size!" she
exclaimed.
"And the comb fits my head!" gasped Alice.
Mrs. Bentley produced some jackstones. "Here," she said. "I once played
with these."
She threw them. They made a constellation on the porch.
"And here!" In triumph she flashed her trump card, a postal picture of
herself when she was seven years old, in a dress like a yellow
butterfly, with her golden curls and blown blue-glass eyes and angelic
pouting lips.
"Who's this little girl?" asked Jane.
"It's me!"
The two girls held onto it.
"But it doesn't look like you," said Jane simply. "Anybody could get a
picture like this, somewhere."
They looked at her for a long moment.
"Any more pictures, Mrs. Bentley?" asked Alice. "Of you, later? You got
a picture of you at fifteen, and one at twenty, and one at forty and
fifty?"
The girls chortled.
"I don't have to show you anything!" said Mrs. Bentley. "Then we don't
have to believe you," replied Jane.
"But this picture proves I was young!"
"That's some other little girl, like us. You borrowed it."
"I was married!"
"Where's Mr. Bentley?"
"He's been gone a long time. If he were here, he'd tell you how young
and pretty I was when I was twenty-two."
"But he's not here and he can't tell, so what does that prove?"
"I have a marriage certificate."
"You could have borrowed that, too. Only way I'll believe you were ever
young"-Jane shut her eyes to emphasize how sure she was of herself--"is
if you have someone say they saw you when you were ten."
"Thousands of people saw me but they're dead, you little fool--or ill,
in other towns. I don't know a soul here, just moved here a few years
ago, so no one saw me young."
"Well, there you are!" Jane blinked at her companions. "Nobody saw her!"
"Listen!" Mrs. Bentley seized the girl's wrist. "You must take these
things on faith. Someday you'll be as old as I. People will say the
same.'Oh no,' they'll say,'those vultures were never hummingbirds, those
owls were never orioles, those parrots were never bluebirds!' One day
you'll be like me!"
"No, we won't!" said the girls. "Will we?" they asked one another.
"Wait and see!" said Mrs. Bentley.
And to herself she thought, Oh, God, children are children, old women
are old women, and nothing in between They can't imagine a change they
can't see.
"Your mother," she said to Jane. "Haven't you noticed, over the years,
the change?"
"No," said Jane. "She's always the same.
And that was true. You lived with people every day and they never
altered a degree. It was only when people had been off on a long trip,
for years, that they shocked you. And she felt like a woman who has been
on a roaring black train for seventy-two years, landing at last upon the
rail platform and everyone crying: "Helen Bentley, is that you?"
"I guess we better go home," said Jane. "Thanks for the ring. It just
fits me."
"Thanks for the comb. It's fine."
"Thanks for the picture of the little girl."
"Come back--you can't have those!" Mrs. Bentley shouted as they raced
down the steps. "They're mine!"
"Don't!" said Tom, following the girls. "Give them back!"
"No, she stole them! They belonged to some other little girl. She stole
them. Thanks!" cried Alice.
So no matter how she called after them, the girls were gone, like moths
through darkness.
"I'm sorry," said Tom, on the lawn, looking up at Mrs. Bentley. He went
away.
They took my ring and my comb and my picture, thought Mrs. Bentley,
trembling there on the steps. Oh, I'm empty, empty; it's part of my
life.
She lay awake for many hours into the night, among her trunks and
trinkets. She glanced over at the neat stacks of materials and toys and
opera plumes and said, aloud, "Does it really belong to me?"
Or was it the elaborate trick of an old lady convincing herself that she
had a past? After all, once a time was over, it was done. You were
always in the present. She may have been a girl once, but was not now.
Her childhood was gone and nothing could fetch it back.
A night wind blew in the room. The white curtain fluttered against a
dark cane, which had leaned against the wall near the other bric-a-brac
for many years. The cane trembled and fell out into a patch of
moonlight, with a soft thud. Its gold ferule glittered. It was her
husband's opera cane. It seemed as if he were pointing it at her, as he
often had, using his soft, sad, reasonable voice when they, upon rare
occasions, disagreed.
"Those children are right," he would have said. "They stole nothing from
you, my dear. These things don't belong to you here, you now. They
belonged to her, that other you, so long ago."
Oh, thought Mrs. Bentley. And then, as though an ancient phonograph
record had been set hissing under a steel needle, she remembered a
conversation she had once had with Mr. Bentley--Mr. Bentley, so prim, a
pink carnation in his whisk-broomed lapel, saying, "My dear, you never
will understand time, will you? You're always trying to be the things
you were, instead of the person you are tonight. Why do you save those
ticket stubs and theater programs? They'll only hurt you later. Throw
them away, my dear."
But Mrs. Bentley had stubbornly kept them.
"It won't work," Mr. Bentley continued, sipping his tea. "No matter how
hard you try to be what you once were, you can only be what you are here
and now. Time hypnotizes. When you're nine, you think you've always been
nine years old and will always be. When you're thirty, it seems you've
always been balanced there on that bright rim of middle life. And then
when you turn seventy, you are always and forever seventy. You're in the
present, you're trapped in a young now or an old now, but there is no
other now to be seen."
It had been one of the few, but gentle, disputes of their quiet
marriage. He had never approved of her bric-a-brackery. "Be what you
are, bury what you are not," he had said. "Ticket stubs are trickery.
Saving things is a magic trick, with mirrors."
If he were alive tonight, what would he say?
"You're saving cocoons." That's what he'd say. "Corsets, in a way, you
can never fit again. So why save them? You can't really prove you were
ever young. Pictures? No, they lie. You're not the picture."
"Affidavits?"
"No, my dear, you're not the dates, or the ink, or the paper. You're not
these trunks of junk and dust. You're only you, here, now--the present
you."
Mrs. Bentley nodded at the memory, breathing easier.
"Yes, I see. I see."
The gold-feruled cane lay silently on the moonlit rug.
"In the morning," she said to it, "I will do something final about this,
and settle down to being only me, and nobody else from any other year.
Yes, that's what I'll do."
She slept....
The morning was bright and green, and there at her door, bumping softly
on the screen, were the two girls. "Got any more to give us, Mrs.
Bentley? More of the little girl's things?"
She led them down the hall to the library.
"Take this." She gave Jane the dress in which she had played the
mandarin's daughter at fifteen. "And this, and this." A kaleidoscope, a
magnifying glass. "Pick anything you want," said Mrs. Bentley. "Books,
skates, dolls, everything-they're yours."
"Ours?"
"Only yours. And will you help me with a little work in the next hour?
I'm building a big fire in my back yard. I'm ; emptying the trunks,
throwing out this trash for the trash-man. It doesn't belong to me.
Nothing ever belongs to anybody."
"We'll help," they said.
Mrs. Bentley led the procession to the back yard, arms full, a box of
matches in her hand.
So the rest of the summer you could see the two little girls and Tom
like wrens on a wire, on Mrs. Bentley's front porch, waiting. And when
the silvery chimes of the icicle man were heard, the front door opened,
Mrs. Bentley floated out with her hand deep down the gullet of her
silver- mouthed purse, and for half an hour you could see them there on
the porch, the children and the old lady putting coldness into warmness,
eating chocolate icicles, laughing. At last they were good friends.
"How old are you, Mrs. Bentley?"
"Seventy-two."
"How old were you fifty years ago?"
"Seventy-two."
"You weren't ever young, were you, and never wore ribbons or dresses
like these?"
"No."
"Have you got a first name?"
"My name is Mrs. Bentley."
"And you've always lived in this one house?"
"Always."
"And never were pretty?"
"Never."
"Never in a million trillion years?" The two girls would bend toward the
old lady, and wait in the pressed silence of four o'clock on a summer
afternoon.
"Never," said Mrs. Bentley, "in a million trillion years."
You got the nickel tablet ready, Doug?"
"Sure." Doug licked his pencil good.
"What you got in there so far?"
"All the ceremonies."
"July Fourth and all that, dandelion-wine making and junk like bringing
out the porch swing, huh?"
"Says here, I ate the first Eskimo Pie of the summer season Tune first,
1928."
"That wasn't summer, that was still spring."
"It was a 'first' anyway, so I put it down. Bought those new tennis
shoes June twenty-fifth. Went barefoot in the grass June twenty-sixth
Busy, busy, busy, heck! Well, what you got to report this time, Tom? A
new first, a fancy ceremony of some sort to do with vacation like
creek-crab catching or water-strider-spider grabbing?"
"Nobody ever grabbed a water-strider-spider in his life. You ever know
anybody grabbed a water-strider-spider? Go ahead, think!"
"I'm thinking."
"Well?"
"You're right. Nobody ever did. Nobody ever will, I guess. They're just
too fast."
"It's not that they're fast. They just don't exist," said Tom. He
thought about it and nodded. "That's right, they just never did exist at
all. Well, what I got to report is this."
He leaned over and whispered in his brother's ear. Douglas wrote it.
They both looked at it.
"I'll be darned!" said Douglas. "I never thought of that. That's
brilliant! It's true. Old people never were children!" "And it's kind of
sad," said Tom, sitting still. "There's nothing we can do to help them."
Seems like the town is full of machines..' said Douglas, running. "Mr.
Auffmann and his Happiness Machine, Miss Fern and Miss Roberta and their
Green Machine. Now, Charlie, what you handing me?"
"A Time Machine!" panted Charlie Woodman, pacing him. "Mother's,
scout's, Injun's honor!"
"Travels in the past and future?" John Huff asked, easily circling them.
"Only in the past, but you can't have everything. Here we are."
Charlie Woodman pulled up at a hedge.
Douglas peered in at the old house. "Heck, that's Colonel Freeleigh's
place. Can't be no Time Machine in there. He's no inventor, and if he
was, we'd known about an important thing like a Time Machine years ago."
Charlie and John tiptoed up the front-porch steps. Douglas snorted and
shook his head, staying at the bottom of: the steps.
"Okay, Douglas," said Charlie. "Be a knucklehead. Sure, Colonel
Freeleigh didn't invent this Time Machine. But he's got a proprietary
interest in it, and it's been here all the time. We were too darned dumb
to notice! So long, Douglas Spaulding, to you!"
Charlie took John's elbow as though he was escorting a lady, opened the
front-porch screen and went in. The screen door did not slam.
Douglas had caught the screen and was following silently.
Charlie walked across the enclosed porch, knocked, and opened the inside
door. They all peered down a long dark hall toward a room that was lit
like an undersea grotto, soft green, dim, and watery.
"Colonel Freeleigh?"
Silence.
"He don't hear so good," whispered Charlie. "But he told me to just come
on in and yell. Colonel!"
The only answer was the dust sifting down and around the spiral
stairwell from above. Then there was a faint stir in that undersea
chamber at the far end of the hall.
They moved carefully along and peered into room which contained but two
pieces of furniture-an old man and a chair. They resembled each other,
both so thin you could see just how they had been put together, ball and
socket, sinew and joint. The rest of the room was raw floor boards,
naked walls and ceiling, and vast quantities of silent air.
"He looks dead," whispered Douglas.
"No, he's just thinking up new places to travel to," said Charlie, very
proud and quiet. "Colonel?"
One of the pieces of brown furniture moved and it was the colonel,
blinking around, focusing, and smiling a wild and toothless smile.
"Charlie!"
"Colonel, Doug and John here came to--"
"Welcome, boys; sit down, sit down!"
The boys sat, uneasily, on the floor.
"But where's the--" said Douglas. Charlie jabbed his ribs quickly.
"Where's the what?" asked Colonel Freeleigh.
"Where's the point in us talking, he means." Charlie grimaced at
Douglas, then smiled at the old man. "We got nothing to say. Colonel,
you say something."
"Beware, Charlie, old men only lie in wait for people to' ask them to
talk. Then they rattle on like a rusty elevator wheezing up a shaft."
"Ching Ling Soo," suggested Charlie casually.
"Eh?" said the colonel.
"Boston," Charlie prompted, "1910."
"Boston, 1910..." The colonel frowned. "Why, Ching Ling Soo, of course!"
"Yes, sir, Colonel."
"Let me see, now ..." The colonel's voice murmured, it drifted away on
serene lake waters. "Let me see ..."
The boys waited.
Colonel Freeleigh closed his eyes.
"October first, 1910, a calm cool fine autumn night, the Boston Variety
Theatre, yes, there it is. Full house, all waiting. Orchestra, fanfare,
curtain! Ching Ling Soo, the great Oriental Magician! There he is, on
stage! And there I am, front row center! 'The Bullet Trick!' he
cries.'Volunteers!' The man next to me goes up.'Examine the rifle!' says
Ching.'Mark the bullet!' says he.'Now fire this marked bullet from this
rifle, using my face for a target, and,' says Ching,'at the far end of
the stage I will catch the bullet in my teeth!' "
Colonel Freeleigh took a deep breath and paused.
Douglas was staring at him, half puzzled, half in awe. John Huff and
Charlie were completely lost. Now the old man went on, his head and body
frozen, only his lips moving.
"'Ready, aim, fire!' cries Ching Ling Soo. Bang! The rifle cracks. Bang!
Ching Ling Soo shrieks, he staggers, he falls, his face all red.
Pandemonium. Audience on its feet. Something wrong with the
rifle.'Dead,' someone says. And they're right. Dead. Horrible,
horrible... I'll always remember... his face a mask of red, the curtain
coming down fast and the women weeping ... 1910 ... Boston ... Variety
Theatre ... poor man...
Colonel Freeleigh slowly opened his eyes.
"Boy, Colonel," said Charlie, "that was fine. Now how about Pawnee
Bill?"
"Pawnee Bill ... ?"
"And the time you was on the prairie way back in '75."
"Pawnee Bill ..." The colonel moved into darkness. "Eighteen
seventy-five ... yes, me and Pawnee Bill on a little rise in the middle
of the prairie, waiting.'Shh!' says Pawnee Bill.'Listen.' The prairie
like a big stage all set for the storm to come. Thunder. Soft. Thunder
again. Not so soft. And across that prairie as far as the eye could see
this big ominous yellow-dark cloud full of black lightning, somehow sunk
to earth, fifty miles wide, fifty miles long, a mile high, and no more
than an inch off the ground.'lord!' I cried, 'Lord!'-from up on my
hill--'lord!' the earth pounded like a mad heart, boys, a heart gone to
panic. My bones shook fit to break. The earth shook: rat-a-tat
rat-a-tat, boom! Rumble. That's a rare word: rumble. Oh, how that mighty
storm rumbled along down, up, and over the rises, and all you could see
was the cloud and nothing inside.'That's them!' cried Pawnee Bill. And
the cloud was dust! Not vapors or rain, no, but prairie dust flung up
from the tinder-dry grass like fine corn meal, like pollen all blazed
with sunlight now, for the sun had come out. I shouted again! Why?
Because in all that hell-fire filtering dust now a veil moved aside and
I saw them, I swear it! The grand army of the ancient prairie: the
bison, the buffalo!"
The colonel let the silence build, then broke it again.
"Heads like giant Negroes' fists, bodies like locomotives! Twenty,
fifty, two hundred thousand iron missiles shot out of the west, gone off
the track and flailing cinders, their eyes like blazing coals, rumbling
toward oblivion!
"I saw that the dust rose up and for a little while showed me that sea
of humps, of dolloping manes, black shaggy waves rising,
falling...'Shoot!' says Pawnee Bill.'Shoot!' And I cock and aim.'Shoot'
he says. And I stand there feeling like God's right hand, looking at the
great vision of strength and violence going by, going by, midnight at
noon, like a glinty funeral train all black and long and sad and forever
and you don't fire at a funeral train, now do you, boys? do you? All I
wanted then was for the dust to sink again and cover the black shapes of
doom which pummeled and jostled on in great burdensome commotions. And,
boys, the dust came down. The cloud hid the million feet that were
drumming up the thunder and dusting out the storm. I heard Pawnee Bill
curse and hit my arm. But I was glad I hadn't touched that cloud or the
power within that cloud with so much as a pellet of lead. I just wanted
to stand watching time bundle by in great trundlings all hid by the
storm the bison made and carried with them toward eternity.
"An hour, three hours, six, it took for the storm to pass on away over
the horizon toward less kind men than me. Pawnee Bill was gone, I stood
alone, stone deaf. I walked all numb through a town a hundred miles
south and heard not the voices of men and was satisfied not to hear. For
a little while I wanted to remember the thunder. I hear it still, on
summer afternoons like this when the rain shapes over the lake; a
fearsome, wondrous sound ... one I wish you might have heard...."
The dim light filtered through Colonel Freeleigh's nose which was large
and like white porcelain which cupped a very thin and tepid orange tea
indeed.
"Is he asleep?" asked Douglas at last.
"No," said Charlie. "Just recharging his batteries."
Colonel Freeleigh breathed swiftly, softly, as if he'd run a long way.
At last he opened his eyes.
"Yes, sir" said Charlie, in admiration.
"Hello Charlie." The colonel smiled at the boys puzzledly.
"That's Doug and that's John," said Charlie.
"How-de-do, boys."
The boys said hello.
"But--" said Douglas. "Where is the--?"
"My gosh, you're dumb!" Charlie jabbed Douglas in the arm. He turned to
the colonel. "You were saying, sir?"
"Was I?" murmured the old man.
"The Civil War," suggested John Huff quietly. "Does he remember that?"
"Do I remember?" said the colonel. "Oh, I do, I do!" His voice trembled
as he shut up his eyes again. "Everything! Except ... which side I
fought on ..."
"The color of your uniform--" Charlie began.
"Colors begin to run on you," whispered the colonel. "it's gotten hazy.
I see soldiers with me, but a long time ago 1 stopped seeing color in
their coats or caps. I was born in Illinois, raised in Virginia, married
in New York, built a house in Tennessee and now, very late, here I am,
good Lord, back in Green Town. So you see why the colors run and
blend... ."
"But you remember which side of hills you fought on?" Charlie did not
raise his voice. "Did the sun rise on your left or right? Did you march
toward Canada or Mexico?"
"Seems some mornings the sun rose on my good right hand, some mornings
over my left shoulder. We marched all directions. It's most seventy
years since. You forget suns and mornings that long past."
"You remember winning, don't you? A battle won, somewhere?"
"No," said the old man, deep under. "I don't remember anyone winning
anywhere any time. War's never a winning thing, Charlie. You just lose
all the time, and the one who loses last asks for terms. All I remember
is a lot of losing and sadness and nothing good but the end of it. The
end of it, Charles, that was a winning all to itself, having nothing to
do with guns. But I don't suppose that's the kind of victory you boys
mean for me to talk on."
"Antietam," said John Huff. "Ask about Antietam."
"I was there."
The boys' eyes grew bright. "Bull Run, ask him Bull Run.. ."
"I was there." Softly.
"What about Shiloh?"
"There's never been a year in my life I haven't thought, what a lovely
name and what a shame to see it only on battle records."
"Shiloh, then. Fort Sumter?"
"I saw the first puffs of powder smoke." A dreaming voice. "So many
things come back, oh, so many things. T remember songs.'AU's quiet along
the Potomac tonight, where the soldiers lie peacefully dreaming; their
tents in the rays of the clear autumn moon, or the light of the
watchfire, are gleaming. Remember, remember...'AU quiet along the
Potomac tonight; no sound save the rush of the river; while soft falls
the dew on the face of the dead--the picket's off duty forever!'...
After the surrender, Mr. Lincoln, on the White House balcony asked the
band to play,'Look away, look away, look away, Dixie land.'... And then
there was the Boston lady who one night wrote a song will last a
thousand years:'Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord;
He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored.
Late nights I feel my mouth move singing back in another time. 'Ye
Cavaliers of Dixie! Who guard the Southern shores ...''When the boys
come home in triumph, brother, with the laurels they shall gain...' So
many songs, sung on both sides, blowing north, blowing south on the
night winds. 'We are coming, Father Abraham, three hundred thousand more
...''Tenting tonight, tenting tonight, tenting on the old camp
ground.''Hurrah, hurrah, we bring the Jubilee, hurrah, hurrah, the flag
that makes us free ...
The old man's voice faded.
The boys sat for a long while without moving. Then Charlie turned and
looked at Douglas and said, "Well, is he or isn't he?" Douglas breathed
twice and said, "He sure is."
The colonel opened his eyes.
"I sure am what?" he asked.
"A Time Machine," murmured Douglas. "A Time Machine."
The colonel looked at the boys for a full five seconds. Now it was his
voice that was full of awe.
"Is that what you boys call me?" "Yes, sir, Colonel."
"Yes, sir."
The colonel sat slowly back in his chair and looked at the boys and
looked at his hands and then looked at the blank wall beyond them
steadily.
Charlie arose. "Well, I guess we better go. So long and thanks,
Colonel."
"What? Oh, so long, boys."
Douglas and John and Charlie went on tiptoe out the door.
Colonel Freeleigh, though they crossed his line of vision, did not see
them go.
In the street, the boys were startled when someone shouted from a
first-floor window above, "Hey!"
They looked up.
"Yes, sir, Colonel?"
The colonel leaned out, waving one arm.
"I thought about what you said, boys!"
"Yes, sir?"
"And-you're right! Why didn't I think of it before! A Time Machine, by
God, a Time Machine!"
"Yes, sir."
"So long, boys. Come aboard any time!"
At the end of the street they turned again and the colonel was still
waving. They waved back, feeling warm and good, then went on.
"Chug-a-chug," said John. "I can travel twelve years into the past.
Wham-chug-ding!"
"Yeah," said Charlie, looking back at that quiet house, "but you can't
go a hundred years."
"No," mused John, "I can't go a hundred years. That's really traveling.
That's really some machine."
They walked for a full minute in silence, looking at their feet. They
came to a fence.
"Last one over this fence," said Douglas, "is a girl."
All the way home they called Douglas "Dora."
Long after midnight Tom woke to find Douglas scribbling rapidly in the
nickel tablet, by flashlight.
"Doug, what's up?"
"Up? Everything's up! I'm counting my blessings, Tom! Look here; the
Happiness Machine didn't work out, did it?. But, who cares! I got the
whole year lined up, anyway. Need r to run anywhere on the main streets,
I got the Green Town Trolley to look around and spy on the world from.
Need to run anywhere off the main streets, I knock on Miss Fern and I
Miss Roberta's door and they charge up the batteries on their electric
runabout and we go sailing down the sidewalks. Need to run down alleys
and over fences, to see that part of Green Town you only see around back
and behind and creep up on, and I got my brand-new sneakers. Sneakers,
runabout, I trolley! I'm set! But even better, Tom, even better, listen!
If I want to go where no one else can go because they're not: smart
enough to even think of it, if I want to charge back to 1890 and then
transfer to 1875 and transfer again crosstown to 1860 I just hop on the
old Colonel Freeleigh Express! I'm writing it down here this way:'Maybe
old people were never children, like we claim with Mrs. Bentley, but,
big or little, some of them were standing around at Appomattox the
summer of 1865.' They got Indian vision and can sight back further than
you and me will ever sight ahead."
"That sounds swell, Doug; what does it mean?"
Douglas went on writing. "It means you and me ain't:; got half the
chance to be far-travelers they have. If we're lucky we'll hit forty,
forty-five, fifty, That's just a jog around the block to them. It's when
you hit ninety, ninety-five, a hundred, that you're far-traveling like
heck."
The flashlight went out.
They lay there in the moonlight.
"Tom," whispered Douglas. "I got to travel all those ways. See what I
can see. But most of all I got to visit Colonel Freeleigh once, twice,
three times a week. He's better than all the other machines. He talks,
you listen. And the more he talks the more he gets you to peering around
and noticing things. He tells you you're riding on a very special train,
by gosh, and sure enough, it's hue. He's been down the track, and knows.
And now here we come, you and me, along the same track, but further on,
and so much looking and snuffing and handling things to do, you need old
Colonel Freeleigh to shove and say look alive so you remember every
second! Every darn thing there is to remember! So when kids come around
when you're real old, you can do for them what the colonel once did for
you. That's the way it is, Tom, I got to spend a lot of time visiting
him and listening so I can go far-traveling with him as often as he
can."
Tom was silent a moment. Then he looked over at Douglas there in the
dark.
"Far-traveling. You make that up?"
"Maybe yes and maybe no." "Far-traveling-" whispered Tom.
"Only one thing I'm sure of," said Douglas, closing his eyes. "It sure
sounds lonely."
Bang!
A door slammed. In an attic dust jumped off bureaus and bookcases. Two
old women collapsed against the attic door, each scrabbling to lock it
tight, tight. A thousand pigeons seemed to have leaped off the roof
right over their heads. They bent as if burdened, ducked under the drum
of beating wings. Then they stopped, their mouths surprised. What they
heard was only the pure sound of panic, their hearts in their chests....
Above the uproar, they tried to make themselves heard. "What've we done!
Poor Mister Quartermain!"
"We must've killed him. And someone must've seen and followed us.
Look..."
Miss Fern and Miss Roberta peered from the cobwebbed attic window.
Below, as if no great tragedy had occurred, the oaks and elms continued
to grow in fresh sunlight. A boy strolled by on the sidewalk, turned,
strolled by again, looking up.
In the attic the old women peered at each other as if trying to see
their faces in a running stream.
"The police!"
But no one hammered the downstairs door and cried, "In the name of the
law!" "Who's that boy down there?"
"Douglas, Douglas Spaulding! Lord, he's come to ask for a ride in our
Green Machine. He doesn't know. Our pride has ruined us. Pride and that
electrical contraption!"
"That terrible salesman from Gumport Falls. It's his fault, him and his
talking."
Talking, talking, like soft rain on a summer roof.
Suddenly it was another day, another noon. They sat with white fans and
dishes of cool, trembling lime Jell-O on their arbored porch.
Out of the blinding glare, out of the yellow sun, glittering, splendid
as a prince's coach ...
THE GREEN MACHINE!
It glided. It whispered, an ocean breeze. Delicate as maple leaves,
fresher than creek water, it purred with the majesty of cats prowling
the noontide. In the machine, his Panama hat afloat in Vaseline above
his ears, the salesman from Gumport Falls! The machine, with a rubber
tread, soft, shrewd, whipped up their scalded white sidewalk, whirred to
the lowest porch step, twirled, stopped. The salesman leaped out,
blocked off the sun with his Panama. In this small shadow, his smile
flashed.
"The name is William Tara! And this--" He pinched a bulb. A seal barked.
"--is the hem!" He lifted black satin cushions. "Storage batteries!" A
smell of lightning blew on the hot air. "Steering lever! Foot rest!
Overhead parasol! Here, in tote, is The Green Machine!"
In the dark attic the ladies shuddered, remembering, eyes shut.
"Why didn't we stab him with our darning needles!"
"Shh! Listen."
Someone knocked on the front door downstairs. After a time the knocking
stopped. They saw a woman cross the yard and enter the house next door.
"Only Lavinia Nebbs, come with an empty cup, to borrow sugar, I guess."
"Hold me, I'm afraid."
They shut their eyes. The memory-play began again. An old straw hat on
an iron trunk was suddenly flourished, it seemed, by the man from
Gumport Falls.
"Thanks, I will have some iced tea." You could hear the cool liquid
shock his stomach, in the silence. Then he turned his gaze upon the old
ladies like a doctor with a small light, looking into their eyes and
nostrils and mouths. "Ladies, I know you're both vigorous. You look it.
Eighty years"-he snapped his fingers--"mean nothing to you! But there
are times, mind, when you're so busy, busy, you need a friend indeed, a
friend in need, and that is the two-seater Green Machine."
He fixed his bright, stuffed-fox, green-glass-eyed gaze upon that
wonderful merchandise. It stood, smelling new, in the hot sunlight,
waiting for them, a parlor chair comfortably put to wheels.
"Quiet as a swan's feather." They felt him breathe softly in their
faces. "Listen." They listened. "The storage batteries are fully charged
and ready now! Listen! Not a tremor, not a sound. Electric, ladies. You
recharge it every night in your garage."
"It couldn't--that is--" The younger sister gulped some iced tea. "It
couldn't electrocute us accidently?"
"Perish the thought!"
He vaulted to the machine again, his teeth like those you saw in dental
windows, alone, grimacing at you, as you passed by late at night.
"Tea parties!" He waltzed the runabout in a circle. "Bridge clubs.
Soirees. Galas. Luncheons. Birthday gatherings! D.A.R. breakfasts." He
purred away as if running off forever. He returned in a rubber-tired
hush. "Gold Star Mother suppers." He sat primly, corseted by his supple
characterization of a woman. "Easy steering. Silent, elegant arrivals
and departures. No license needed. On hot days--take the breeze. Ah ...
He glided by the porch, head back, eyes closed deliciously, hair
tousling in the wind thus cleanly sliced through.
He trudged reverently up the porch stairs, hat in hand, turning to gaze
at the trial model as at the altar of a familiar church. "Ladies," he
said softly, "twenty-five dollars down. Ten dollars a month, for two
years."
Fern was first down the steps onto the double seat. She sat
apprehensively. Her hand itched. She raised it. She dared tweak the
rubber bulb horn.
A seal barked.
Roberta, on the porch, screamed hilariously and leaned over the railing.
The salesman joined their hilarity. He escorted the older sister down
the steps, roaring, at the same time taking out his pen and searching in
his straw hat for some piece of paper or other.
And so we bought it!" remembered Miss Roberta, in the attic, horrified
at their nerve. "We should've been warned! Always did think it looked
like a little car off the carnival roller coaster!"
"Well," said Fern defensively, "my hip's bothered me for years, and you
always get tired walking. It seemed so refined, so regal. Like in the
old days when women wore hoop skirts. They sailed! The Green Machine
sailed so quietly."
Like an excursion boat, wonderfully easy to steer, a baton handle you
twitched with your hand, so.
Oh, that glorious and enchanted first week--the magical afternoons of
golden light, humming through the shady town on a dreaming, timeless
river, seated stiffly, smiling at passing acquaintances, sedately
purring out their wrinkled claws at every turn, squeezing a hoarse cry
from the black rubber horn at intersections, sometimes letting Douglas
or Tom Spaulding or any of the other boys who trotted, chatting,
alongside, hitch a little ride. Fifteen slow and pleasurable miles an
hour top speed. They came and went through the summer sunlight and
shadow, their faces freckled and stained by passing trees, going and
coming like an ancient, wheeled vision.
"And then," whispered Fern, "this afternoon! Oh, this afternoon!"
"It was an accident."
"But we ran away, and that's criminal!"
This noon. The smell of the leather cushions under their bodies, the
gray perfume smell of their own sachets trailing back as they moved in
their silent Green Machine through the small, languorous town.
It happened quickly. Rolling soft onto the sidewalk at noon, because the
streets were blistering and fiery, and the only shade was under the lawn
trees, they had glided to a blind comer, bulbing their throaty horn.
Suddenly, like a jack-in-the-box, Mister Quartermain had tottered from
nowhere!
"Look out!" screamed Miss Fern.
"Look out!" screamed Miss Roberta.
"Look out!" cried Mister Quartermain.
The two women grabbed each other instead of the steering stick.
There was a terrible thud. The Green Machine sailed on in the hot
daylight, under the shady chestnut trees, past the ripening apple trees.
Looking back only once, the two old ladies' eyes filled with faded
horror.
The old man lay on the sidewalk, silent.
"And here we are," mourned Miss Fern in the darkening attic. "Oh, why
didn't we stop! Why did we run away?"
"Shh!" They both listened.
The rapping downstairs came again.
When it stopped they saw a boy cross the lawn in the dim light. "Just
Douglas Spaulding come for a ride again." They both sighed.
The hours passed; the sun was going down.
"We've been up here all afternoon," said Roberta tiredly. "We can't stay
in the attic three weeks hiding till everybody forgets."
"We'd starve."
"What'll we do, then? Do you think anyone saw and followed us?" They
looked at each other.
"No. Nobody saw."
The town was silent, all the tiny houses putting on lights. There was a
smell of watered grass and cooking suppers from below.
"Time to put on the meat," said Miss Fern. "Frank'll be coming home in
ten minutes."
"Do we dare go down?"
"Frank'd call the police if he found the house empty. That'd make things
worse."
The sun went swiftly. Now they were only two moving things in the musty
blackness. "Do you," wondered Miss Fern, "think he's dead?"
"Mister Quartermain?"
A pause. "Yes."
Roberta hesitated. "We'll check the evening paper."
They opened the attic door and looked carefully at the steps leading
down. "Oh, if Frank hears about this, he'll take our Green Machine away
from us, and it's so lovely and nice riding and getting the cool wind
and seeing the town."
"We won't tell him."
"Won't we?"
They helped each other down the creaking stairs to the second floor,
stopping to listen.... In the kitchen they peered at the pantry, peeked
out windows with frightened eyes, and finally set to work frying
hamburger on the stove. After five minutes of working silence Fern
looked sadly over at Roberta and said, "I've been thinking. We're old
and feeble and don't like to admit it. We're dangerous. We owe a debt to
society for running off--"
"And--?" A kind of silence fell on the frying in the kitchen as the two
sisters faced each other, nothing in their hands.
"I think that"--Fern stared at the wall for a long time-"we shouldn't
drive the Green Machine ever again." Roberta picked up a plate and held
it in her thin hand. "Not-ever?" she said.
"No."
"But," said Roberta, "we don't have to--to get rid of it, do we? We can
keep it, can't we?"
Fern considered this.
"Yes, I guess we can keep it."
"At least that'll be something. I'll go out now and disconnect the
batteries."
Roberta was leaving just as Frank, their younger brother, only fifty-six
years, entered.
"Hi, sisters!" he cried.
Roberta brushed past him without a word and walked out into the summer
dusk. Frank was carrying a newspaper which Fern immediately snatched
from him. Trembling, she looked it through and through, and sighing,
gave it back to him.
"Saw Doug Spaulding outside just now. Said he had a message for you.
Said for you not to worry--he saw everything and everything's all right.
What did he mean by that?"
"I'm sure I wouldn't know." Fem turned her back and searched for her
handkerchief.
"Oh well, these kids." Frank looked at his sister's back for a long
moment, then shrugged.
"Supper almost ready?" he asked pleasantly.
"Yes." Fern set the kitchen table.
There was a bulbing cry from outside. Once, twice, three times--far
away.
"What's that?" Frank peered through the kitchen window into the dusk.
"What's Roberta up to? Look at her out there, sitting in the Green
Machine, poking the rubber horn!"
Once, twice more, in the dusk, softly, like some kind of mournful
animal, the bulbing sound was pinched out.
"What's got into her?" demanded Frank.
"You just leave her alone!" screamed Fern. Frank looked surprised.
A moment later Roberta entered quietly, without looking at anyone, and
they all sat down to supper.
The first light on the roof outside; very early morning. The leaves on
all the trees tremble with a soft awakening to any breeze the dawn may
offer. And then, far off, around a curve of silver track, comes the
trolley, balanced on four small steel-blue wheels, and it is painted the
color of tangerines. Epaulets of shimmery brass cover it and pipings of
gold; and its chrome bell bings if the ancient motorman taps it with a
wrinkled shoe. The numerals on the trolley's front 1, and sides are
bright as lemons. Within, its seats prickle with ; cool green moss.
Something like a buggy whip flings up from its roof to brush the spider
thread high in the passing trees from which it takes its juice. From
every window blows an incense, the all-pervasive blue and secret smell
of summer storms and lightning.
Down the long elm-shadowed streets the trolley moves along, the
motorman's gray-gloved hand touched gently, timelessly, to the levered
controls.
At noon the motorman stopped Is car in the middle of the block and
leaned out. "Hey!"
And Douglas and Charlie and Tom and all the boys and girls on the block
saw the gray glove waving, and dropped : from trees and left skip ropes
in white snakes on lawns, to run and sit in the green plush seats, and
there was no charge. Mr. Tridden, the conductor, kept his glove over the
mouth of the money box as he moved the trolley on down the shady block,
calling.
"Hey!" said Charlie. "Where are we going?"
"Last ride," said Mr. Tridden, eyes on the high electric wire ahead. "No
more trolley. Bus starts to run tomorrow. Going to retire me with a
pension, they are. So-a free ride for everyone! Watch out!"
He ricocheted the brass handle, the trolley groaned and swung round an
endless green curve, and all the time in the world held still, as if
only the children and Mr. Tridden and his miraculous machine were riding
an endless river, away.
"Last day?" asked Douglas, stunned. "They can't do that! It's bad enough
the Green Machine is gone, locked up in the garage, and no arguments.
And bad enough my new tennis shoes are getting old and slowing down!
How'll I get around? But ... But ... They can't take off the trolley!
Why," said Douglas, "no matter how you look at it, a bus ain't a
trolley. Don't make the same kind of noise. Don't have tracks or wires,
don't throw sparks, don't pour sand on the tracks, don't have the same
colors, don't have a bell, don't let down a step like a trolley does!"
"Hey, that's right," said Charlie. "I always get a kick watching a
trolley let down the step, like an accordion."
"Sure," said Douglas.
And then they were at the end of the line, the silver tracks, abandoned
for eighteen years, ran on into rolling country. In 1910 people took the
trolley out to Chessman's Park with vast picnic hampers. The track,
never ripped up, still lay rusting among the hills.
"Here's where we turn around," said Charlie.
"Here's where you're wrong!" Mr. Tridden snapped the emergency generator
switch. "Now!"
The trolley, with a bump and a sailing glide, swept past the city
limits, turned off the street, and swooped downhill through intervals of
odorous sunlight and vast acreages of shadow that smelled of toadstools.
Here and there creek waters flushed the tracks and sun filtered through
trees like green glass. They slid whispering on meadows washed with wild
sunflowers past abandoned way stations empty of all save
transfer-punched confetti, to follow a forest stream into a summer
country, while Douglas talked.
"Why, just the smell of a trolley, that's different. I been on Chicago
buses; they smell funny."
"Trolleys are too slow," said Mr. Tridden. "Going to put busses on.
Fusses for people and busses for school."
The trolley whined to a stop. From overhead Mr. Tridden reached down
huge picnic hampers. Yelling, the children helped him carry the baskets
out by a creek that emptied into a silent lake where an ancient
bandstand stood crumbling into termite dust.
They sat eating ham sandwiches and fresh strawberries and waxy oranges
and Mr. Tridden told them how it had been twenty years ago, the band
playing on that ornate stand at night, the men pumping air into their
brass horns, the plump conductor flinging perspiration from his baton,
the children and fireflies running in the deep grass, the ladies with
long dresses and high pompadours treading the wooden xylophone walks
with men in choking collars. There was the walk now, all softened into a
fiber mush by the years. The lake was silent and blue and serene, and
fish peacefully threaded the bright reeds, and the motorman murmured on
and on, and the children felt it was some other year, with Mr. Tridden
looking wonderfully young, his eyes lighted like small bulbs, blue and
electric. It was a drifting, easy day, nobody rushing and the forest all
about, the sun held in one position, as Mr. Tridden's voice rose and
fell, and a darning needle sewed along the air, stitching, restitching
designs both golden and invisible. A bee settled into ,flower, humming
and humming. The trolley stood like an enchanted calliope, simmering
where the sun fell on it. The trolley was on their hands, a brass smell,
as they ate ripe cherries. The bright odor of the trolley blew from
their clothes on the summer wind.
A loon flew over the sky, crying.
Somebody shivered.
Mr. Tridden worked on his gloves. "Well, time to go. Parents'll think I
stole you all for good."
The trolley was silent and cool dark, like the inside of an ice-cream
drugstore. With a soft green rustling of velvet buff, the seats were
turned by the quiet children so they sat with their backs to the silent
lake, the deserted bandstand and the wooden planks that made a kind of
music if you walked down the shore on them into other lands.
Bing! went the soft bell under Mr. Tridden's foot and they soared back
over sun-abandoned, withered flower meadows, through woods, toward a
town that seemed to crush the sides of the trolley with bricks and
asphalt and wood when Mr. Tridden stopped to let the children out in
shady streets.
Charlie and Douglas were the last to stand near the opened tongue of the
trolley, the folding step, breathing electricity, watching Mr. Tridden's
gloves on the brass controls.
Douglas ran his fingers on the green creek moss, looked at the silver,
the brass, the wine color of the ceiling.
"Well... so long again, Mr. Tridden."
"Good-by, boys."
"See you around, Mr. Tridden."
"See you around."
There was a soft sigh of air; the door collapsed shut, tucking up its
corrugated tongue. The trolley sc slowly down the late afternoon,
brighter than the sun, tangerine, all flashing gold and lemon, turned a
far con wheeling, and vanished, gone away.
"School busses!" Charlie walked to the curb. "Won' even give us a chance
to be late to school. Come get you a your front door. Never be late
again in all our lives. Think of that nightmare, Doug, just think it all
over."
But Douglas, standing on the lawn, was seeing how it would be tomorrow,
when the men would pour hot tar over the silver tracks so you would
never know a trolley had e run this way. He knew it would take as many
years as could think of now to forget the tracks, no matter how deeply
buried. Some morning in autumn, spring, or winter he kn he'd wake and,
if he didn't go near the window, if he just lay deep and snug and warm,
in his bed, he would hear it, faint and far away.
And around the bend of the morning street, up the avenue, between the
even rows of sycamore, elm and maple, it the quietness before the start
of living, past his house h would hear the familiar sounds. Like the
ticking of a doe the rumble of a dozen metal barrels rolling, the hum of
single immense dragonfly at dawn. Like a merry-go-round like a small
electrical storm, the color of blue lightning, coming, here, and gone.
The trolley's chime! The hiss like a sc fountain spigot as it let down
and took up its step, and starting of the dream again, as on it sailed
along its way, traveling a hidden and buried track to some hidden and
buried destination...
Kick-the-can after supper?" asked Charlie.
"Sure," said Douglas. "Kick-the-can."
The facts about John Huff aged twelve. are simple and soon stated. He
could pathfind more trails than any Choctaw or Cherokee since time
began, could leap from the sky like a chimpanzee from a vine, could live
underwater two minutes and slide fifty yards downstream from where you
last saw him. The baseballs you pitched him he hit in the apple trees,
knocking down harvests. He could jump six-foot orchard walls, swing up
branches faster and come down, fat with peaches, quicker than anyone
else in the gang. He ran laughing. He sat easy. He was not a bully. He
was kind. His hair was dark and curly and his teeth were white as cream.
He remembered the words to all the cowboy songs and would teach you if
you asked. He knew the names of all the wild flowers and when the moon
would rise and set and when the tides came in or out. He was, in fact,
the only god living in the whole of Green Town, Illinois, during the
twentieth century that Douglas Spaulding knew of.
And right now he and Douglas were hiking out beyond town on another warm
and marble-round day, the sky blue blown-glass reaching high, the creeks
bright with mirror waters fanning over white stones. It was a day as
perfect as the flame of a candle.
Douglas walked through it thinking it would go on this way forever. The
perfection, the roundness, the grass smell traveled on out ahead as far
and fast as the speed of light. The sound of a good friend whistling
like an oriole, pegging the softball, as you horse-danced, key-jingled
the dusty paths, all of it was complete, everything could be touched;
things stayed near, things were at hand and would remain.
It was such a fine day and then suddenly a cloud crossed the sky,
covered the sun, and did not move again.
John Huff had been speaking quietly for several minutes. Now Douglas
stopped on the path and looked over at him.
"John, say that again."
"You heard me the first time, Doug."
"Did you say you were--going away?"
"Got my train ticket here in my pocket. Whoo-whoo, clang!
Shush-shush-shush-shush. Whooooooooo..."
His voice faded.
John took the yellow and green train ticket solemnly from his pocket and
they both looked at it.
"Tonight!" said Douglas. "My gosh! Tonight we were going to play Red
Light, Green Light and Statues! How come, all of a sudden? You been here
in Green Town all my life. You just don't pick up and leave!"
"It's my father," said John. "He's got a job in Milwaukee. We weren't
sure until today...."
"My gosh, here it is with the Baptist picnic next week and the big
carnival Labor Day and Halloween--can't your dad wait till then?"
John shook his head.
"Good grief!" said Douglas. "Let me sit down!"
They sat under an old oak tree on the side of the hill looking back at
town, and the sun made large trembling shadows around them; it was cool
as a cave in under the tree. Out beyond, in sunlight, the town was
painted with heat, the windows all gaping. Douglas wanted to run back in
there where the town, by its very weight, its houses, their bulk, might
enclose and prevent John's ever getting up and running off.
"But we're friends," Douglas said helplessly.
"We always will be," said John.
"You'll come back to visit every week or so, won't you?"
"Dad says only once or twice a year. It's eighty miles."
"Eighty miles ain't far!" shouted Douglas.
"No, it's not far at all," said John.
"My grandma's got a phone. I'll call you. Or maybe we'll all visit up
your way, too. That'd be great!" John said nothing for a long while.
"Well," said Douglas, "let's talk about something."
"What?"
"My gosh, if you're going away, we got a million things to talk about!
All the things we would've talked about next : month, the month after!
Praying mantises, zeppelins, acrobats, sword swallowers! Go on like you
was back there, grasshoppers spitting tobacco!"
"Funny thing is It don't feel like talking about grasshoppers."
"You always did!"
"Sure." John looked steadily at the town. "But It guess this just ain't
the time."
"John, what's wrong? You look funny...."
John had closed his eyes and screwed up his face. "Doug, the Terle
house, upstairs, you know?"
"Sure."
"The colored windowpanes on the little round windows, have they always
been there?"
"Sure."
"You positive?"
"Darned old windows been there since before we were born. Why?"
"I never saw them before today," said John. "On the way walking through
town I looked up and there they were. Doug, what was I doing all these
years I didn't see them?"
"You had other things to do."
"Did I?" John turned and looked in a kind of panic at Douglas. "Gosh,
Doug, why should those dam windows scare me? I mean, that's nothing to
be scared of, is it? It's just..." He floundered. "It's just, if I
didn't see these windows until today, what else did I miss? And what
about all the things I did see here in town? Will I be able to remember
them when I go away?"
"Anything you want to remember, you remember. T went to camp two summers
ago. Up there I remembered."
"No, you didn't! You told me. you woke nights and couldn't remember your
mother's face."
"No!"
"Some nights it happens to me in my own house; scares heck out of me. I
got to go in my folks' room and look at their faces while they sleep, to
be sure! And I go back to my room and lose it again. Gosh, Doug, oh
gosh!" He held onto his knees tight. "Promise me just one thing, Doug.
Promise you'll remember me, promise you'll remember my face and
everything. Will you promise?"
"Easy as pie. Cot a motion-picture machine in my head. Lying in bed
nights I can just turn on a light in my head and out it comes on the
wall, clear as heck, and there you'll be, yelling and waving at me."
"Shut your eyes, Doug. Now, tell me, what color eyes I got? Don't peek.
What color eyes I got?"
Douglas began to sweat. His eyelids twitched nervously. "Aw heck, John,
that's not fair."
"Tell me!"
"Brown!"
John turned away. "No, sir."
"What do you mean, no?"
"You're not even close!" John closed his eyes.
"Turn around here," said Douglas. "Open up, let me see."
"It's no use," said John. "You forgot already. Just the way I said.
"Turn around here!" Douglas grabbed him by the hair and turned him
slowly.
"Okay, Doug." John opened his eyes.
"Green." Douglas, dismayed, let his hand drop. "Your eyes are green....
Well, that's close to brown. Almost hazel!"
"Doug, don't lie to me." "All right," said Doug quietly. "I won't."
They sat there listening to the other boys running up the hill,
shrieking and yelling at them.
They raced along the railroad tracks, opened their lunch in brown-paper
sacks, and sniffed deeply of the wax-wrapped deviled-ham sandwiches and
green-sea pickles and colored peppermints. They ran and ran again and
Douglas bent to scorch his ear on the hot steel rails, hearing trains so
far away they were unseen voyagings in other lands, sending Morse-code
messages to him here under the killing sun. Douglas stood up, stunned.
"John!"
For John was running, and this was terrible. Because if you ran, time
ran. You yelled and screamed and raced and rolled and tumbled and all of
a sudden the sun was gone and the whistle was blowing and you were on
your long way home to supper. When you weren't looking, the sun got
around behind you! The only way to keep things slow was to watch
everything and do nothing! You could stretch a day to three days, sure,
just by watching!
"John!"
There was no way to get him to help now, save by a trick.
"John, ditch, ditch the others!"
Yelling, Douglas and John sprinted off, kiting the wind downhill,
letting gravity work for them, over meadows, around barns until at last
the sound of the pursuers faded.
John and Douglas climbed into a haystack which was like a great bonfire
crisping under them.
"Let's not do anything," said John.
"Just what I was going to say," said Douglas.
They sat quietly, getting their breath.
There was a small sound like an insect in the hay.
They both heard it, but they didn't look at the sound. When Douglas
moved his wrist the sound ticked in another part of the haystack. When
he brought his arm around on his lap the sound ticked in his lap. He let
his eyes fall in a brief flicker. The watch said three o'clock.
Douglas moved his right hand stealthily to the ticking, pulled out the
watch stem. He set the hands back.
Now they had all the time they would ever need to look long and close at
the world, feel the sun move like a fiery wind over the sky.
But at last John must have felt the bodiless weight of their shadows
shift and lean, and he spoke.
"Doug, what time is it?"
"Two-thirty."
John looked at the sky.
Don't! thought Douglas.
"Looks more like three-thirty, four," said John. "Boy Scout. You learn
them things."
Douglas sighed and slowly turned the watch ahead.
John watched him do this, silently. Douglas looked up. John punched him,
not hard at all, in the arm.
With a swift stroke a plunge, a train came and went so quickly the boys
all leaped aside, yelling, shaking their fists after it, Douglas and
John with them. The train roared down the track, two hundred people in
it, gone. The dust followed it a little way toward the south, then
settled in the golden silence among the blue rails.
The boys were walking home.
"I'm going to Cincinnati when I'm seventeen and be a railroad fireman,"
said Charlie Woodman.
"I got an uncle in New York," said Jim. "I'll go there and be a
printer."
Doug did not ask the others. Already the trains were chanting and he saw
their faces drifting off on back observation platforms, or pressed to
windows. One by one they slid away. And then the empty track and the
summer sky and himself on another train run in another direction.
Douglas felt the earth move under his feet and saw their shadows move
off the grass and color the air.
He swallowed hard, then gave a screaming yell, pulled back his fist,
shot the indoor ball whistling in the sky. "Last one home's a rhino's
behind!"
They pounded down the tracks, laughing, flailing the air. There went
John Huff, not touching the ground at all. And here came Douglas,
touching it all the time.
It was seven o'clock, supper over, and the boys gathering one by one
from the sound of their house doors slammed and their parents crying to
them not to slam the doors. Douglas and Tom and Charlie and John stood
among half a dozen others and it was time for hide-and-seek and Statues.
"Just one game," said John. "Then I got to go home. The train leaves at
nine. Who's going to be 'it'?"
"Me," said Douglas.
"That the first time I ever heard of anybody volunteering to be 'it,' "
said Tom.
Douglas looked at John for a long moment. "Start running," he cried.
The boys scattered, yelling. John backed away, then turned and began to
lope. Douglas counted slowly. He let them run far, spread out, separate
each to his own small world. When they had got their momentum up and
were almost out of sight he took a deep breath.
"Statues!"
Everyone froze.
Very quietly Douglas moved across the lawn to where John Huff stood like
an iron deer in the twilight.
Far away, the other boys stood hands up, faces grimaced, eyes bright as
stuffed squirrels.
But here was John, alone and motionless and no one rushing or making a
great outcry to spoil this moment.
Douglas walked around the statue one way, walked around the statue the
other way. The statue did not move.
It did not speak. It looked at the horizon, its mouth half smiling.
It was like that time years ago in Chicago when they had visited a big
place where the carved marble figures were, and his walking around them
in the silence. So here was John Huff with grass stains on his knees and
the seat of his. pants, and cuts on his fingers and scabs on his elbows.
Here was John Huff with the quiet tennis shoes, his feet sheathed in
silence. There was the mouth that had chewed many an: apricot pie come
summer, and said many a quiet thing or: two about life and the lay of
the land. And there were the eyes, not blind like statues' eyes, but
filled with molten green-  gold. And there the dark hair blowing now
north now south or any direction in the little breeze there was. And
there the % hands with all the town on them, dirt from roads and
bark-slivers from trees, the fingers that smelled of hemp and vine and
green apple, old coins or pickle-green frogs. There were the ears with
the sunlight shining through them like bright warm peach wax and here,
invisible, his spearmint-breath upon the air.
"John, now," said Douglas, "don't you move so much as an eyelash. I
absolutely command you to stay here and not move at all for the next
three hours!"
"Doug.. ."
John's lips moved.
"Freeze!" said Douglas.
John went back to looking at the sky, but he was not smiling now.
"I got to go," he whispered.
"Not a muscle, it's the game!"
"I just got to get home now," said John.
Now the statue moved, took its hands down out of the air and turned its
head to look at Douglas. They stood looking at each other. The other
kids were putting their arms down, too.
"We'll play one more round," said John, "except this time, I'm 'it.'
Run!"
The boys ran.
"Freeze!"
The boys froze, Douglas with them.
"Not a muscle!" shouted John. "Not a hair!"
He came and stood by Douglas.
"Boy, this is the only way to do it," he said.
Douglas looked off at the twilight sky.
"Frozen statues, every single one of you, the next three minutes!" said
John.
Douglas felt John walking around him even as he had walked around John a
moment ago. He felt John sock him on the arm once, not too hard. "So
long," he said.
Then there was a rushing sound and he knew without looking that there
was nobody behind him now.
Far away, a train whistle sounded.
Douglas stood that way for a full minute, waiting for the sound of the
running to fade, but it did not stop. He's still running away, but he
doesn't sound any further off, thought Douglas. Why doesn't he stop
running?
And then he realized it was only the sound of his heart in his body.
Stop! He jerked his hand to his chest. Stop running! I don't like that
sound!
And then he felt himself walking across the lawns among all the other
statues now, and whether they, too, were coming to life he did not know.
They did not seem to be moving at all. For that matter he himself was
only moving from the knees down. The rest of him was cold stone, and
very heavy.
Going up the front porch of his house, he turned suddenly to look at the
lawns behind him. The lawns were empty.
A series of rifle shots. Screen doors banged one after the . other, a
sunset volley, along the street.
Statues are best, he thought. They're the only things you can keep on
your lawn. Don't ever let them move. Once you do, you can't do a thing
with them.
Suddenly his fist shot out like a piston from his side and it shook
itself hard at the lawns and the street and the gathering dusk. His face
was choked with blood, his eyes were blazing.
"John!" he cried. "You, John! John, you're my enemy, you hear? You're no
friend of mine! Don't come back now, ever! Get away, you! Enemy, you
hear? That's what you are! It's all off between us, you're dirt, that's
all, dirt! John, you hear me, John!"
As if a wick had been turned a little lower in a great clear lamp beyond
the town, the sky darkened still more. He stood on the porch, his mouth
gasping and working. His fist still thrust straight out at that house
across the street and down the way. He looked at the fist and it
dissolved, the world dissolved beyond it.
Going upstairs, in the dark, where he could only feel his face but see
nothing of himself, not even his fists, he told himself over and over,
I'm mad, I'm angry, I hate him, I'm mad, I'm angry, I hate him!
Ten minutes later, slowly he reached the top of the stairs, in the
dark....
"Tom," said Douglas, "just promise me one thing, okay?"
"It's a promise. What?"
"You may be my brother and maybe I hate you sometimes, but stick around,
all right?"
"You mean you'll let me follow you and the older guys when you go on
hikes?"
"Well ... sure ... even that. What I mean is, don't go away, huh? Don't
let any cars run over you or fall off a cliff." "I should say not!
Whatta you think I am, anyway?"
"Cause if worst comes to worst, and both of us are real old--say forty
or forty-five some day--we can own a gold mine out West and sit there
smoking corn silk and growing beards."
"Growing beards! Boy!"
"Like I say, you stick around and don't let nothing happen."
"You can depend on me," said Tom.
"It's not you I worry about," said Douglas. "It's the way God runs the
world."
Tom thought about this for a moment.
"He's all right, Doug," said Tom. "He tries."
She came out of the the bathroom putting iodine on her finger where she
had almost lopped it off cutting herself a chunk of cocoanut cake. Just
then the mailman came up the porch steps, opened the door, and walked
in. The door slammed. Elmira Brown jumped a foot.
"Sam!" she cried. She waved her iodined finger on the air to cool it.
"I'm still not used to my husband being a postman. Every time you just
walk in, it scares the life out of me!"
Sam Brown stood there with the mail pouch half empty, scratching his
head. He looked back out the door as if a fog had suddenly rolled in on
a calm sweet summer morn.
"Sam, you're home early," she said.
"Can't stay," he said in a puzzled voice.
"Spit it out, what's wrong?" She came over and looked into his face.
"Maybe nothing, maybe lots. I just delivered some mail to Clara
Goodwater up the street ...."
"Clara Goodwater!"
"Now don't get your dander up. Books it was, from the Johnson-Smith
Company, Racine, Wisconsin. Title of one book ... let's see now." He
screwed up his face, then unscrewed it. "Albertus Magnus-that's it.
Being the approved, verified, sympathetic and natural EGYPTIAN SECRETS
or ..." He peered at the ceiling to summon the lettering. "White and
Black Art for Man and Beast, Revealing the Forbidden Knowledge and
Mysteries of Ancient Philosophers!"
"Clara Goodwater's you say?"
"Walking along, I had a good chance to peek at the front pages, no harm
in that. 'Hidden Secrets of Life Unveiled by that celebrated Student,
Philosopher, Chemist, Naturalist, Psychomist, Astrologer, Alchemist,
Metallurgist, Sorcerer, Explanator of the Mysteries of Wizards and
Witchcraft, together with recondite views of numerous Arts and
Sciences--Obscure, Plain, Practical, etc.' There! By God, I got a head
like a box Brownie. Got the words, even if I haven't got the sense."
Elmira stood looking at her iodined finger as if it were pointed at her
by a stranger.
"Clara Goodwater," she murmured.
"Looked me right in the eye as I handed it over, said, 'Going to be a
witch, first-class no doubt. Get my diploma in no time. Set up business.
Hex crowds and individuals, old and young, big and small.' Then she
kinda laughed, put her nose in that book, and went in."
Elmira stared at a bruise on her arm, carefully tongued a loose tooth in
her jaw.
A door slammed. Tom Spaulding, kneeling on Elmira Brown's front lawn,
looked up. He had been wandering about the neighborhood, seeing how the
ants were doing here or there, and had found a particularly good hill
with a big hole in which all kinds of fiery bright pismires were
tumbling about scissoring the air and wildly carrying little packets of
dead grasshopper and infinitesimal bird down into the earth. Now here
was something else: Mrs. Brown, swaying on the edge of her porch as if
she'd just found out the world was falling through space at sixty
trillion miles a second. Behind her was Mr. Brown, who didn't know the
miles per second and probably wouldn't care if he did know.
"You, Tom!" said Mrs. Brown. "I need moral support and the equivalent of
the blood of the Lamb with me. Come along!"
And off she rushed, squashing ants and kicking tops off dandelions and
trotting big spiky holes in flower beds as she cut across yards.
Tom knelt a moment longer studying Mrs. Brown's shoulder blades and
spine as she toppled down the street. He read the bones and they were
eloquent of melodrama and adventure, a thing he did not ordinarily
connect with ladies, even though Mrs. Brown had the remnants of a
pirate's mustache. A moment later he was in tandem with her.
"Mrs. Brown, you sure look mad!"
"You don't know what mad is, boy!"
"Watch out!" cried Tom.
Mrs. Elmira Brown fell right over an iron dog lying asleep there on the
green grass.
"Mrs. Brown!"
"You see?" Mrs. Brown sat there. "Clara Goodwater did this to me!
Magic!"
"Magic?"
"Never mind, boy. Here's the steps. You go first and kick any invisible
strings out of the way. Ring that doorbell, but pull your finger off
quick, the juice'll burn you to a cinder!"
Tom did not touch the bell.
"Clara Goodwater!" Mrs. Brown flicked the bell button with her iodined
finger.
Far away in the cool dim empty rooms of the big old house, a silver bell
tinkled and faded.
Tom listened. Still farther away there was a stir of mouselike running.
A shadow, perhaps a blowing curtain, moved in a distant parlor.
"Hello," said a quiet voice.
And quite suddenly Mrs. Goodwater was there, fresh as a stick of
peppermint, behind the screen.
"Why, hello there, Tom, Elmira. What--"
"Don't rush me! We came over about your practicing to be a full-fledged
witch!"
Mrs. Goodwater smiled. "Your husband's not only a mailman, but a
guardian of the law. Got a nose out to here!"
"He didn't look at no mail."
"He's ten minutes between houses laughing at post cards. and tryin' on
mail-order shoes."
"It ain't what he seen; it's what you yourself told him about the books
you got."
"Just a joke. Goin' to be a witch! I said, and bang! Off gallops Sam,
like I'd flung Lightning at him. I declare there can't be one wrinkle in
that man's brain."
"You talked about your magic other places yesterday--"
"You must mean the Sandwich Club ..."
"To which I pointedly was not invited."
"Why, lady, we thought that was your regular day with your grandma."
"I can always have another Grandma day, if people'd only ask me places."
"All there was to it at the Sandwich Club was me sitting there with a
ham and pickle sandwich, and I said right out loud, "At last I'm going
to get my witch's diploma. Been studying for years!"
"That's what come back to me over the phone!"
"Ain't modern inventions wonderful!" said Mrs. Goodwater.
"Considering you been president of the Honeysuckle Ladies Lodge since
the Civil War, it seems, I'll put it to you bang on the nose, have you
used witchcraft all these years to spell the ladies and win the
ayes-have-it?"
"Do you doubt it for a moment, lady?" said Mrs. Goodwater.
"Election's tomorrow again, and all I want to know is, you runnin' for
another term--and ain't you ashamed?"
"Yes to the first question and no to the second. Lady, look here, I
bought those books for my boy cousin, Raoul. He's just ten and goes
around looking in hats for rabbits. I told him there's about as much
chance finding rabbits in hats as brains in heads of certain people I
could name, but look he does and so I got these gifts for him.
"Wouldn't believe you on a stack of Bibles."
"God's truth, anyway. I love to fun about the witch thing. The ladies
all yodeled when I explained about my dark powers. Wish you'd been
there."
"I'll be there tomorrow to fight you with a cross of gold and all the
powers of good I can organize behind me," said Elmira. "Right now, tell
me how much other magic junk you got in your house."
Mrs. Goodwater pointed to a side table inside the door.
"I been buyin' all kinds of magic herbs. Smell funny and make Raoul
happy. That little sack of stuff, that's called This is rue, and this is
Sabisse root and that there's Ebon herbs; here's black sulphur, and this
they claim is bone dust."
"Bone dust" Elmira skipped back and kicked Tom's ankle. Tom yelped.
"And here's wormwood and fern leaves so you can freeze shotguns and fly
like a bat in your dreams, it says in Chapter X of the little book here.
I think it's fine for growing boys' heads to think about things like
this. Now, from the look on your face you don't believe Raoul exists.
Well, I'll give you his Springfield address."
"Yes," said Elmira, "and the day I write him you'll take the Springfield
bus and go to General Delivery and get my letter and write back to me in
a boy's hand. I know you!"
"Mrs. Brown, speak up--you want to be president of the Honeysuckle
Ladies Lodge, right? You run every year now for ten years. You nominate
yourself. And always wind up gettin' one vote. Yours. Elmira, if the
ladies wanted you they'd landslide you in. But from where I stand
looking up the mountain, ain't so much as one pebble come rattlin' down
save yours. Tell you what, I'll nominate and vote for you myself come
noon tomorrow, how's that?"
"Damned for sure, then," said Elmira. "Last year I got a deathly cold
right at election time; couldn't get out and campaign
back-fence-to-back-fence. Year before that, broke my leg. Mighty
strange." She squinted darkly at the lady behind the screen. "That's not
all. Last month I cut my finger six times, bruised my knee ten times,
fell off my back porch twice, you hear-twice! I broke a window, dropped
four dishes, one vase worth a dollar forty-nine at Bixby's, and I'm
billin' you for every dropped dish from now on in my house and
environs!"
"I'll be poor by Christmas," said Mrs. Goodwater. She opened the screen
door and came out suddenly and let the door slam. "Elmira Brown, how old
are you?"
"You probably got it written in one of your black books. Thirty-five!"
"Well, when I think of thirty-five years of your life ..." Mrs.
Goodwater pursed her lips and blinked her eyes, counting. "That's about
twelve thousand seven hundred and seventy-five days, or counting three
of them per day, twelve thousand-odd commotions, twelve thousand
much-ados and twelve thousand calamaties. It's a full rich life you
lead, Elmira Brown. Shake hands!"
"Get away!" Elmira fended her off.
"Why, lady, you're only the second most clumsy woman in Green Town,
Illinois. You can't sit down without playing the chair like an
accordion. You can't stand up but what you kick the cat. You can't trot
across an open meadow without falling into a well. Your life has been
one long decline, Elmira Alice Brown, so why not admit it?"
"It wasn't clumsiness that caused my calamities, but you being within a
mile of me at those times when I dropped a pot of beans or juiced my
finger in the electric socket at home."
"Lady, in a town this size, everybody's within a mile of someone at one
time or other in the day."
"You admit being around then?"
"I admit being born here, yes, but I'd give anything right now to have
been born in Kenosha or Zion. Elmira, go to your dentist and see what he
can do about that serpent's tongue in there."
"Oh!" said Elmira. "Oh, oh, oh!"
"You've pushed me too far. I wasn't interested in witchcraft, but I
think I'll just look into this business. Listen here! You're invisible
right now. While you stood there I put a spell on you. You're clean out
of sight."
"You didn't!"
"Course," admitted the witch, "I never could see you, lady." Elmira
pulled out her pocket mirror. "There I am!" She peered closer and
gasped. She reached up like someone tuning a harp and plucked a single
thread. She held it up, Exhibit A. "I never had a gray hair in my life
till this second!"
The witch smiled charmingly. "Put it in a jar of still water, be an
angleworm come morning. Oh, Elmira, look at yourself at last, won't you?
All these years, blaming others for your own mallet feet and floaty
ways! You ever read Shakespeare? There's little stage directions in
there: ALARUMS AND EXCURSIONS. That's you, Elmira. Alarums and
Excursions! Now get home before I feel the bumps on your head and
predict gas at night for you! Shoo!
She waved her hands in the air as if Elmira were a cloud of things. "My,
the flies are thick this summer!" she said.
She went inside and hooked the door.
"The line is drawn, Mrs. Goodwater," Elmira said, folding her arms.
"I'll give you one last chance. Withdraw from the candidacy of the
Honeysuckle Lodge or face me face-to-face tomorrow when I run for office
and wrest it from you in a fair fight. I'll bring Tom here with me. An
innocent good boy. And innocence and good will win the day."
"I wouldn't count on me being innocent, Mrs. Brown," said the boy. "My
mother says--"
"Shut up, Tom, good's good! You'll be there on my right hand, boy."
"Yes'm" said Tom.
"If, that is," said Elmira, "I can live through the night with this lady
making wax dummies of me--shoving rusty needles through the very heart
and soul of them. If you find a great big fig in my bed all shriveled up
come sunrise, Tom, you'll know who picked the fruit in the vineyard. And
look to see Mrs. Goodwater president till she's a hundred and
ninety-five years old."
"Why, lady," said Mrs. Goodwater, "I'm three hundred and five now. Used
to call me SHE in the old days." She poked her fingers at the street.
"Abracadabra-zimmity-ZAM! How's that?"
Elmira ran down off the porch.
"Tomorrow!" she cried.
"Till then, lady!" said Mrs. Goodwater.
Tom followed Elmira, shrugging and kicking ants off the sidewalk as he
went.
Running across a driveway, Elmira screamed.
"Mrs. Brown!" cried Tom.
A car backing out of a garage ran right over Elmira's right big toe.
Mrs. Elmira Brown's foot hurt her in the middle of the night, so she got
up and went down to the kitchen and ate some cold chicken and made a
neat, painfully accurate list of things. First, illnesses in the past
year. Three colds, four mild attacks of indigestion, one seizure of
bloat, arthritis, lumbago, what she imagined to be gout, a severe
bronchial cough, incipient asthma, and spots on her arms, plus an
abscessed semicircular canal which made her reel like a drunken moth
some days, backache, head pains, and nausea. Cost of medicine:
ninety-eight dollars and seventy-eight cents.
Secondly, things broken in the house during the twelve months just past;
two lamps, six vases, ten dishes, one soup tureen, two windows, one
chair, one sofa cushion, six glasses, and one crystal chandelier prism.
Total cost: twelve dollars and ten cents.
Thirdly, her pains this very night. Her toe hurt from being run over.
Her stomach was upset. Her back was stiff, her legs were pulsing with
agony. Her eyeballs felt like wads of blazing cotton. Her tongue tasted
like a dust mop. Her ears were belling and ringing away. Cost? She
debated, going back to bed.
Ten thousand dollars in personal suffering.
"Try to settle this out of court!" she said half aloud.
"Eh?" said her husband, awake.
She lay down in bed. "I simply refuse to die."
"Beg pardon?" he said.
"I won't die!" she said, staring at the ceiling.
"That's what I always claimed," said her husband, and turned over to
snore.
In the morning Mrs. Elmira Brown was up early and down to the library
and then to the drugstore and back to the house where she was busy
mixing all kinds of chemicals when her husband, Sam came home with an
empty mail pouch at noon.
"Lunch's in the icebox." Elmira stirred a green-looking porridge in a
large glass.
"Good Lord, what's that?" asked her husband. "Looks like a milk shake
been left out in the sun for forty years. Got kind of a fungus on it."
"Fight magic with magic."
"You going to drink that?"
"Just before I go up into the Honeysuckle Ladies Lodge for the big
doings."
Samuel Brown sniffed the concoction. "Take my advice. Get up those steps
first, then drink it. What's in it?"
"Snow from angels' wings, well, really menthol, to cool hell's fires
that burn you, it says in this book I got at the library. The juice of a
fresh grape off the vine, for thinking clear sweet thoughts in the face
of dark visions, it says. Also red rhubarb, cream of tartar, white
sugar, white of eggs, spring water and clover buds with the strength of
the good earth in them. Oh, I could go on all day. It's here in the
list, good against bad, white against black. I can't lose!"
"Oh, you'll win, all right," said her husband. "But will you know it?"
"Think good thoughts. I'm on my way to get Tom for my charm."
"Poor boy," said her husband. "Innocent, like you say, and about to be
tom limb from limb, bargain-basement day at the Honeysuckle Lodge."
"Tom'll survive," said Elmira, and, taking the bubbling concoction with
her, hid inside a Quaker Oats box with the lid on, went out the door
without catching her dress or snagging her new ninety-eight-cent
stockings. Realizing this, she was smug all the way to Tom's house where
he waited for her in his white summer suit as she had instructed.
"Phew!" said Tom. "What you got in that box?"
"Destiny," said Elmira.
"I sure hope so," said Tom, walking about two paces ahead of her.
The Honeysuckle Ladies Lodge was full of ladies looking in each other's
mirrors and tugging at their skirts and asking to be sure their slips
weren't showing.
At one o'clock Mrs. Elmira Brown came up the steps with ' a boy in white
clothes. He was holding his nose and screwing ! up one eye so he could
only half see where he was going. Mrs. Brown looked at the crowd and
then at the Quaker Oats box and opened the top and looked in and gasped,
and put the top back on without drinking any of that stuff in there. She
moved inside the hall and with her moved a rustling as of taffeta, all
the ladies whispering in a tide after her.
She sat down in back with Tom, and Tom looked more, miserable than ever.
The one eye he had open looked at the crowd of ladies and shut up for
good. Sitting there, Elmira got the potion out and drank it slowly down.
At one-thirty, the president, Mrs. Goodwater, banged the gavel and all
but two dozen of the ladies quit talking.
"Ladies," she called out over the summer sea of silks and laces, capped
here and there with white or gray, "it's election time. But before we
start, I believe Mrs. Elmira Brown, wife of our eminent graphologist--"
A titter ran through the room.
"What's graphologist?" Elmira elbowed Tom twice.
"I don't know," whispered Tom fiercely, eyes shut, feeling that elbow
come out of darkness at him.
"--wife, as I say, of our eminent handwriting expert, Samuel Brown ...
(more laughter) ... of the U.S. Postal Service," continued Mrs.
Goodwater. "Mrs. Brown wants to give us some opinions. Mrs. Brown?"
Elmira stood up. Her chair fell over backward and snapped shut like a
bear trap on itself. She jumped an inch off the floor and teetered on
her heels, which gave off cracking sounds like they would fall to dust
any moment. "I got plenty to say," she said, holding the empty Quaker
Oats box in one hand with a Bible. She grabbed Tom with the other and
plowed forward, hitting several people's elbows and muttering to them,
"Watch what you're doing! Careful, you!" to reach the platform, turn,
and knock a glass of water dripping over the table. She gave Mrs.
Goodwater another bristly scowl when this happened and let her mop it up
with a tiny handkerchief. Then with a secret look of triumph, Elmira
drew forth the empty philter glass and held it up, displaying it for
Mrs. Goodwater and whispering, "You know what was in this? It's inside
me, now, lady. The charmed circle surrounds me. No knife can cleave, no
hatchet break through."
The ladies, all talking, did not hear.
Mrs. Goodwater nodded, held up her hands, and there was silence.
Elmira held tight to Tom's hand. Tom kept his eyes shut, wincing.
"Ladies," Elmira said, "I sympathize with you. I know what you've been
through these last ten years. I know why you voted for Mrs. Goodwater
here. You've got boys, girls, and men to feed. You've got budgets to
follow. You couldn't afford to have your milk sour, your bread fall, or
your cakes as flat as wheels. You didn't want mumps, chicken pox, and
whooping cough in your house all in three weeks. You didn't want your
husband crashing his car or electrocuting himself on the high-tension
wires outside town. But now all of that's over. You can come out in the
open now. No more heartburns or backaches, because I've brought the good
word and we're going to exorcise this witch we've got here!"
Everybody looked around but didn't see any witch.
"I mean your president!" cried Elmira.
"Me!" Mrs. Goodwater waved at everyone.
"Today," breathed Elmira, holding onto the desk for support, "I went to
the library. I looked up counteractions. How to get rid of people who
take advantage of others, how to make witches leave off and go. And I
found a way to fight for all our rights. I can feel the power growing. I
got the magic of all kinds of good roots and chemicals in me. I got ..."
She paused and swayed. She blinked once. "I got : cream of tartar and
... I got ... white hawkweed and milk soured in the light of the moon
and ..." She stopped and thought for a moment. She shut her mouth and a
tiny sound : came from deep inside her and worked up through to come out
the comers of her lips. She closed her eyes for a moment to see where
the strength was.
"Mrs. Brown, you feelin' all right?" asked Mrs. Goodwater.
"Feelin' fine!" said Mrs. Brown slowly. "I put in some pulverized
carrots and parsley root, cut fine; juniper berry ..."
Again she paused as if a voice had said STOP to her and she looked out
across all those faces.
The room, she noticed, was beginning to turn slowly, first from left to
right, then right to left.
"Rosemary roots and crowfoot flower.. ." she said rather dimly. She let
go of Tom's hand. Tom opened one eye and looked at her.
"Bay leaves, nasturtium petals ..." she said.
"Maybe you better sit down," said Mrs. Goodwater.
One lady at the side went and opened a window.
"Dry betel nuts, lavender and crab-apple seed," said Mrs. Brown and
stopped. "Quick now, let's have the election. Got to have the votes.
I'll tabulate."
"No hurry, Elmira," said Mrs. Goodwater.
"Yes, there is." Elmira took a deep trembling breath. "Remember, ladies,
no more fear. Do like you always wanted to do. Vote for me, and ..." The
room was moving again, up and down. "Honesty in government. All those in
favor of Mrs. Goodwater for president say 'Aye.' "
"Aye," said the whole room.
"All those in favor of Mrs. Elmira Brown?" said Elmira in a faint voice.
She swallowed.
After a moment she spoke, alone.
"Aye," she said.
She stood stunned on the rostrum.
A silence filled the room from wall to wall. In that silence Mrs. Elmira
Brown made a croaking sound. She put her hand on her throat. She turned
and looked dimly at Mrs. Goodwater, who now very casually drew forth
from her purse a small wax doll in which were a number of rusted
thumbtacks.
"Tom," said Elmira, "show me the way to the ladies' room.
"Yes'm."
They began to walk and then hurry and then run. Elmira ran on ahead,
through the crowd, down the aisle.... She reached the door and started
left.
"No, Elmira, right, right!" cried Mrs. Goodwater.
Elmira turned left and vanished.
There was a noise like coal down a chute.
"Elmira!"
The ladies ran around like a girl's basketball team, colliding with each
other.
Only Mrs. Goodwater made a straight line.
She found Tom looking down the stairwell, his hands clenched to the
banister.
"Forty steps!" he moaned. "Forty steps to the ground!"
Later on and for months and years after it was told how like an
inebriate Elmira Brown negotiated those steps touching every one on her
long way down. It was claimed that when she began the fall she was sick
to unconsciousness and that this made her skeleton rubber, so she kind
of rolled rather than ricocheted. She landed at the bottom, blinking and
feeling better, having left whatever it was that had made her uneasy all
along the way. True, she was so badly bruised she looked like a tattooed
lady. But, no, not a wrist was sprained or an ankle twisted. She held
her head funny for three days, kind of peering out of the sides of her
eyeballs instead of turning to look. But the important thing was Mrs.
Goodwater at the bottom of the steps, pillowing Elmira's Head on her Lap
and dropping tears on her as the ladies gathered Hysterically.
"Elmira, I promise, Elmira, I swear, if you just live, if you don't die,
you hear me, Elmira, listen! I'll use my magic for nothing but good from
now on. No more black, nothing but white magic. The rest of your life,
if I have my way, no more falling over iron dogs, tripping on sills,
cutting fingers, or dropping downstairs for you! Elysium, Elmira,
Elysium, I promise! If you just live! Look, I'm pulling the tacks out of
the doll! Elmira, speak to me! Speak now and sit up! And come upstairs
for another vote. President, I promise, president of the Honeysuckle
Ladies Lodge, by acclamation, won't we, ladies?"
At this all the ladies cried so hard they had to lean on each other.
Tom, upstairs, thought this meant death down there.
He was halfway down when he met the ladies coming back up, looking like
they had just wandered out of a dynamite explosion.
"Get out of the way, boy!"
First came Mrs. Goodwater, laughing and crying.
Next came Mrs. Elmira Brown, doing the same.
And after the two of them came all the one hundred twenty-three members
of the lodge, not knowing if they'd just returned from a funeral or were
on their way to a ball.
He watched them pass and shook his head.
"Don't need me no more," he said. "No more at all."
So he tiptoed down the stairs before they missed him, holding tight to
the rail all the way.
For what it's worth," said Tom, "there's the whole thing in a nutshell.
The ladies carrying on like crazy. Everybody standing around blowing
their noses. Elmira Brown sitting there at the bottom of the steps,
nothing broke, her it bones made out of Jell-O, I suspect, and the witch
sobbin' on her shoulder, and then all of them goin' upstairs suddenly 
laughing. Cry-yi, you figure it out. I got out of there fast!"
Tom loosened his shirt and took off his tie.
"Magic, you say?" asked Douglas.
"Magic six ways from Sunday."
"You believe it?"
"Yes I do and no I don't."
"Boy, this town is full of stuff!" Douglas peered off at the horizon
where clouds filled the sky with immense shapes of old gods and
warriors. "Spells and wax dolls and needles and elixirs, you said?"
"Wasn't much as an elixir, but awful fine as an upchuck. Blap! Wowie!"
Tom clutched his stomach and stuck out his tongue.
"Witches .. ." said Douglas. He squinted his eyes mysteriously.
And then there is that day when all around, all around you hear the
dropping of the apples, one by one, from the trees. At first it is one
here and one there, and then it is three and then it is four and then
nine and twenty, until the apples plummet like rain, fall like horse
hoofs in the soft, darkening grass, and you are the last apple on the
tree; and you wait for the wind to work you slowly free from your hold
upon the sky, and drop you down and down. Long before you hit the grass
you will have forgotten there ever was a tree, or other apples, or a
summer, or green grass below. You will fall in darkness....
"No!"
Colonel Freeleigh opened his eyes quickly, sat erect in his wheel chair.
He jerked his cold hand out to find the telephone. It was still there!
He crushed it against his chest for a moment, blinking.
"I don't like that dream," he said to his empty room.
At last, his fingers trembling, he lifted the receiver and called the
long-distance operator and gave her a number and waited, watching the
bedroom door as if at any moment a plague of sons, daughters, grandsons,
nurses, doctors, might swarm in to seize away this last vital luxury he
permitted his failing senses. Many days, or was it years, ago, when his
heart had thrust like a dagger through his ribs and flesh, he had heard
the boys below ... their names what were they? Charles, Charlie, Chuck,
yes! And Douglas! And Tom! He remembered! Calling his name far down the
hall, but the door being locked in their faces, the boys turned away.
You can't be excited, the doctor said. No visitors, no visitors, no It
visitors. And he heard the boys moving across the street, he saw them,
he waved. And they waved back. "Colonel... Colonel ..." And now he sat
alone with the little gray toad of a heart flopping weakly here or there
in his chest from time to time.
"Colonel Freeleigh," said the operator. "Here's your call. Mexico City.
Erickson 3899."
And now the far away but infinitely clear voice:
"Bueno." "Jorge!" cried the old man
"Senor Freeleigh! Again? This costs money."
"Let it cost! You know what to do."
"Si. The window?"
"The window, Jorge, if you please."
"A moment," said the voice.
And, thousands of miles away, in a southern land, in an office in a
building in that land, there was the sound of footsteps retreating from
the phone. The old man leaned forward, gripping the receiver tight to
his wrinkled ear that ached with waiting for the next sound. The raising
of a window.
Ah, sighed the old man.
The sounds of Mexico City on a hot yellow noon through the open window
into the waiting phone. He c see Jorge standing there holding the
mouthpiece out, out the bright day.
"Senor.. ."
"No, no, please. Let me listen."
He listened to the hooting of many metal horns, squealing of brakes, the
calls of vendors selling red-purple bananas and jungle oranges in their
stalls. Colonel Freeleigh's feet began to move, hanging from the edge of
his wheel chair, making the motions of a man walking. His eyes squeezed
tight. He gave a series of immense sniffs, as if to gain the odors of
meats hung on iron hooks in sunshine, cloaked with flies like a mantle
of raisins; the smell of stone alleys wet with morning rain. He could
feel the sun bum his spiny-bearded cheek, and he was twenty-five years
old again, walking, walking, looking, smiling, happy to be alive, very
much alert, drinking in colors and smells.
A rap on the door. Quickly he hid the phone under his lap robe.
The nurse entered. "Hello," she said. "Have you been good?"
"Yes." The old man's voice was mechanical. He could hardly see. The
shock of a simple rap on the door was such that part of him was still in
another city, far removed. He waited for his mind to rush home--it must
be here to answer questions, act sane, be polite.
"I've come to check your pulse."
"Not now!" said the old man.
"You're not going anywhere, are you?" She smiled.
He looked at the nurse steadily. He hadn't been anywhere in ten years.
"Give me your wrist."
Her fingers, hard and precise, searched for the sickness in his pulse
like a pair of calipers.
"What've you been doing to excite yourself?" she demanded.
"Nothing."
Her gaze shifted and stopped on the empty phone table. At that instant a
horn sounded faintly, two thousand miles away.
She took the receiver from under the lap robe and held it before his
face. "Why do you do this to yourself? You promised you wouldn't. That's
how you hurt yourself in the first place, isn't it? Getting excited,
talking too much. Those boys up here jumping around--"
"They sat quietly and listened," said the colonel. "And I told them
things they'd never heard. The buffalo, I told them, the bison. It was
worth it. I don't care. I was in a pure fever and I was alive. It
doesn't matter if being so alive kills a man; it's better to have the
quick fever every time. Now give me that phone. If you won't let the
boys come up and sit politely I can at least talk to someone outside the
room."
"I'm sorry, Colonel. Your grandson will have to know about this. I
prevented his having the phone taken out last week. Now it looks like
I'll let him go ahead.
"This is my house, my phone. I pay your salary!" he said.
"To make you well, not get you excited." She wheeled his chair across
the room. "To bed with you now, young man!"
From bed he looked back at the phone and kept looking at it.
"I'm going to the store for a few minutes," the nurse said. "Just to be
sure you don't use the phone again, I'm hiding your wheel chair in the
hall."
She wheeled the empty chair out the door. In the downstairs entry, he
heard her pause and dial the extension phone.
Was she phoning Mexico City? he wondered. She wouldn't dare!
The front door shut.
He thought of the last week here, alone, in his room, and the secret,
narcotic calls across continents, an isthmus, whole jungle countries of
rain forest, blue-orchid plateaus, lakes and hills ... talking...
talking ...to Buenos Aires ... and ... Lima ... Rio de Janeiro ...
He lifted himself in the cool bed. Tomorrow the telephone gone! What a
greedy fool he had been! He slipped his brittle ivory legs down from the
bed, marveling at their desiccation. They seemed to be things which had
been fastened to his body while he slept one night, while his younger
legs were taken off and burned in the cellar furnace. Over the years,
they had destroyed all of him, removing hands, arms, and legs and
leaving him with substitutes as delicate and useless as chess pieces.
And now they were tampering with something more intangible--the memory;
they were trying to cut the wires which led back into another year.
He was across the room in a stumbling run. Grasping the phone, he took
it with him as he slid down the wall to sit upon the floor. He got the
long-distance operator, his heart exploding within him, faster and
faster, a blackness in his eyes. "Hurry, hurry!"
He waited. "Bueno?"
"Jorge, we were cut off."
"You must not phone again, Senior," said the faraway voice. "Your nurse
called me. She says you are very ill. I must hang up."
"No, Jorge! Please!" the old man pleaded. "One last time, listen to me.
They're taking the phone out tomorrow. I can never call you again.
Jorge said nothing.
The old man went on. "For the love of God, Jorge! For friendship, then,
for the old days! You don't know what it means. You're my age, but you
can move! I haven't moved anywhere in ten years."
He dropped the phone and had trouble picking it up, his chest was so
thick with pain. "Jorge! You are still there, aren't you?"
"This will be the last time?" said Jorge.
"I promise!"
The phone was laid on a desk thousands of miles away. Once more, with
that clear familiarity, the footsteps, the pause, and, at last, the
raising of the window.
"Listen," whispered the old man to himself.
And he heard a thousand people in another sunlight, and the faint,
tinkling music of an organ grinder playing "La Marimba"--oh, a lovely,
dancing tune.
With eyes tight, the old man put up his hand as if to click pictures of
an old cathedral, and his body was heavier with flesh, younger, and he
felt the hot pavement underfoot.
He wanted to say, "You're still there, aren't you? All of : you people
in that city in the time of the early siesta, the shops closing, the
little boys crying loteria nacional para hoy! to sell lottery tickets.
You are all there, the people in the city. I can't believe I was ever
among you. When you are away I: from a city it becomes a fantasy. Any
town, New York, Chicago, with its people, becomes improbable with
distance. Just as I am improbable here, in Illinois, in a small town by
a ' quiet lake. All of us improbable to one another because we are not
present to one another. And it is so good to hear the sounds, and know
that Mexico City is still there and the people moving and living...."
He sat with the receiver tightly pressed to his ear.
And at last, the dearest, most improbable sound of all--the sound of a
green trolley car going around a comer--a trolley burdened with brown
and alien and beautiful people, and the sound of other people running
and calling out with triumph as they leaped up and swung aboard and
vanished around a corner on the shrieking rails and were borne away in
the sun-blazed distance to leave only the sound of tortillas frying on
the market stoves, or was it merely the ever rising and falling hum and
burn of static quivering along two thousand miles of copper wire....
The old man sat on the floor.
Time passed.
A downstairs door opened slowly. Light footsteps came in, hesitated,
then ventured up the stairs. Voices murmured.
"We shouldn't be here!"
"He phoned me, I tell you. He needs visitors bad. We can't let him
down."
"He's sick!"
"Sure! But he said to come when the nurse's out. We'll only stay a
second, say hello, and ..."
The door to the bedroom moved wide. The three boys stood looking in at
the old man seated there on the floor.
"Colonel Freeleigh?" said Douglas softly.
There was something in his silence that made them all shut up their
mouths.
They approached, almost on tiptoe.
Douglas, bent down, disengaged the phone from the old man's now quite
cold fingers. Douglas lifted the receiver to his own ear, listened.
Above the static he heard a strange, a far, a final sound.
Two thousand miles away, the closing of a window.
"Boom!!" said Tom. "Boom. Boom. Boom."
He sat on the Civil War cannon in the courthouse square. Douglas, in
front of the cannon, clutched his heart and fell down on the grass. But
he did not get up; he just lay there, his face thoughtful.
"You look like you're going to get out the old pencil any second now,"
said Tom.
"Let me think!" said Douglas, looking at the cannon. He rolled over and
gazed at the sky and the trees above him. "Tom, it just hit me."
"What?"
"Yesterday Ching Ling Soo died. Yesterday the Civil War ended right here
in this town forever. Yesterday Mr. Lincoln died right here and so did
General Lee and General Grantl and a hundred thousand others facing
north and south. And yesterday afternoon, at Colonel Freeleigh's house,
a herd of buffalo-bison as big as all Green Town, Illinois, went off the
cliff into nothing at all. Yesterday a whole lot of dust settled for
good. And I didn't even appreciate it at the time. It's awful, Tom, it's
awful! What we going to do without all those soldiers and Generals Lee
and Grant and Honest Abe; what we going to do without Ching Ling Soo? It
never dreamed so many people could die so fast, Tom. But they did. They
sure did!"
Tom sat astride the cannon, looking down at his brother as his voice
trailed away.
"You got your tablet with you?"
Douglas shook his head.
"Better get home and put all that down before you forget it. It ain't
every day you got half the population of the world keeling over on you."
Douglas sat up and then stood up. He walked across the courthouse lawn
slowly, chewing his lower lip.
"Boom," said Tom quietly. "Boom. Boom!"
Then he raised his voice:
"Doug! I killed you three times, crossing the grass! Doug, you hear me?
Hey, Doug! Okay. All right for you." He lay down on the cannon and
sighted along the crusted barrel. He squinted one eye. "Boom!" he
whispered at that dwindling figure. "Boom!"
"There!"
"Twenty-nine!"
"There!"
"Thirty!"
"There!"
"Thirty-one!"
The lever plunged. The tin caps, crushed atop the filled bottles,
flickered bright yellow. Grandfather handed the last bottle to Douglas.
"Second harvest of the summer. June's on the shelf. Here's July. Now,
just-August up ahead."
Douglas raised the bottle of warm dandelion wine but did not set it on
the shelf. He saw the other numbered bottles waiting there, one like
another, in no way different, all bright, all regular, all
self-contained.
There's the day I found I was alive, he thought, and why isn't it
brighter than the others?
There's the day John Huff fell off the edge of the world, gone; why
isn't it darker than the others?
Where, where all the summer dogs leaping like dolphins in the
wind-braided and unbraided tides of what? Where lightning smell of Green
Machine or trolley? Did the wine remember? It did not! Or seemed not,
anyway.
Somewhere, a book said once, all the talk ever talked, all the songs
ever sung, still lived, had vibrated way out in space and if you could
travel to Far Centauri you could hear George Washington talking in his
sleep or Caesar surprised at the knife in his back. So much for sounds.
What about light then? All things, once seen, they didn't just die, that
couldn't be. It must be then that somewhere, searching the world,
perhaps in the dripping multiboxed honeycombs where light was an amber
sap stored by pollen-fired bees, or in the thirty thousand lenses of the
noon dragonfly's gemmed skull you might find all the colors and sights
of the world in any one year. Or pour one single drop of this dandelion
wine beneath a microscope and perhaps the entire world of July Fourth
would firework out in Vesuvius showers. This he would have to believe.
And yet ... looking here at this bottle which by its number signalized
the day when Colonel Freeleigh had stumbled and fallen six feet into the
earth, Douglas could not find so much as a gram of dark sediment, not a
speck of the great flouring buffalo dust, not a flake of sulphur from
the guns at Shiloh....
"August up ahead," said Douglas. "Sure. But the way things are going,
there'll be no machines, no friends, and dam few dandelions for the last
harvest."
"Doom. Doom. You sound like a funeral bell tolling," said Grandfather.
"Talk like that is worse than swearing. I won't wash out your mouth with
soap, however. A thimbleful of dandelion wine is indicated. Here, now,
swig it down. What's it taste like?"
"I'm a fire-eater! Whoosh!"
"Now upstairs, run three times around the block, do five somersets, six
pushups, climb two trees, and you'll be concertmaster instead of chief
mourner. Get!"
On his way, running, Douglas thought, Four pushups, one tree, and two
somersets will do it!
And out there in the middle of the first day of August just getting into
his car, was Bill Forrester, who shouted he Ir was going downtown for
some extraordinary ice cream or other and would anyone join him? So, not
five minutes later, jiggled and steamed into a better mood, Douglas
found himself stepping in off the fiery pavements and moving through the
grotto of soda-scented air, of vanilla freshness at the drugstore, to
sit at the snow-marble fountain with Bill Forrester. They then asked for
a recital of the most unusual ices and when the fountain man said, "Old
fashioned lime-vanilla ice..."
"That's it!" said Bill Forrester.
"Yes, sir!" said Douglas.
And, while waiting, they turned slowly on their rotating stools. The
silver spigots, the gleaming mirrors, the hushed whirl-around ceiling
fans, the green shades over the small windows, the harp-wire chairs,
passed under their moving gaze. They stopped turning. Their eyes had
touched upon the face and form of Miss Helen Loomis, ninety-five years
old, ice-cream spoon in hand, ice cream in mouth.
"Young man," she said to Bill Forrester, "you are a person of taste and
imagination. Also, you have the will power of ten men; otherwise you
would not dare veer away from the common flavors listed on the menu and
order, straight out, without quibble or reservation, such an unheard-of
thing as lime-vanilla ice."
He bowed his head solemnly to her.
"Come sit with me, both of you," she said. "We'll talk of strange ice
creams and such things as we seem to have a bent for. Don't be afraid;
J'11 foot the bill."
Smiling, they carried their dishes to her table and sat.
"You look like a Spaulding," she said to the boy. "You've got your
grandfather's head. And you, you're William Forrester. You write for the
Chronicle, a good enough column. I've heard more about you than I'd care
to tell."
"I know you," said Bill Forrester. "You're Helen Loomis." He hesitated,
then continued. "T was in love with you once," he said.
"Now that's the way I like a conversation to open." She dug quietly at
her ice cream. "That's grounds for another meeting. No-don't tell me
where or when or how you were in love with me. We'll save that for next
time. You've taken away my appetite with your talk. Look there now!
Well, I must get home anyway. Since you're a reporter, come for tea
tomorrow between three and four; it's just possible I can sketch out the
history of this town, since it was a trading post, for you. And, so
we'll both have something for our curiosity to chew on, Mr. Forrester,
you remind me of a gentleman I went with seventy, yes, seventy years
ago.
She sat across from them and it was like talking with a gray and lost
quivering moth. The voice came from far away inside the grayness and the
oldness, wrapped in the powders of pressed flowers and ancient
butterflies.
"Well." She arose. "Will you come tomorrow?"
"I most certainly will," said Bill Forrester.
And she went off into the town on business, leaving the young boy and
the young man there, looking after her, slowly finishing their ice
cream.
William Forrester spent the next morning checking local news items for
the paper, had time after lunch for some local news items for the paper,
had time after lunch for some fishing in the river outside town, caught
only some small fish which he threw back happily, and, without thinking
about it, or at least not noticing that he had thought about it, at
three o'clock he found his car taking him down a certain street, He
watched with interest as his hands turned the steering wheel and motored
him up a vast circular drive where he stopped under an ivy-covered
entry. Letting himself out, he was conscious of the fact that his car
was like his pipe old, chewed-on, unkempt in this huge green garden by
this freshly painted, three-story Victorian house. He saw a faint
ghostlike movement at the far end of the garden, heard a whispery cry,
and saw that Miss Loomis was there, removed :I across time and distance,
seated alone, the tea service glittering its soft silver surfaces,
waiting for him.
"This is the first time a woman has ever been ready and , waiting," he
said, walking up. "It is also," he admitted, "the first time in my life
I have been on time for an appointment."
"Why is that?" she asked, propped back in her wicker chair.
"I don't know," he admitted.
"Well." She started pouring tea. "To start things off, what do you think
of the world?"
"I don't know anything."
"The beginning of wisdom, as they say. When you're seventeen you know
everything. When you're twenty-seven if you still know everything you're
still seventeen."
"You seem to have learned quite a lot over the years."
"It is the privilege of old people to seem to know everything. But it's
an act and a mask, like every other act and mask Between ourselves, we
old ones wink at each other and smile, saying, How do you like my mask,
my act, my certainty? Isn't life a play? Don't I play it well?"
They both laughed quietly. He sat back and let the laughter, come
naturally from his mouth for the first time in many months. When they
quieted she held her teacup in her two hands and looked into it. "Do you
know, it's lucky we met so late. I wouldn't have wanted you to meet me
when I was twenty-one and full of foolishness."
"They have special laws for pretty girls twenty-one."
"So you think I was pretty?"
He nodded good-humoredly.
"But how can you tell?" she asked. "When you meet a dragon that has
eaten a swan, do you guess by the few feathers left around the mouth?
That's what it is--a body like this is a dragon, all scales and folds.
So the dragon ate the white swan. I haven't seen her for years. I can't
even remember what she looks like. I feel her, though. She's safe
inside, still alive; the essential swan hasn't changed a feather. Do you
know, there are some mornings in spring or fall, when I wake and think,
I'I1 run across the fields into the woods and pick wild strawberries! Or
I'll swim in the lake, or I'll dance all night tonight until dawn! And
then, in a rage, discover I'm in this old and ruined dragon. I'm the
princess in the crumbled tower, no way out, waiting for her Prince
Charming."
"You should have written books."
"My dear boy, I have written. What else was there for an old maid? I was
a crazy creature with a headful of carnival spangles until I was thirty,
and then the only man I ever really cared for stopped waiting and
married someone else. So in spite, in anger at myself, I told myself I
deserved my : fate for not having married when the best chance was at
hand. I started traveling. My luggage was snowed under blizzards of
travel stickers. I have been alone in Paris, alone in Vienna, alone in
London, and all in all, it is very much like being alone in Green Town,
Illinois. It is, in essence, being alone. Oh, you have plenty of time to
think, improve your manners, sharpen your conversations. But I sometimes
think I could easily trade a verb tense or a curtsy for some company
that would stay over for a thirty-year weekend."
They drank their tea.
"Oh, such a rush of self-pity," she said good-naturedly. "About
yourself, now. You're thirty-one and still not married?"
"Let me put it this way," he said. "Women who act and think and talk
like you are rare."
"My," she said seriously, "you mustn't expect young women to talk like
me. That comes later. They're much too young, first of all. And
secondly, the average man runs helter-skelter the moment he finds
anything like a brain in a lady. You've probably met quite a few brainy
ones who hid it most successfully from you. You'll have to pry around a
bit to find the odd beetle. Lift a few boards."
They were laughing again.
"I shall probably be a meticulous old bachelor," he said.
"No, no, you mustn't do that. It wouldn't be right. You shouldn't even
be here this afternoon. This is a street which ends only in an Egyptian
pyramid. Pyramids are all very nice, but mummies are hardly fit
companions. Where would you like to go, what would you really like to do
with your life?"
"See Istanbul, Port Said, Nairobi, Budapest. Write a book. Smoke too
many cigarettes. Fall off a cliff, but get caught in a tree halfway
down. Get shot at a few times in a dark alley on a Moroccan midnight.
Love a beautiful woman."
"Well, I don't think I can provide them all," she said. "but I've
traveled and I can tell you about many of those places. And if you'd
care to run across my front lawn tonight about eleven and if I'm still
awake, I'll fire off a Civil War musket at you Will that satisfy your
masculine urge for adventure?"
"That would be just fine."
"Where would you like to go first? I can take you there, you know. I can
weave a spell. Just name it. London? Cairo? Cairo makes your face turn
on like a light. So let's go to Cairo. Just relax now. Put some of that
nice tobacco in that pipe of yours and sit back."
He sat back, lit his pipe, half smiling, relaxing, and listened, and she
began to talk. "Cairo ..." she said.
The hour passed in jewels and alleys and winds from the Egyptian desert.
The sun was golden and the Nile was muddy where it lapped down to the
deltas, and there was someone very young and very quick at the top of
the pyramid, laughing, calling to him to come on up the shadowy side
into the sun, and he was climbing, she putting her hand down to help him
up the last step, and then they were laughing on camel back, loping
toward the great stretched bulk of the Sphinx, and late at night, in the
native quarter, there was the tinkle of small hammers on bronze and
silver, and music from some stringed instruments fading away and away
and away....
William Forrester opened his eyes. Miss Helen Loomis had finished the
adventure and they were home again, very familiar to each other, on the
best of terms, in the garden, the tea cold in the silver pourer, the
biscuits dried in the latened sun. He sighed and stretched and sighed
again.
"I've never been so comfortable in my life."
"Nor I."
"I've kept you late. I should have gone an hour ago."
"You know I love every minute of it. But what you should see in an old
silly woman ..."
He lay back in his chair and half closed his eyes and looked at her. He
squinted his eyes so the merest filament of light came through. He
tilted his head ever so little this way, then that.
"What are you doing?" she asked uncomfortably.
He said nothing, but continued looking.
"If you do this just right," he murmured, "you can adjust, make
allowances...." To himself he was thinking, You can erase lines, adjust
the time factor, turn back the years.
Suddenly he started.
"What's wrong?" she asked.
But then it was gone. He opened his eyes to catch it. That was a
mistake. He should have stayed back, idling, erasing, his eyes gently
half closed.
"For just a moment," he said, "I saw it."
"Saw what?"
"The swan, of course," he thought. His mouth must have pantomimed the
words.
The next instant she was sitting very straight in her chair. Her hands
were in her lap, rigid. Her eyes were fixed upon him and as he watched,
feeling helpless, each of her eyes cupped and brimmed itself full.
"I'm sorry," he said, "terribly sorry."
"No, don't be." She held herself rigid and did not touch her face or her
eyes; her hands remained, one atop the other, holding on. "You'd better
go now. Yes, you may come tomorrow, but go now, please, and don't say
any more."
He walked off through the garden, leaving her by her table in the shade.
He could not bring himself to look back.
Four days, eight days, twelve days passed, and he was invited to teas,
to suppers, to lunches. They sat talking through the long green
afternoons-they talked of art, of literature, of life, of society and
politics. They ate ice creams and squabs and drank good wines.
"I don't care what anyone says," she said. "And people are saying
things, aren't they?"
He shifted uneasily.
"I knew it. A woman's never safe, even when ninety-five, from gossip."
"I could stop visiting."
"Oh, no," she cried, and recovered. In a quieter voice she said, "You
know you can't do that. You know you don't care what they think, do you?
So long as we know it's all right?"
"I don't care," he said.
"Now"-she settled back--"let's play our game. Where shall it be this
time? Paris? I think Paris."
"Paris," he said, nodding quietly.
"Well," she began, "it's the year 1885 and we're boarding the ship in
New York harbor. There's our luggage, here are our tickets, there goes
the sky line. Now we're at sea. Now we're coming into Marseilles...."
Here she was on a bridge looking into the clear waters of the Seine, and
here he was, suddenly, a moment later, beside her, looking down at the
tides of summer flowing past. Here she was with an aperitif in her
talcum-white fingers, and here he was, with amazing quickness, bending
toward her to tap her wineglass with his. His face appeared in mirrored
halls at Versailles, over steaming smorgasbords in Stockholm, and they
counted the barber poles in the Venice canals. The things she had done
alone, they were now doing together.
I the middle of August they sat staring at one another one late
afternoon.
"Do you realize," he said, "I've seen you nearly every day for two and a
half weeks?"
"Impossible!"
"I've enjoyed it immensely."
"Yes, but there are so many young girls ..."
"You're everything they are not--kind, intelligent, witty."
"Nonsense. Kindness and intelligence are the preoccupations of age.
Being cruel and thoughtless is far more fascinating when you're twenty."
She paused and drew a breath. "Now, I'm going to embarrass you. Do you
recall that first afternoon we met in the soda fountain, you said that
you had had some degree of--shall we say affection for me at one time?
You've purposely put me off on this by never mentioning it again. Now
I'm forced to ask you to explain the whole uncomfortable thing."
He didn't seem to know what to say. "That's embarrassing," he protested.
"Spit it out!"
"I saw your picture once, years ago."
"I never let my picture be taken."
"This was an old one, taken when you were twenty."
"Oh, that. It's quite a joke. Each time I give to a charity or attend a
ball they dust that picture off and print it. Everyone in town laughs;
even I"
"It's cruel of the paper."
"No. I told them, If you want a picture of me, use the one taken back in
1853. Let them remember me that way. Keep the lid down, in the name of
the good Lord, during the service."
"I'll tell you all about it." He folded his hands and looked at them and
paused a moment. He was remembering the picture now and it was very
clear in his mind. There was time, here in the garden to think of every
aspect of the photograph and of Helen Loomis, very young, posing for her
picture the first time, alone and beautiful. He thought of her quiet,
shyly smiling face.
It was the face of spring, it was the face of summer, it was the
warmness of clover breath. Pomegranate glowed in her lips, and the noon
sky in her eyes. To touch her face was that always new experience of
opening your window one December morning, early, and putting out your
hand to the first white cool powdering of snow that had come, silently,
with no announcement, in the night. And all of this, this
breath-warmness and plum-tenderness was held forever in one miracle of
photographic chemistry which no clock winds could blow upon to change
one hour or one second; this fine first cool white snow would never
melt, but live a thousand summers.
That was the photograph; that was the way he knew her. Now he was
talking again, after the remembering and the thinking over and the
holding of the picture in his mind. "When I first saw that picture--it
was a simple, straightforward picture with a simple hairdo--I didn't
know it had been taken that long ago. The item in the paper said
something about Helen Loomis marshaling the Town Ball that night. I tore
the picture from the paper. I carried it with me all that day. I
intended going to the ball. Then, late in the afternoon, someone saw me
looking at the picture, and told me about it. How the picture of the
beautiful girl had been taken so long ago and used every year since by
the paper. And they said I shouldn't go to the Town Ball that night,
carrying that picture and looking for you."
They sat in the garden for a long minute. He glanced over at her face.
She was looking at the farthest garden wall and the pink roses climbing
there. There was no way to tell what she was thinking. Her face showed
nothing. She rocked for a little while in her chair and then said
softly, "Shall we have some more tea? There you are."
They sat sipping the tea. Then she reached over and patted his arm.
"Thank you."
"For what?"
"For wanting to come to find me at the dance, for clipping out my
picture, for everything. Thank you so very much."
They walked about the garden on the paths.
"And now," she said, "it's my turn. Do you remember, I mentioned a
certain young man who once attended me, seventy years ago? Oh, he's been
dead fifty years now, at . least, but when he was very young and very
handsome he rode a fast horse off for days, or on summer nights over the
meadows around town. He had a healthy, wild face, always sunburned, his
hands were always cut and he fumed like a stovepipe and walked as if he
were going to fly apart; wouldn't keep a job, quit those he had when he
felt like it, and one day he sort of rode off away from me because I was
even wilder than he and wouldn't settle down, and that was that. I never
thought the day would come when I would see him alive again. But you're
pretty much alive, you spill ashes around like he did, you're clumsy and
graceful combined, I know everything you're going to do before you do
it, but after you've done it I'm always surprised. Reincarnation's a lot
of milk-mush to me, but the other day I felt, What if I called Robert,
Robert, to you on the street, would William Forrester turn around?"
"I don't know," he said.
"Neither do I. That's what makes life interesting."
August was almost over. The first cool touch of autumn moved slowly
through the town and there was a softening and the first gradual burning
fever of color in every tree, a faint flush and coloring in the hills,
and the color of lions in the wheat fields. Now the pattern of days was
familiar and repeated like a penman beautifully inscribing again and
again, in practice, a series of it's and w's and m's, day after day the
line repeated in delicate rills.
William Forrester walked across the garden one early August afternoon to
find Helen Loomis writing with great care at the tea table.
She put aside her pen and ink.
"I've been writing you a letter," she said.
"Well, my being here saves you the trouble."
"No, this is a special letter. Look at it." She showed him the blue
envelope, which she now sealed and pressed flat. "Remember how it looks.
When you receive this in the mail, you'll know I'm dead."
"That's no way to talk, is it?"
"Sit down and listen to me."
He sat.
"My dear William," she said, under the parasol shade. "In a few days I
will be dead. No." She put up her hand. "I don't want you to say a
thing. I'm not afraid. When you live as long as I've lived you lose
that, too. I never liked lobster in my life, and mainly because I'd
never tried it. On my eightieth birthday I tried it. I can't say I'm
greatly excited over lobster still, but I have no doubt as to its taste
now, and I don't fear it. I dare say death will be a lobster, too, and I
can come to terms with it." She motioned with her hands. "But enough of
that. The important thing is that I shan't be seeing you again. There
will be no services. I believe that a woman who has passed through that
particular door has as much right to privacy as a woman who has retired
for the night."
"You can't predict death," he said at last.
"For fifty years I've watched the grandfather clock in the hall,
William. After it is wound I can predict to the hour when it will stop.
Old people are no different. They can feel the machinery slow down and
the last weights shift. Oh, please don't look that way--please don't."
"I can't help it," he said.
"We've had a nice time, haven't we? It has been very special here,
talking every day. It was that much-overburdened and worn phrase
referred to as a 'meeting of the minds.' " She turned the blue envelope
in her hands. "I've always known that the quality of love was the mind,
even though the body sometimes refuses this knowledge. The body lives
for itself. It lives only to feed and wait for the night. It's
essentially nocturnal. But what of the mind which is born of the sun,
William, and must spend thousands of hours of a lifetime awake and
aware? Can you balance off the body, that pitiful, selfish thing of
night against a whole lifetime of sun and intellect? I don't know. I
only know there has been your mind here and my mind here, and the
afternoons have been like none I can remember. There is still so much to
talk about, but we must save it for another time."
"We don't seem to have much time now."
"No, but perhaps there will be another time. Time is so strange and life
is twice as strange. The cogs miss, the wheels turn, and lives interlace
too early or too late. I lived too long, that much is certain. And you
were born either too early or too late. It was a terrible bit of timing.
But perhaps I am being punished for being a silly girl. Anyway, the next
spin around, wheels might function right again. Meantime you must find a
nice girl and be married and be happy. But you must promise me one
thing."
"Anything."
"You must promise me not to live to be too old, William. If it is at all
convenient, die before you're fifty. It may take a bit of doing. But I
advise this simply because there is no telling when another Helen Loomis
might be born. It would be dreadful, wouldn't it, if you lived on to be
very, very old and some afternoon in 1999 walked down Main Street and
saw me standing there, aged twenty-one, and the whole thing out of
balance again? I don't think we could go through any more afternoons
like these we've had, no matter how pleasant, do you? A thousand gallons
of tea and five hundred biscuits is enough for one friendship. So you
must have an attack of pneumonia some time in about twenty years. For I
don't know how long they let you linger on the other side. Perhaps they
send you back immediately. But I shall do my best, William, really I
shall. And everything put right and in balance, do you know what might
happen?"
"You tell me."
"Some afternoon in 1985 or 1990 a young man named Tom Smith or John
Green or a name like that, will be walking downtown and will stop in the
drugstore and order, appropriately, a dish of some unusual ice cream. A
young girl the same age will be sitting there and when she hears the
name of that ice cream, something will happen. I can't say what or how.
She won't know why or how, assuredly. Nor will the young man. It will
simply be that the name of that ice cream will be a very good thing to
both of them. They'll talk. And later, when they know each other's
names, they'll walk from the drugstore together."
She smiled at him.
"This is all very neat, but forgive an old lady for tying things in neat
packets. It's a silly trifle to leave you. Now let's talk of something
else. What shall we talk about? Is there any place in the world we
haven't traveled to yet? Have we been to Stockholm?"
"Yes, it's a fine town."
"Glasgow? Yes? Where then?"
"Why not Green Town, Illinois?" he said. "Here. We haven't really
visited our own town together at all."
She settled back, as did he, and she said, "I'll tell you how it was,
then, when I was only nineteen, in this town, a long time ago...."
It was a night in winter and she was skating lightly over a pond of
white moon ice, her image gliding and whispering under her. It was a
night in summer in this town of fire in the air, in the cheeks, in the
heart, your eyes full of the glowing and shutting-off color of
fireflies. It was a rustling night in October, and there she stood,
pulling taffy from a hook in the kitchen, singing, and there she was,
running on the moss by the river, and swimming in the granite pit beyond
town on a spring night, in the soft deep warm waters, and now it was the
Fourth of July with rockets slamming the sky and every porch full of now
red-fire, now blue-fire, now white-fire faces, hers dazzling bright
among them as the last rocket died.
"Can you see all these things?" asked Helen Loomis. "Can you see me
doing them and being with them?"
"Yes," said William Forrester, eyes closed. "I can see you."
"And then," she said, "and then..."
Her voice moved on and on as the afternoon grew late and the twilight
deepened quickly, but her voice moved in the garden and anyone passing
on the road, at a far distance, could have heard its moth sound,
faintly, faintly....
Two days later William Forrester was at his desk in his room when the
letter came. Douglas brought it upstairs and handed it to Bill and
looked as if he knew what was in it.
William Forrester recognized the blue envelope, but did not open it. He
simply put it in his shirt pocket, looked at the boy for a moment, and
said, "Come on, Doug; my treat."
They walked downtown, saying very little, Douglas preserving the silence
he sensed was necessary. Autumn, which had threatened for a time, was
gone. Summer was back full, boiling the clouds and scouring the metal
sky. They turned in at the drugstore and sat at the marble fountain.
William Forrester took the letter out and laid it before him and still
did not open it.
He looked out at the yellow sunlight on the concrete and on the green
awnings and shining on the gold letters of the window signs across the
street, and he looked at the calendar on the wall. August 27, 1928. He
looked at his wrist watch and felt his heart beat slowly, saw the second
hand of the watch moving moving with no speed at all, saw the calendar
frozen there with its one day seeming forever, the sun nailed to the sky
with no motion toward sunset whatever. The warm air spread under the
sighing fans over his head. A number of women laughed by the open door
and were gone through his vision, which was focused beyond them at the
town itself and the high courthouse clock. He opened the letter and
began to read.
He turned slowly on the revolving chair. He tried the words again and
again, silently, on his tongue, and at last spoke them aloud and
repeated them.
"A dish of lime-vanilla ice," he said. "A dish of lime-vanilla ice."
Douglas and Tom and Charlie came panting along the unshaded street.
"Tom, answer me true, now."
"Answer what true?"
"What ever happened to happy endings?"
"They got them on shows at Saturday matinees."
"Sure, but what about life?"
"All I know is I feel good going to bed nights, Doug. That's a happy
ending once a day. Next morning I'm up and maybe things go bad. But all
I got to do is remember that I'm going to bed that night and just lying
there a while makes everything okay."
"I'm talking about Mr. Forrester and old Miss Loomis."
"Nothing we can do; she's dead."
"I know! But don't you figure someone slipped up there?"
"You mean about him thinking she was the same age as her picture and her
a trillion years old all the time? No, sir, I think it's swell!"
"Swell, for gosh sakes?"
"The last few days when Mr. Forrester told me a little here or a little
there and I finally put it all together--boy, did I bawl my head off. I
don't even know why. I wouldn't change one bit of it. If you changed it,
what would we have to talk about? Nothing! And besides, I like to cry.
After I cry hard it's like it's morning again and I'm starting the day
over."
"I heard everything now."
"You just won't admit you like crying, too. You cry just so long and
everything's fine. And there's your happy ending. And you're ready to go
back out and walk around with folks again. And it's the start of
gosh-knows-what-all! Any time now, Mr. Forrester will think it over and
see it's just the only way and have a good cry and then look around and
see it's morning again, even though it's five in the afternoon."
"That don't sound like no happy ending to me."
"A good night's sleep, or a ten-minute bawl, or a pint of chocolate ice
cream, or all three together, is good medicine, Doug. You listen to Tom
Spaulding, M.D."
"Shut up, you guys," said Charlie. "We're almost there!"
They turned a corner.
Deep in winter they had looked for bits and pieces of summer and found
it in furnace cellars or in bonfires on the edge of frozen skating ponds
at night. Now, in summer, they went searching for some little bit, some
piece of the forgotten winter.
Rounding the corner, they felt a continual light rain spray down from a
vast brick building to refresh them as they read the sign they knew by
heart, the sign which showed them what they'd come searching for:
SUMMER'S ICE HOUSE.
Summer's Ice House on a summer day! They said the words, laughing, and
moved to peer into that tremendous cavern where in fifty, one-hundred,
and two-hundred-pound chunks, the glaciers, the icebergs, the fallen but
not forgotten snows of January slept in ammoniac steams and crystal
drippings.
"Feel that," sighed Charlie Woodman. "What more could you ask?"
For the winter breath was exhaled again and again about them as they
stood in the glary day, smelling the wet wood platform with the
perpetual mist shimmering in rainbows down from the ice machinery above.
They chewed icicles that froze their fingers so they had to grip the ice
in handkerchiefs and suck the linen.
"All that steam, all that fog," whispered Tom. "The Snow Queen. Remember
that story? Nobody believes in that stuff, Snow Queens, now. So don't be
surprised if this is where she came to hide out because nobody believes
in her anymore."
They looked and saw the vapors rise and drift in long swathes of cool
smoke.
"No," said Charlie. "You know who lives here? Only one guy. A guy who
gives you goose-pimples just to think of him." Charlie dropped his voice
very low. "The Lonely One."
"The Lonely One?"
"Born, raised and lives here! All that winter, Tom, all that cold, Doug
Where else would he come from to make us shiver the hottest nights of
the year? Don't it smell like him? You know darn well it does. The
Lonely One ... the Lonely One ..."
The mists and vapors curled in darkness.
Tom screamed.
"It's okay, Doug." Charlie grinned. "I just dropped a little bitty hunk
of ice down Tom's back, is all."
The courthouse clock chimed seven times. The echoes of the chimes faded.
Warm summer twilight here in upper Illinois country in this little town
deep far away from everything, kept to itself by a river and a forest
and a meadow and a lake. The sidewalks still scorched. The stores
closing and the streets shad- : owed. And there were two moons; the
clock moon with four ' faces in four night directions above the solemn
black courthouse, and the real moon rising in vanilla whiteness from the
dark east.
In the drugstore fans whispered in the high ceiling. In the rococo shade
of porches, a few invisible people sat. Cigars glowed pink, on occasion.
Screen doors whined their springs and slammed. On the purple bricks of
the summer-night streets, Douglas Spaulding ran; dogs and boys followed
after.
"Hi, Miss Lavinia!"
The boys loped away. Waving after them quietly, Lavinia Nebbs sat all
alone with a tall cool lemonade in her white I fingers, tapping it to
her lips, sipping, waiting.
"Here I am, Lavinia."
She turned and there was Francine, all in snow white, at the bottom
steps of the porch, in the smell of zinnias and hibiscus.
Lavinia Nebbs locked her front door and, leaving her lemonade glass half
empty on the porch, said, "It's a fine night for the movie."
They walked down the street.
"Where you going, girls?" cried Miss Fern and Miss Roberta from their
porch over the way.
Lavinia called back through the soft ocean of darkness: "To the Elite
Theater to see CHARLIE CHAPLIN!"
"Won't catch us out on no night like this," wailed Miss Fern. "Not with
the Lonely One strangling women. Lock ourselves up in our closet with a
gun."
"Oh, bosh!" Lavinia heard the old women's door bang and lock, and she
drifted on, feeling the warm breath of summer night shimmering off the
oven-baked sidewalks. It was like walking on a hard crust of freshly
warmed bread. The heat pulsed under your dress, along your legs, with a
stealthy and not unpleasant sense of invasion.
"Lavinia, you don't believe all that about the Lonely One, do you?"
"Those women like to see their tongues dance."
"Just the same, Hattie McDollis was killed two months ago, Roberta Ferry
the month before, and now Elizabeth Ramsell's disappeared...."
"Hattie McDollis was a silly girl, walked off with a traveling man, I
bet."
"But the others, all of them, strangled, their tongues sticking out
their mouths, they say."
They stood upon the edge of the ravine that cut the town half in two.
Behind them were the lit houses and music, ahead was deepness,
moistness, fireflies and dark.
"Maybe we shouldn't go to the show tonight," said Francine. "The Lonely
One might follow and kill us. I don't like that ravine. Look at it, will
you!"
Lavinia looked and the ravine was a dynamo that never stopped running,
night or day; there was a great moving hum, a bumbling and murmuring of
creature, insect, or plant life. It smelled like a greenhouse, of secret
vapors and ancient, washed shales and quicksands. And always the black
dynamo humming, with sparkles like great electricity where fireflies
moved on the air.
"It won't be me coming back through this old ravine tonight late, so
darned late; it'll be you, Lavinia, you down the steps and over the
bridge and maybe the Lonely One there."
"Bosh!" said Lavinia Nebbs.
"It'll be you alone on the path, listening to your shoes, not me. You
all alone on the way back to your house. Lavinia, don't you get lonely
living in that house?"
"Old maids love to live alone." Lavinia pointed at the hot shadowy path
leading down into the dark. "Let's take the short cut."
"I'm afraid!"
"It's early. Lonely One won't be out till late." Lavinia took the
other's arm and led her down and down the crooked path into the cricket
warmth and frog sound and mosquito-delicate silence. They brushed
through summer-scorched grass, burs prickling at their bare ankles.
"Let's run!" gasped Francine.
"No!"
They turned a curve in the path--and there it was.
In the singing deep night, in the shade of warm trees, as if she had
laid herself out to enjoy the soft stars and the easy wind, her hands at
either side of her like the oars of a delicate craft, lay Elizabeth
Ramsell!
Francine screamed.
"Don't scream!" Lavinia put out her hands to hold onto Francine, who was
whimpering and choking. "Don't! Don't!"
The woman lay as if she had floated there, her face moon-lit, her eyes
wide and like flint, her tongue sticking from her mouth.
"She's dead!" said Francine. "Oh, she's dead, dead! She's dead!"
Lavinia stood in the middle of a thousand warm shadows with the crickets
screaming and the frogs loud.
"We'd better get the police," she said at last.
Hold me. Lavinia, hold me. I'm cold, oh, I've never been so cold in all
my life!"
Lavinia held Francine and the policemen were brushing through the
crackling grass, flashlights ducked about, voices mingled, and the night
grew toward eight-thirty.
"It's like December. I need a sweater," said Francine, eyes shut,
against Lavinia.
The policeman said, "I guess you can go now, ladies. You might drop by
the station tomorrow for a little more questioning."
Lavinia and Francine walked away from the police and the sheet over the
delicate thing upon the ravine grass.
Lavinia felt her heart going loudly in her and she was cold, too, with a
February cold; there were bits of sudden snow all over her flesh, and
the moon washed her brittle fingers whiter, and she remembered doing all
the talking while Francine just sobbed against her.
A voice called from far off, "You want an escort, ladies?"
"No, we'll make it," said Lavinia to nobody, and they walked on. They
walked through the nuzzling, whispering ravine, the ravine of whispers
and clicks, the little world of investigation growing small behind them
with its lights and voices.
"I've never seen a dead person before," said Francine.
Lavinia examined her watch as if it was a thousand miles away on an arm
and wrist grown impossibly distant. "It's only eight-thirty. We'll pick
up Helen and get on to the show."
"The show!" Francine jerked.
"It's what we need. We've got to forget this. It's not good to remember.
If we went home now we'd remember. We'll go to the show as if nothing
happened."
"Lavinia, you don't mean it!"
"I never meant anything more in my life. We need to laugh now and
forget."
"But Elizabeth's back there--your friend, my friend--"
"We can't help her; we can only help ourselves. Come on."
They started up the ravine side, on the stony path, in the dark. And
suddenly there, barring their way, standing very still in one spot, not
seeing them, but looking on down at the moving lights and the body and
listening to the official voices, was Douglas Spaulding.
He stood there, white as a mushroom, with his hands at his sides,
staring down into the ravine.
"Get home!" cried Francine.
He did not hear.
"You!" shrieked Francine. "Get home, get out of this place, you hear?
Get home, get home, get home!"
Douglas jerked his head, stared at them as if they were I. not there.
His mouth moved. He gave a bleating sound. Then,  silently, he whirled
about and ran. He ran silently up the distant hills into the warm
darkness.
Francine sobbed and cried again and, doing this, walked on with Lavinia
Nebbs.
"There you are! I thought you ladies'd never come!" Helen Greer stood
tapping her foot atop her porch steps. "You're only an hour late, that's
all. What happened?"
"We--" started Francine.
Lavinia clutched her arm tight. "There was a commotion. Somebody found
Elizabeth Ramsell in the ravine."
"Dead? Was she--dead?"
Lavinia nodded. Helen gasped and put her hand to her throat. "Who found
her?"
Lavinia held Francine's wrist firmly. "We don't know."
The three young women stood in the summer night looking at each other.
"I've got a notion to go in the house and lock the doors," said Helen at
last.
But finally she went to get a sweater, for though it was still warm,
she, too, complained of the sudden winter night. While she was gone
Francine whispered frantically, "Why didn't you tell her?"
"Why upset her?" said Lavinia. "Tomorrow. Tomorrow's plenty of time."
The three women moved along the street under the black trees, past
suddenly locked houses. How soon the news had spread outward from the
ravine, from house to house, porch to porch, telephone to telephone.
Now, passing, the three women felt eyes looking out at them from
curtained windows as locks rattled into place. How strange the popsicle,
the vanilla night, the night of close-packed ice cream, of
mosquito-lotioned wrists, the night of running children suddenly veered
from their games and put away behind glass, behind wood, the popsicles
in melting puddles of lime and strawberry where they fell when the
children were scooped indoors. Strange the hot rooms with the sweating
people pressed tightly back into them behind the bronze knobs and
knockers. Baseball bats and balls lay upon the unfootprinted lawns. A
half-drawn, white-chalk game of hopscotch lay on the broiled, steamed
sidewalk. It was as if someone had predicted freezing weather a moment
ago.
"We're crazy being out on a night like this," said Helen.
"Lonely One won't kill three ladies," said Lavinia. "There's safety in
numbers. And besides, it's too soon. The killings always come a month
separated."
A shadow fell across their terrified faces. A figure loomed behind a
tree. As if someone had struck an organ a terrible blow with his fist,
the three women gave off a scream, in three different shrill notes.
"Got you!" roared a voice. The man plunged at them. He came into the
light, laughing. He leaned against a tree, pointing at the ladies
weakly, laughing again.
"Hey! I'm the Lonely One!" said Frank Dillon.
"Frank Dillon!"
"Frank!"
"Frank," said Lavinia, "if you ever do a childish thing like that again,
may someone riddle you with bullets!"
"What a thing to do!"
Francine began to cry hysterically.
Frank Dillon stopped smiling. "Say, I'm sorry."
"Go away!" said Lavinia. "Haven't you heard about Elizabeth
Ramsell--found dead in the ravine? You running around scaring women!
Don't speak to us again!"
"Aw, now--"
They moved. He moved to follow.
"Stay right there, Mr. Lonely One, and scare yourself. Go take a look at
Elizabeth Ramsell's face and see if it's funny. Good night!" Lavinia
took the other two on along the street of trees and stars, Francine
holding a kerchief to her face.
"Francine, it was only a joke." Helen turned to Lavinia. "Why's she
crying so hard?"
"We'll tell you when we get downtown. We're going to the show no matter
what! Enough's enough. Come on now, get your money ready, we're almost
there!"
The drugstore was a small pool of sluggish air which the great wooden
fans stirred in tides of arnica and tonic and soda-smell out onto the
brick streets.
"I need a nickel's worth of green peppermint chews," said Lavinia to the
druggist. His face was set and pale, like all the faces they had seen on
the half-empty streets. "For eating in the show," said Lavinia as the
druggist weighed out a nickel's worth of the green candy with a silver
shovel.
"You sure look pretty tonight, ladies. You looked cool this afternoon,
Miss Lavinia, when you was in for a chocolate soda. So cool and nice
that someone asked after you."
"Oh?"
"Man sitting at the counter--watched you walk out. Said to me,'Say,
who's that?' Why, that's Lavinia Nebbs, prettiest maiden lady in town, I
said.'She's beautiful,' he said.'Where does she live?' " Here the
druggist paused uncomfortably.
"You didn't!" said Francine. "You didn't give him her address, I hope?
You didn't!"
"I guess I didn't think. I said,'Oh, over on Park Street, you know, near
the ravine.' A casual remark. But now, tonight, them finding the body, I
heard a minute ago, I thought, My God, what've I done!" He handed over
the package, much too full.
"You fool!" cried Francine, and tears were in her eyes.
"I'm sorry. Course, maybe it was nothing."
Lavinia stood with the three people looking at her, staring at her. She
felt nothing. Except, perhaps, the slightest prickle of excitement in
her throat. She held out her money automatically.
"There's no charge on those peppermints," said the druggist, turning to
shuffle some papers.
"Well, I know what I'm going to do right now!" Helen stalked out of the
drugshop. "I'm calling a taxi to take us all home. I'll be no part of a
hunting party for you, Lavinia. That man was up to no good. Asking about
you. You want to be dead in the ravine next?"
"It was just a man," said Lavinia, turning in a slow circle to look at
the town.
"So is Frank Dillon a man, but maybe he's the Lonely One."
Francine hadn't come out with them, they noticed, and turning, they
found her arriving. "I made him give me a description-the druggist. I
made him tell what the man looked like. A stranger," she said, "in a
dark suit. Sort of pale and thin."
"We're all overwrought," said Lavinia. "I simply won't take a taxi if
you get one. If I'm the next victim, let me be ; the next. There's all
too little excitement in life, especially for a maiden lady thirty-three
years old, so don't you mind if I enjoy it. Anyway it's silly; I'm not
beautiful."
"Oh, but you are, Lavinia; you're the loveliest lady in town, now that
Elizabeth is--" Francine stopped. "You keep men off at a distance. If
you'd only relax, you'd been married years ago!"
"Stop sniveling, Francine! Here's the theater box office, I'm paying
forty-one cents to see Charlie Chaplin. If you two want a taxi, go on.
I'll sit alone and go home alone."
"Lavinia, you're crazy; we can't let you do that--"
They entered the theater.
The first showing was over, intermission was on, and the dim auditorium
was sparsely populated. The three ladies sat halfway down front, in the
smell of ancient brass polish, and watched the manager step through the
worn red velvet curtains to make an announcement.
"The police have asked us to close early tonight so everyone can be out
at a decent hour. Therefore we are cutting our short subjects and
running our feature again immediately. The show will be over at eleven.
Everyone is advised to go straight home. Don't linger on the streets."
"That means us, Lavinia!" whispered Francine.
The lights went out. The screen leaped to life.
"Lavinia," whispered Helen.
"What?"
"As we came in, a man in a dark suit, across the street, crossed over.
He just walked down the aisle and is sitting in the row behind us."
"Oh, Helen!"
"Right behind us?"
One by one the three women turned to look.
They saw a white face there, flickering with unholy light from the
silver screen. It seemed to be all men's faces hovering there in the
dark.
"I'm going to get the manager!" Helen was gone up the aisle. "Stop the
film! Lights!"
"Helen, come back!" cried Lavinia, rising.
They tapped their empty soda glasses down, each with a vanilla mustache
on their upper lip, which they found with their tongues, laughing.
"You see how silly?" said Lavinia. "All that riot for nothing. How
embarrassing."
"I'm sorry," said Helen faintly.
The clock said eleven-thirty now. They had come out of the dark theater,
away from the Buttering rush of men and women hurrying everywhere,
nowhere, on the street while laughing at Helen. Helen was trying to
laugh at herself.
"Helen, when you ran up that aisle crying,'Lights!' I thought I'd die!
That poor man!"
"The theater manager's brother from Racine!"
"I apologized," said Helen, looking up at the great fan still whirling,
whirling the warm late night air, stirring, restirring the smells of
vanilla, raspberry, peppermint and Lysol.
"We shouldn't have stopped for these sodas. The police warned-"
"Oh, bosh the police," laughed Lavinia. "I'm not afraid of anything. The
Lonely One is a million miles away now. He won't be back for weeks and
the police'll get him then, just wait. Wasn't the film wonderful?"
"Closing up, ladies." The druggist switched off the lights in the cool
white-tiled silence.
Outside, the streets were swept clean and empty of cars it or trucks or
people. Bright lights still burned in the small store windows where the
warm wax dummies lifted pink wax hands fired with blue-white diamond
rings, or flourished orange wax legs to reveal hosiery. The hot
blue-glass eyes of the mannequins watched as the ladies drifted down the
empty river bottom street, their images shimmering in the windows like
blossoms seen under darkly moving waters.
"Do you suppose if we screamed they'd do anything?"
"Who?"
"The dummies, the window people."
"Oh, Francine."
"Well.. ."
There were a thousand people in the windows, stiff and silent, and three
people on the street, the echoes following like gunshots from store
fronts across the way when they tapped their heels on the baked
pavement.
A red neon sign flickered dimly, buzzed like a dying insect, as they
passed.
Baked and white, the long avenues lay ahead. Blowing and tall in a wind
that touched only their leafy summits, the trees stood on either side of
the three small women. Seen from the courthouse peak, they appeared like
three thistles far away.
"First, we'll walk you home, Francine."
"No, I'll walk you home."
"Don't be silly. You live way out at Electric Park. If you walked me
home you'd have to come back across the ravine alone, yourself. And if
so much as a leaf fell on you, you'd drop dead."
Francine said, "I can stay the night at your house. You're the pretty
one!"
And so they walked, they drifted like three prim clothes forms over a
moonlit sea of lawn and concrete, Lavinia watching the black trees Bit
by each side of her, listening to the voices of her friends murmuring,
trying to laugh; and the night seemed to quicken, they seemed to run
while walking slowly, everything seemed fast and the color of hot snow.
"Let's sing," said Lavinia.
They sang, "Shine On, Shine On, Harvest Moon ..."
They sang sweetly and quietly, arm in arm, not looking back. They felt
the hot sidewalk cooling underfoot, moving, moving.
"Listen!" said Lavinia.
They listened to the summer night. The summer-night crickets and the
far-off tone of the courthouse clock making I it eleven forty-five.
"Listen!"
Lavinia listened. A porch swing creaked in the dark and there was Mr.
Terle, not saying anything to anybody, alone on his swing, having a last
cigar. They saw the pink ash swinging gently to and fro.
Now the lights were going, going, gone. The little house lights and big
house lights and yellow lights and green hurricane lights, the candles
and oil lamps and porch lights, and everything felt locked up in brass
and iron and steel, everything, thought Lavinia, is boxed and locked and
wrapped and shaded. She imagined the people in their moonlit beds. And
their breathing in the summer-night rooms, safe and together. And here
we are, thought Lavinia, our footsteps on along the baked summer evening
sidewalk. And above us the 1 lonely street lights shining down, making a
drunken shadow.
"Here's your house, Francine. Good night." "Lavinia, Helen, stay here
tonight. It's late, almost midnight now. You can sleep in the parlor.
I'll make hot chocolate--it'll be such fun!" Francine was holding them
both now, close to her.
"No, thanks," said Lavinia.
And Francine began to cry.
"Oh, not again, Francine," said Lavinia.
"I don't want you dead," sobbed Francine, the tears running straight
down her cheeks. "You're so fine and nice, I want you alive. Please, oh,
please!"
"Francine, I didn't know how much this has done to you. I promise I'll
phone when I get home."
"Oh, will you?"
"And tell you I'm safe, yes. And tomorrow we'll have a picnic lunch at
Electric Park. With ham sandwiches I'll make myself, how's that? You'll
see, I'll live forever!"
"You'll phone, then?"
"I promised, didn't I?"
"Good night, good night!" Rushing upstairs, Francine whisked behind a
door, which slammed to be snap-bolted tight on the instant.
"Now," said Lavinia to Helen, "I'll walk you home."
The courthouse clock struck the hour. The sounds blew across a town that
was empty, emptier than it had ever been. Over empty streets and empty
lots and empty lawns the sound faded.
"Nine, ten, eleven, twelve," counted Lavinia, with Helen on her arm.
"Don't you feel funny?" asked Helen.
"How do you mean?"
"When you think of us being out here on the sidewalks, under the trees,
and all those people safe behind locked doors, lying in their beds.
We're practically the only walking people out in the open in a thousand
miles, I bet."
The sound of the deep warm dark ravine came near.
In a minute they stood before Helen's house, looking at each other for a
long time. The wind blew the odor of cut grass between them. The moon
was sinking in a sky that was beginning to cloud. "I don't suppose it's
any use asking you to stay, Lavinia?"
"I'll be going on."
"Sometimes--"
"Sometimes what?"
"Sometimes I think people want to die. You've acted odd all evening."
"I'm just not afraid," said Lavinia. "And I'm curious, I suppose. And
I'm using my head. Logically, the Lonely One can't be around. The police
and all."
"The police are home with their covers up over their ears."
"Let's just say I'm enjoying myself, precariously, but safely. If there
was any real chance of anything happening to me, I'd stay here with you,
you can be sure of that."
"Maybe part of you doesn't want to live anymore."
"You and Francine. Honestly!"
"I feel so guilty. I'll be drinking some hot cocoa just as you reach the
ravine bottom and walk on the bridge."
"Drink a cup for me. Good night."
Lavinia Nebbs walked alone down the midnight street, down the late
summer-night silence. She saw houses with the dark windows and far away
she heard a dog barking. In five minutes, she thought, I'll be safe at
home. In five minutes I'll be phoning silly little Francine. I'll--"
She heard the man's voice.
A man's voice singing far away among the trees.
"Oh, give me a June night, the moonlight and you..."
She walked a little faster.
The voice sang, "In my arms ... with all your charms.. ."
Down the street in the dim moonlight a man walked slowly and casually
along.
I can run knock on one of these doors, thought Lavinia, if I must.
"Oh, give me a June night," sang the man, and he carried a long club in
his hand. "The moonlight and you. Well, look who's here! What a time of
night for you to be out, Miss Nebbs!"
"Officer Kennedy!"
And that's who it was, of course.
"I'd better see you home!"
"Thanks, I'll make it."
"But you live across the ravine...."
Yes, she thought, but I won't walk through the ravine with any man, not
even an officer. How do I know who the Lonely One is? "No," she said,
"I'll hurry."
"I'll wait right here," he said. "If you need any help, give a yell.
Voices carry good here. I'll come running."
"Thank you."
She went on, leaving him under a light, humming to himself, alone.
Here I am, she thought.
The ravine.
She stood on the edge of the one hundred and thirteen steps that went
down the steep hill and then across the bridge seventy yards and up the
hills leading to Park Street. And only one lantern to see by. Three
minutes from now, she thought, I'll be putting my key in my house door.
Nothing can happen in just one hundred eighty seconds.
She started down the long dark-green steps into the deep ravine.
"One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten steps," she
counted in a whisper.
She felt she was running, but she was not running.
"Fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty steps," she
breathed.
"One fifth of the way!" she announced to herself.
The ravine was deep, black and black, black! And the world was gone
behind, the world of safe people in bed, the locked doors, the town, the
drugstore, the theater, the lights, everything was gone. Only the ravine
existed and lived, black and huge, about her.
"Nothing's happened, has it? No one around, is there? Twenty-four,
twenty-five steps. Remember that old ghost story you told each other
when you were children?"
She listened to her shoes on the steps.
"The story about the dark man coming in your house and you upstairs in
bed. And now he's at the first step coming up to your room. And now he's
at the second step. And now he's at the third step and the fourth step
and the fifth! Oh, how you used to laugh and scream at that story! And
now the horrid dark man's at the twelfth step and now he's opening the
door of your room and now he's standing by your bed.'I GOT YOU!' "
She screamed. It was like nothing she'd ever heard, that scream. She had
never screamed that loud in her life. She stopped, she froze, she clung
to the wooden banister. Her heart exploded in her. The sound of the
terrified beating filled the universe.
"There, there!" she screamed to herself. "At the bottom of the steps. A
man, under the light! No, now he's gone! He was waiting there!"
She listened.
Silence.
The bridge was empty.
Nothing, she thought, holding her heart. Nothing. Fool! That story I
told myself. How silly. What shall I do?
Her heartbeats faded.
Shall I call the officer--did he hear me scream?
She listened. Nothing. Nothing.
I'll go the rest of the way. That silly story.
She began again, counting the steps.
"Thirty-five, thirty-six, careful, don't fall. Oh, I am a fool.
Thirty-seven steps, thirty-eight, nine and forty, and two makes
forty-two--almost halfway."
She froze again.
Wait, she told herself.
She took a step. There was an echo.
She took another step.
Another echo. Another step, just a fraction of a moment later.
"Someone's following me," she whispered to the ravine, to the black
crickets and dark-green hidden frogs and the black stream. "Someone's on
the steps behind me. I don't dare turn around."
Another step, another echo.
"Every time I take a step, they take one."
A step and an echo.
Weakly she asked of the ravine, "Officer Kennedy, is that you?"
The crickets were still.
The crickets were listening. The night was listening to her. For a
change, all of the far summer-night meadows and close summer-night trees
were suspending motion; leaf, shrub, star, and meadow grass ceased their
particular tremors and were listening to Lavinia Nebbs's heart. And
perhaps a thousand miles away, across locomotive-lonely country, in an
empty way station, a single traveler reading a dim newspaper under a
solitary naked bulb, might raise up his head, listen, and think, What's
that? and decide, Only a woodchuck, surely, beating on a hollow log. But
it was Lavinia Nebbs, it was most surely the heart of Lavinia Nebbs.
Silence. A summer-night silence which lay for a thousand miles, which
covered the earth like a white and shadowy sea.
Faster, faster! She went down the steps.
Run!
She heard music. In a mad way, in a silly way, she heard the great surge
of music that pounded at her, and she realized as she ran, as she ran in
panic and terror, that some part of her mind was dramatizing, borrowing
from the turbulent musical score of some private drama, and the music
was rushing and pushing her now, higher and higher, faster, faster,
plummeting and scurrying, down, and down into the pit of the ravine.
Only a little way, she prayed. One hundred eight, nine, one hundred ten
steps! The bottom! Now, run! Across the bridge!
She told her legs what to do, her arms her body, her terror; she advised
all parts of herself in this white and terrible moment, over the roaring
creek waters, on the hollow, thudding, swaying, almost alive, resilient
bridge planks she ran, followed by the wild footsteps behind, behind,
with the music following, too, the music shrieking and babbling.
He's following, don't turn, don't look, if you see him, you'll not be
able to move, you'll be so frightened. Just run, run!
She ran across the bridge.
Oh, God, God, please, please let me get up the hill! Now up the path,
now between the hills, oh God, it's dark, and everything so far away. ii
I screamed now it wouldn't help; I can't scream anyway. Here's the top
of the path, here's the street, oh, God, please let me be safe, if I get
home safe I'll never go out alone; I was a fool, let me admit it, I was
a fool, I didn't know what terror was, but if you let me get home from
this I'll never go without Helen or Francine again! Here's the street.
Across the street!
She crossed the street and rushed up the sidewalk.
Oh God, the porch! My house! Oh God, please give me time to get inside
and lock the door and I'll be safe!
And there--silly thing to notice--why did she notice, instantly, no
time, no time--but there it was anyway, flashing by--there on the porch
rail, the half-filled glass of lemonade she had abandoned a long time, a
year, half an evening ago! The lemonade glass sitting calmly,
imperturbably there on the rail ... and ...
She heard her clumsy feet on the porch and listened and felt her hands
scrabbling and ripping at the lock with the key. She heard her heart.
She heard her inner voice screaming.
The key fit.
Unlock the door, quick, quick!
The door opened.
Now, inside. Slam it!
She slammed the door.
"Now lock it, bar it, lock it!" she gasped wretchedly.
"Lock it, tight, tight!"
The door was locked and bolted tight.
The music stopped. She listened to her heart again and the sound of it
diminishing into silence.
Home! Oh God, safe at home! Safe, safe and safe at home! She slumped
against the door. Safe, safe. Listen. Not a sound. Safe, safe, oh thank
God, safe at home. I'll never go out at night again. I'll stay home. I
won't go over that ravine again ever. Safe, oh safe, safe home, so good,
so good, safe! Safe inside, the door locked. Wait.
Look out the window.
She looked.
Why, there's no one there at all! Nobody. There was nobody following me
at all. Nobody running after me. She got her breath and almost laughed
at herself. It stands to reason. If a man had been following me, he'd
have caught me! I'm not a fast runner.... There's no one on the porch or
in the yard. How silly of me. I wasn't running from anything. That
ravine's as safe as anyplace. Just the same, it's nice to be home.
Home's the really good warm place, the only place to be.
She put her hand out to the light switch and stopped.
"What?" she asked. "What, What?"
Behind her in the living room, someone cleared his throat.
"Good grief, they ruin everything!"
"Don't take it so hard, Charlie."
"Well, what're we going to talk about now? It's no use talking the
Lonely One if he ain't even alive! It's not scary anymore!"
"Don't know about you, Charlie," said Tom. "I'm going back to Summer's
Ice House and sit in the door and pretend he's alive and get cold all up
and down my spine."
"That's cheating."
"You got to take your chills where you can find them, Charlie."
Douglas did not listen to Tom and Charlie. He looked at Lavinia Nebbs's
house and spoke, almost to himself.
"I was there last night in the ravine. I saw it. I saw everything. On my
way home I cut across here. I saw that lemonade glass right on the porch
rail, half empty. Thought I'd like to drink it. Like to drink it, I
thought. I was in the ravine and I was here, right in the middle of it
all."
Tom and Charlie, in turn, ignored Douglas.
"For that matter," said Tom. "I don't really think the Lonely One is
dead."
"You were here this morning when the ambulance came to bring that man
out on the stretcher, weren't you?"
"Sure," said Tom.
"Well, that was the Lonely One, dumb! Read the papers! After ten long
years escaping, old Lavinia Nebbs up and stabbed him with a handy pair
of sewing scissors. I wish she'd minded her own business."
"You want she'd laid down and let him squeeze her windpipe?"
"No, but the least she could've done is gallop out of the house and down
the street screaming 'Lonely One! Lonely One!' long enough to give him a
chance to beat it. This town used to have some good stuff in it up until
about twelve o'clock last night. From here on, we're vanilla junket."
"Let me say it for the last time, Charlie; I figure the Lonely One ain't
dead. I saw his face, you saw his face, Doug saw his face, didn't you,
Doug?"
"What? Yes. I think so. Yes."
"Everybody saw his face. Answer me this, then: Did it look like the
Lonely One to you?"
"I ..." said Douglas, and stopped.
The sun buzzed in the sky for about five seconds.
"My gosh..." whispered Charlie at last.
Tom waited, smiling.
"It didn't look like the Lonely One at all," gasped Charlie. "It looked
like a man."
"Right, yes, sir, a plain everyday man, who wouldn't pull the wings off
even so much as a fly, Charlie, a fly! The least the Lonely One would do
if he was the Lonely One is look like the Lonely One, right? Well, he
looked like the candy butcher down front the Elite Theater nights."
"What you think he was, a tramp coming through town, got in what he
thought was an empty house, and got killed by Miss Nebbs?"
"Sure!"
"Hold on, though. None of us know what the Lonely One should look like.
There's no pictures. Only people ever saw him wound up dead."
"You know and Doug knows and I know what he looks like. He's got to be
tall, don't he?"
"Sure.. ."
"And he's got to be pale, don't he?"
"Pale, that's right."
"And skinny like a skeleton and have long dark hair, don't he?"
"That's what I always said."
"And big eyes bulging out, green eyes like a cat?"
"That's him to the t."
"Well, then." Tom snorted. "You saw that poor guy they lugged out of the
Nebbs's place a couple hours ago. What was he?"
"Little and red-faced and kind of fat and not much hair and what there
was was sandy. Tom, you hit on it! Come on! Call the guys! You go tell
them like you told me! The Lonely One ain't dead. He'll still be out
lurkin' around tonight."
"Yeah," said Tom, and stopped, suddenly thoughtful.
"Tom, you're a pal, you got a real brain. None of us would've saved the
day this way. The summer was sure going bad up to this very minute. You
got your thumb in the dike just in time. August won't be a total loss.
Hey, kids!"
And Charlie was off, waving his arms, yelling.
Tom stood on the sidewalk in front of Lavinia Nebbs' house, his face
pale.
"My gosh!" he whispered. "What've I gone and done now!"
He turned to Douglas.
"I say, Doug, what've I gone and done now?"
Douglas was staring at the house. His lips moved.
"I was there, last night, in the ravine. I saw Elizabeth Ramsell. It
came by here last night on the way home. I saw the lemonade glass there
on the rail. Just last night it was. I could drink that, I thought... I
could drink that...."
She was a woman with a broom or a dustpan or a washrag or a mixing spoon
in her hand. You saw her cutting piecrust in the morning, humming to it,
or you saw her setting out the baked pies at noon or taking them in,
cool, at dusk. She rang porcelain cups like a Swiss bell ringer, to
their place. She glided through the halls as steadily as a vacuum
machine, seeking, finding, and setting to rights. She made mirrors of
every window, to catch the sun. She strolled but twice through any
garden, trowel in hand, and the flowers raised their quivering fires
upon the warm air in her wake. She slept quietly and turned no more than
three times in a night, as relaxed as a white glove to which, at dawn, a
brisk hand will return. Waking, she touched people like pictures, to set
their frames straight.
But, now...?
"Grandma," said everyone. "Great-grandma."
Now it was as if a huge sum in arithmetic were finally drawing to an
end. She had stuffed turkeys, chickens, squabs, gentlemen, and boys. She
had washed ceilings, walls, invalids, and children. She had laid
linoleum, repaired bicycles, wound clocks, stoked furnaces, swabbed
iodine on ten thousand grievous wounds. Her hands had flown all around
about and down, gentling this, holding that, throwing baseballs,
swinging bright croquet mallets, seeding black earth, or fixing covers
over dumplings, ragouts, and children wildly strewn by slumber. She had
pulled down shades, pinched out candles, turned switches, and--grown
old. Looking back on thirty billions of things started, carried,
finished and done, it all summed up, totaled out; the last decimal was
placed, the final zero swung slowly into line. Now, chalk in hand, she
stood back from life a silent hour before reaching for the eraser.
"Let me see now," said Great-grandma. "Let me see ..."
With no fuss or further ado, she traveled the house in an ever-circling
inventory, reached the stairs at last, and, making no special
announcement, she took herself up three flights to her room where,
silently, she laid herself out like a fossil imprint under the snowing
cool sheets of her bed and began to die.
Again the voices:
"Grandma! Great-grandma!"
The rumor of what she was doing dropped down the stairwell, hit, and
spread ripples through the rooms, out doors and windows and along the
street of elms to the edge of the green ravine.
"Here now, here!" The family surrounded her bed.
"Just let me lie," she whispered.
Her ailment could not be seen in any microscope; it was a mild but
ever-deepening tiredness, a dim weighing of her sparrow body; sleepy,
sleepier, sleepiest.
As for her children and her children's children--it seemed impossible
that with such a simple act, the most leisurely act in the world, she
could cause such apprehension.
"Great-grandma, now listen--what you're doing is no better than breaking
a lease. This house will fall down without you. You must give us at
least a year's notice!"
Great-grandma opened one eye. Ninety years gazed calmly out at her
physicians like a dust-ghost from a high cupola window in a
fast-emptying house. "Tom ... ?"
The boy was sent, alone, to her whispering bed.
"Tom," she said, faintly, far away, "in the Southern Seas there's a day
in each man's life when he knows it's time to shake hands with all his
friends and say good-bye and sail away, and he does, and it's
natural--it's just his time. That's how it is today. I'm so like you
sometimes, sitting through Saturday matinees until nine at night when we
send your dad to bring you home. Tom, when the time comes that the same
cowboys are shooting the same Indians on the same mountaintop, then it's
best to fold back the seat and head for the door, with no regrets and no
walking backward up the aisle. So, I'm leaving while I'm still happy and
still entertained"
Douglas was summoned next to her side.
"Grandma, who'll shingle the roof next spring?"
Every April for as far back as there were calendars, you thought you
heard woodpeckers tapping the housetop. But no, it was Great-grandma
somehow transported, singing, pounding nails, replacing shingles, high
in the sky!
"Douglas," she whispered, "don't ever let anyone do the shingles unless
it's fun for them."
"Look around come April, and say,'Who'd like to fix the roof?' And
whichever face lights up is the face you want, Douglas. Because up there
on that roof you can see the whole town going toward the country and the
country going toward the edge of the earth and the river shining, and
the morning lake, and birds on the trees down under you, and the best of
the wind all around above. Any one of those should be enough to make a
person climb a weather vane some spring sunrise. It's a powerful hour,
if you give it half a chance...."
Her voice sank to a soft flutter.
Douglas was crying.
She roused herself again. "Now, why are you doing that?"
"Because," he said, "you won't be here tomorrow."
She turned a small hand mirror from herself to the boy. He looked at her
face and himself in the mirror and then at her face again as she said,
"Tomorrow morning I'll get up at seven and wash behind my ears; I'll run
to church with Charlie Woodman; I'll picnic at Electric Park; I'll swim,
run barefoot, fall out of trees, chew spearmint gum.... Douglas,
Douglas, for shame! You cut your fingernails, don't you?"
"Yes'm."
"And you don't yell when your body makes itself over every seven years
or so, old cells dead and new ones added to your fingers and your heart.
You don't mind that, do you?"
"No'm."
"Well, consider then, boy. Any man saves fingernail clippings is a fool.
You ever see a snake bother to keep his peeled skin? That's about all
you got here today in this bed is fingernails and snake skin. One good
breath would send me up in flakes. Important thing is not the me that's
lying here, but the me that's sitting on the edge of the bed looking
back at me, and the me that's downstairs cooking supper, or out in the
garage under the car, or in the library reading. All the new parts, they
count. I'm not really dying today. No person ever died that had a
family. I'll be around a long time. A thousand years from now a whole
township of my offspring will be biting sour apples in the gumwood
shade. That's my answer to anyone asks big questions! Quick now, send in
the rest!"
At last the entire family stood, like people seeing someone off at the
rail station, waiting in the room.
"Well," said Great-grandma, "there I am. I'm not humble, so it's nice
seeing you standing around my bed. Now next week there's late gardening
and closet-cleaning and clothes-buying for the children to do. And since
that part of me which is called, for convenience, Great-grandma, won't
be here to step it along, those other parts of me called Uncle Bert and
Leo and Tom and Douglas, and all the other names, will have to take
over, each to his own."
"Yes, Grandma."
"I don't want any Halloween parties here tomorrow. Don't want anyone
saying anything sweet about me; I said it all in my time and my pride.
I've tasted every victual and danced every dance; now there's one last
tart I haven't bit on, one tune I haven't whistled. But I'm not afraid.
I'm truly curious. Death won't get a crumb by my mouth I won't keep and
savor. So don't you worry over me. Now, all of you go, and let me find
my sleep...."
Somewhere a door closed quietly.
"That's better." Alone she snuggled luxuriously down through the warm
snowbank of linen and wool, sheet and cover, and the colors of the
patchwork quilt were bright as the circus banners of old time. Lying
there, she felt as small and secret as on those mornings eighty-some-odd
years ago when, wakening, she comforted her tender bones in bed.
A long time back, she thought, I dreamed a dream, and was enjoying it so
much when someone wakened me, and that was the day when I was born. And
now? Now, let me see ... She cast her mind back. Where was I? she
thought. Ninety years ... how to take up the thread and the pattern of
that lost dream again? She put out a small hand. There ... Yes, that was
it. She smiled. Deeper in the warm snow hill she turned her head upon
her pillow. That was better. Now, yes, now she saw it shaping in her
mind quietly, and with a serenity like a sea moving along an endless and
self-refreshing shore. Now she let the old dream touch and lift her from
the snow and drift her above the scarce-remembered bed.
Downstairs, she thought, they are polishing the silver, and rummaging
the cellar, and dusting in the halls. She could hear them living all
through the house.
"It's all right," whispered Great-grandma, as the dream floated her.
"Like everything else in this life, it's fitting."
And the sea moved her back down the shore.
"A ghost!" Cried Tom
"No," said a voice. "Just me."
The ghastly light flowed into the dark apple-scented bedroom. A
quart-size Mason jar, seemingly suspended upon space, flickered many
twilight-colored flakes of light on and off. In this pallid illumination
Douglas's eyes shone pale and solemn. He was so tan his face and hands
were dissolved in darkness and his nightgown seemed a disembodied
spirit.
"My gosh!" hissed Tom. "Two dozen, three dozen fireflies!"
"Shh, for cry-yi!"
"What you got'em for?"
"We got caught reading nights with flashlights under our sheets, right?
So, nobody'll suspect an old jar of fireflies; folks'll think it's just
a night museum."
"Doug, you're a genius!"
But Doug did not answer. Very gravely he placed the intermittently
signaling light source upon the night table and picked up his pencil and
began to write large and long on his tablet. With the fireflies burning,
dying, burning, dying, and his eyes glinting with three dozen fugitive
bits of pale green color, he block printed for ten and then twenty
minutes, aligning and realigning, writing and rewriting the facts that
he had gathered all too swiftly during the season. Tom watched,
hypnotized by the small bonfire of insects leaping and furling within
the jar, until he froze, sleeping, raised on elbow, while Douglas wrote
on. He summed it all up on a final page:
YOU CAN'T DEPEND ON THINGS BECAUSE ...
... like machines, for instance, they fall apart or rust or rot, or
maybe never get finished at all ... or wind up in garages ...
... like tennis shoes, you can only run so far, so fast, and then the
earth's got you again ...
... like trolleys. Trolleys, big as they are, always
come to the end of the line ...
YOU CAN'T DEPEND ON PEOPLE BECAUSE ...
... they go away. ... strangers die. ... people you know fairly well
die. ... friends die. ... people murder people, like in books. ... your
own folks can die.
So. ..!
He held onto a double fistful of breath, let it hiss out slow, grabbed
more breath, and let it whisper through his tight-gritted teeth.
SO. He finished in huge heavily blocked capitals.
SO IF TROLLEYS AND RUNABOUTS AND FRIENDS AND NEAR FRIENDS CAN GO AWAY
FOR A WHILE OR GO AWAY FOREVER, OR RUST, OR FALL APART OR DIE, AND IF
PEOPLE CAN BE MURDERED, AND IF SOMEONE LIKE GREAT-
GRANDMA, WHO WAS GOING TO LIVE FOREVER, CAN DIE ... IF ALL OF THIS IS
TRUE ... THEN ... I, DOUGLAS SPAULDING, SOME DAY... MUST...
But the fireflies, as if extinguished by his somber thoughts, had softly
turned themselves off.
I can't write any more, anyway, thought Douglas. I won't write any more.
I won't, I won't finish it tonight.
He looked over at Tom asleep on his upraised elbow and hand. He touched
Tom's wrist and Tom collapsed into a sighing ruin, back upon the bed.
Douglas picked up the Mason jar with the cold dark lumps in it and the
cool lights flicked on again, as if given life by his hand. He lifted
the Mason jar to where it shone fitfully on his summing-up. The final
words waited to be written. But he went instead to the window and pushed
the screen frame out. He unscrewed the top of the jar and tilted the
fireflies in a pale shower of sparks down the windless night. They found
their wings and flew away.
Douglas watched them go. They departed like the pale fragments of a
final twilight in the history of a dying world. They went like the few
remaining shreds of warm hope from his hand. They left his face and his
body and the space inside his body to darkness. They left him empty as
the Mason jar which now, without knowing that he did so, he took back
into bed with him, when he tried to sleep....
There she sat in her glass coffin, night after night, her body melted by
the carnival blaze of summer, frozen in the ghost winds of winter,
waiting with her sickle smile and carved, hooked, and wax-poured nose
hovering above her pale pink and wrinkled wax hands poised forever above
the ancient fanned-out deck of cards. The Tarot Witch. A delicious name.
The Tarot Witch. You thrust a penny in the silver slot and far away
below, behind, inside, machinery groaned and cogged, levers stroked,
wheels spun. And in her case the witch raised up her glittery face to
blind you with a single needle stare. Her implacable left hand moved
down to stroke and fritter enigmatic tarot-card skulls, devils, hanging
men, hermits, cardinals and clowns, while her head hung close to delve
your misery or murder, hope or health, your rebirths each morning and
death's renewals by night. Then she spidered a calligrapher's pen across
the back of a single card and let it titter down the chute into your
hands. Whereupon the witch, with a last veiled glimmer of her eyes,
froze back in her eternal caul for weeks, months, years, awaiting the
next copper penny to revive her from oblivion. Now, waxen dead, she
suffered the two boys' approach.
Douglas fingerprinted the glass.
"There she is."
"It's a wax dummy," said Tom. "Why do you want me to see her?"
"All the time asking why!" yelled Douglas. "Because, that's why,
because!"
Because... the arcade lights dimmed ... because...
One day you discover you are alive.
Explosion! Concussion! Illumination! Delight!
You laugh, you dance around, you shout.
But, not long after, the sun goes out. Snow falls, but no one sees it,
on an August noon.
At the cowboy matinee last Saturday a man had dropped down dead on the
white-hot screen. Douglas had cried out. For years he had seen billions
of cowboys shot, hung, burned, destroyed. But now, this one particular
man ...
He'll never walk, run, sit, laugh, cry, won't do anything ever, thought
Douglas. Now he's turning cold. Douglas's teeth chattered, his heart
pumped sludge in his chest. He shut his eyes and let the convulsion
shake him.
He had to get away from these other boys because they weren't thinking
about death, they just laughed and yelled at the dead man as if he still
lived. Douglas and the dead man were on a boat pulling away, with all
the others left behind on the bright shore, running, jumping, hilarious
with motion, not knowing that the boat, the dead man and Douglas were
going, going, and now gone into darkness. Weeping, Douglas ran to the
lemon-smelling men's room where, sick, it seemed a fire hydrant churned
three times from his throat.
And waiting for the sickness to pass he thought: All the people I know
who died this summer! Colonel Freeleigh, dead! I didn't know it before;
why? Great-grandma, dead, too. Really-truly. Not only that but ... He
paused. Me! No, they can't kill me! Yes, said a voice, yes, any time
they want to they can, no matter how you kick or scream, they just put a
big hand over you and you're still.... I don't want to die! Douglas
screamed, without a sound. You'll have to anyway, said the voice, you'll
have to anyway....
The sunlight outside the theater blazed down upon unreal street, unreal
buildings, and people moving slowly, as if under a bright and heavy
ocean of pure burning gas and him thinking that now, now at last he must
go home and finish out the final line in his nickel tablet: SOME DAY, I,
DOUGLAS SPAULDING, MUST DIE....
It had taken him ten minutes to get up enough courage to cross the
street, his heart slowing, and there was the arcade and he saw the
strange wax witch back where she had always hidden in cool dusty shadow
with the Fates and Furies tucked under her fingernails. A car passing
flashed an explosion of light through the arcade, jumping the shadows,
making it seem that the wax woman nodded swiftly for him to enter.
And he had gone in at the witch's summoning and come forth five minutes
later, certain of survival. Now, he must show Tom....
"She looks almost alive," said Tom.
"She is alive. I'll show you."
He shoved a penny in the slot.
Nothing happened.
Douglas yelled across the arcade at Mr. Black, the proprietor, seated on
an upended soda-pop crate uncorking and taking a swig from a
three-quarters empty bottle of brownyellow liquid.
"Hey, something's wrong with the witch!" Mr. Black shuffled over, his
eyes half closed, his breath sharp and strong. "Something's wrong with
the pinball, wrong with the peep show, wrong with the ELECTROCUTE
YOURSELF FOR A PENNY machine." He struck the case. "Hey, in there! Come
alive!" The witch sat unperturbed. "Costs me more to fix her each month
than she earns." Mr. Black reached behind the case and hung a sign "OUT
OF ORDER" over her face. "She ain't the only thing's out of order. Me,
you, this town, this country, the whole world! To hell with it!" He
shook his fist at the woman. "The junk heap for you, you hear me, the
junk heap!" He walked off and plunged himself down on the soda-pop crate
to feel the coins in his money apron again, like it was his stomach
giving him pain.
"She just can't--oh, she can't be out of order," said Douglas, stricken.
"She's old," said Tom. "Grandpa says she was here when he was a boy and
before. So it's bound to be some day she'd konk out and ..."
"Come on now," whispered Douglas. "Oh, please, please, write so Tom can
see!"
He shoved another coin stealthily into the machine. "Please.. ."
The boys pressed the glass, their breath made cumulus clouds on the
pane.
Then, deep inside the box, a whisper, a whir.
And slowly, the witch's head rose up and looked at the boys and there
was something in her eyes that froze them as her hand began to scrabble
almost frantically back and forth upon the tarots, to pause, hurry on,
return. Her head bent down, one hand came to rest and a shuddering shook
the machine as the other hand wrote, paused, wrote, and stopped at last
with a paroxysm so violent the glass in the case chimed. The witch's
face bent in a rigid mechanical misery, almost fisted into a ball. Then
the machinery gasped and a single cog slipped and a tiny tarot card
tickled down the flue into Douglas's cupped hands.
"She's alive! She's working again!"
"What's the card say, Doug?"
"It's the same one she wrote for me last Saturday! Listen.. ."
And Douglas read:
"Hey, nonny no! Men are fools that wish to die! Is't not fine to dance
and sing When the bells of death do ring? Is't not fine to swim in wine,
And turn upon the toe, And sing Hey, nonny no! When the winds blow and
the seas flow? Hey, nonny no!"
"Is that all it says?" said Tom.
"At the bottom is a message: 'PREDICTION: A long life and a lively one.'
"
"That's more like it! Now how about one for me?"
Tom put his coin in. The witch shuddered. A card fell into his hand.
"Last one off the premises is the witch's behind," said Tom calmly.
They ran out so fast, the proprietor gasped and clutched forty-five
copper pennies in one fist, thirty-six in the other.
Outside the glare of the uneasy street lights Douglas and Tom made a
terrible discovery.
The tarot card was empty, there was no message.
"That can't be!"
"Don't get excited, Doug. It's just a plain old card; we only lost a
penny."
"It's not just a plain old card, it's more than a penny, it's life and
death."
Under the fluttering moth light in the street Douglas's face was milky
as he stared at the card and turned it, rustling, trying somehow to put
words on it.
"She ran out of ink."
"She never runs out of ink!"
He looked at Mr. Black sitting there finishing off his bottle and
cursing, not knowing how lucky he was, living in the arcade. Please, he
thought, don't let the arcade fall apart, too. Bad enough that friends
disappeared, people were killed and buried in the real world, but let
the arcade run along the way it was, please, please....
Now Douglas knew why the arcade had drawn him so steadily this week and
drew him still tonight. For there was a world completely set in place,
predictable, certain, sure, with its bright silver slots, its terrible
gorilla behind glass forever stabbed by waxen hero to save still more
waxen heroine, and then the flipping waterfalling chitter of Keystone
Kops on eternal photographic spindles set spiraling in darkness by
Indianhead pennies under naked bulb light. The Kops, forever in
collision or near-collision with train, truck, streetcar, forever gone
off piers in oceans which did not drown, because there they rushed to
collide again with train, truck, streetcar, dive off old and beautifully
familiar pier. Worlds within worlds, the penny peek shows which you
cranked to repeat old rites and formulas. There, when you wished, the
Wright Brothers sailed sandy winds at Kittyhawk, Teddy Roosevelt exposed
his dazzling teeth, San Francisco was built and burned, burned and
built, as long as sweaty coins fed self-satisfied machines.
Douglas looked around at this night town, where anything at all might
happen now, a minute from now. Here, by night of day, how few the slots
to shove your money in, how few the cards delivered to your hand for
reading, and, if read, how few made sense. Here in the world of people
you might give time, money, and prayer with little or no return.
But there in the arcade you could hold lightning with the CAN YOU TAKE
IT? electrical machine when you pried its chromed handles apart as the
power wasp-stung, sizzled, sewed your vibrant fingers. You punched a bag
and saw how many hundred pounds of sinew were available in your arm to
strike the world if it need be struck. There grip a robot's hand to
Indian-wrestle out your fury and light the bulbs half up a numbered
chart where fireworks at the summit proved your violence supreme.
In the arcade, then, you did this and this, and that and that occurred.
You came forth in peace as from a church unknown before.
And now? Now?
The witch moving but silent, and perhaps soon dead in her crystal
coffin. He looked at Mr. Black droning there, defying all worlds, even
his own. Someday the fine machinery would rust from lack of loving care,
the Keystone Kops freeze forever half in, half out of the lake, half
caught, half struck by locomotive; the Wright Brothers never get their
kite machine off the ground....
"Tom," Douglas said, "we got to sit in the library and figure this thing
out."
They moved on down the street, the white unwritten card passing between
them.
They sat inside the library in the lidded green light and then they sat
outside on the carved stone lion, dangling their feet over its back,
frowning.
"Old man Black, all the time screaming at her, threatening to kill her."
"You can't kill what's never lived, Doug."
"He treats the witch like she's alive or was once alive, or something.
Screaming at her, so maybe she's finally given up. Or maybe she hasn't
given up at all, but's taken a secret way to warn us her life's in
danger. Invisible ink. Lemon juice, maybe! There's a message here she
didn't want Mr. Black to see, in case he looked while we were in his
arcade. Hold on! I got some matches."
"Why would she write us, Doug?"
"Hold the card. Here!" Douglas struck a match and ran it under the card.
"Ouch! The words ain't on my fingers, Doug, so keep the match away."
"There!" cried Douglas. And there it was, a faint spidery scrawl which
began to shape itself in a spiral of incredible corkscrew calligrapher's
letters, dark on light ... a word, two words, three ...
"The card, it's on fire!"
Tom yelled and let it drop.
"Stomp on it!"
But by the time they had jumped up to smash their feet on the stony
spine of the ancient lion, the card was a black ruin.
"Doug! Now we'll never know what it said!"
Douglas held the flaking warm ashes in the palm of his hand. "No, I saw.
I remember the words."
The ashes blew about in his fingers, whispering.
"You remember in that Charlie Chase Comedy last spring where the
Frenchman was drowning and kept yelling something in French which
Charlie Chase couldn't figure. Secours, Secours! And someone told
Charlie what it meant and he jumped in and saved the man. Well, on this
card, with my own eyes, I saw it. Secours!"
"Why would she write it in French?"
"So Mr. Black wouldn't know, dumb!"
"Doug, it was just an old watermark coming out when you scorched the
card...." Tom saw Douglas's face and stopped. "Okay, don't look mad. It
was 'sucker' or whatever. But there were other words...."
"Mme. Tarot, it said. Tom, I got it now! Mme. Tarot's real, lived a long
time ago, told fortunes. I saw her picture once in the encyclopedia.
People came from all over Europe to see her. Well, don't you figure it
now yourself? Think, Tom, think!"
Tom sat back down on the lion's back, looking along the street to where
the arcade lights flickered.
"That's not the real Mrs. Tarot?"
"Inside that glass box, under all that red and blue silk and all that
old half-melted wax, sure! Maybe a long time ago someone got jealous or
hated her and poured wax over ;j her and kept her prisoner forever and
she's passed down the line from villain to villain and wound up here,
centuries later, in Green Town, Illinois--working for Indian-head
pennies instead of the crown heads of Europe!"
"Villains? Mr. Black?"
"Name's Black, shirt's black, pants're black, tie's black. Movie
villains wear black, don't they?"
"But why didn't she yell last year, the year before?"
"Who knows, every night for a hundred years she's been writing messages
in lemon juice on cards, but everybody read her regular message, nobody
thought, like us, to run a match over the back to bring out the real
message. Lucky I know what secours means."
"Okay, she said,'Help!' Now what?"
"We save her, of course."
"Steal her out from under Mr. Black's nose, huh? And wind up witches
ourselves in glass boxes with wax poured on our faces the next ten
thousand years."
"Tom, the library's here. We'll arm ourselves with spells and magic
philters to fight Mr. Black."
"There's only one magic philter will fix Mr. Black," said Tom. "Soon's
he gets enough pennies any one evening, he--well, let's see." Tom drew
some coins from his pocket. "This just might do it. Doug, you go read
the books. I'll run back and look at the Keystone Kops fifteen times; I
never get tired. By the time you meet me at the arcade, it might be the
old philter will be working for us."
"Tom, I hope you know what you're doing."
"Doug, you want to rescue this princess or not?"
Douglas whirled and plunged.
Tom watched the library doors wham shut and settle. Then he leaped over
the lion's back and down into the night. On the library steps, the ashes
of the tarot card fluttered, blew away.
The arcade was dark, inside, the pinball machines lay dim and enigmatic
as dust scribblings in a giant's cave. The peep shows stood with Teddy
Roosevelt and the Wright Brothers faintly smirking or just cranking up a
wooden propeller. The witch sat in her case, her waxen eyes cauled.
Then, suddenly, one eye glittered. A flashlight bobbed outside through
the dusty arcade windows. A heavy figure lurched against the locked
door, a key scrabbled into the lock. The door slammed open, stayed open.
There was a sound of thick breathing.
"It's only me, old girl," said Mr. Black, swaying.
Outside on the street, coming along with his nose in a book, Douglas
found Tom hiding in a door nearby.
"Shh!" said Tom. "It worked. The Keystone Kops, fifteen times; and when
Mr. Black heard me drop all that money in, his eyes popped, he opened
the machine, took out the pennies, threw me out and went across to the
speak-easy for the magic philter."
Douglas crept up and peered into the shadowy arcade and saw the two
gorilla figures there, one not moving at all, the wax heroine in his
arms, the other one standing stunned in the middle of the room, weaving
slightly from side to side.
"Oh, Tom," whispered Douglas, "you're a genius. He's just full of magic
philter, ain't he?"
"You can say that again. What did you find out?"
Douglas tapped the book and talked in a low voice. "Mme. Tarot, like I
said, told all about death and destiny and stuff in rich folks' parlors,
but she made one mistake. She predicted Napoleon's defeat and death to
his face! So ..."
Douglas's voice faded as he looked again through the dusty window at
that distant figure seated quietly in her crystal case.
"Secours," murmured Douglas. "Old Napoleon just called in Mme. Tussaud's
waxworks and had them drop the Tarot Witch alive in boiling wax, and now
... now ..."
"Watch out, Doug, Mr. Black, in there! He's got a club or something!"
This was true. Inside, cursing horribly, the huge figure of Mr. Black
lurched. In his hand a camping knife seethed on the air six inches from
the witch's face.
"He's picking on her because she's the only human-looking thing in the
whole darn joint," said Tom. "He won't do her no harm. He'll fall over
any second and sleep it off."
"No, sir," said Douglas. "He knows she warned us and we're coming to
rescue her. He doesn't want us revealing his guilty secret, so maybe
tonight he's going to destroy her once and for all."
"How could he know she warned us? We didn't even know ourselves till we
got away from here."
"He made her tell, put coins in the machine; that's one thing she can't
lie on, the cards, all them tarot skulls and bones. She just can't help
telling the truth and she gave him a card, sure, with two little knights
on it, no bigger than kids, you see? That's us, clubs in our hands,
coming down the street."
"One last time!" cried Mr. Black from the cave inside. "I'm. puttin' the
coin in. One last time now, dammit, tell me! Is this damn arcade ever
goin' to make money or do I declare bankruptcy? Like all women; sit
there, cold fish, while a man starves! Gimme the card. There! Now, let
me see." He held up the card to the light.
"Oh, my gosh!" whispered Douglas. "Get ready."
"No!" cried Mr. Black. "Liar! Liar! Take that!" He smashed his fist
through the case. Glass exploded in a great shower of starlight, it
seemed, and fell away in darkness. The witch sat naked, in the open air,
reserved and calm, waiting for the second blow.
"No!" Douglas plunged through the door. "Mr. Black!"
"Doug!" cried Tom.
Mr. Black wheeled at Tom's shout. He raised the knife blindly in the air
as if to strike. Douglas froze. Then, eyes wide, lids blinking once, Mr.
Black turned perfectly so he fell with his back toward the floor and
took what seemed a thousand years to strike, his flashlight flung from
his right hand, the knife scuttling away like a silverfish from the
left.
Tom moved slowly in to look at the long-strewn figure in the dark.
"Doug, is he dead?"
"No, just the shock of Mme. Tarot's predictions. Boy, he's got a scalded
look. Horrible, that's what the cards must have been."
The man slept noisily on the floor.
Douglas picked up the strewn tarot cards, put them, trembling, in his
pocket. "Come on, Tom, let's get her out of here before it's too late."
"Kidnap her? You're crazy!"
"You wanna be guilty of aiding and abetting an even worse crime? Murder,
for instance?"
"For gosh sakes, you can't kill a dam old dummy!"
But Doug was not listening. He had reached through the open case and
now, as if she had waited for too many years, the wax Tarot Witch with a
rustling sigh, leaned forward and fell slowly slowly down into his arms.
The town clock struck nine forty-five. The moon was high and filled all
the sky with a warm but wintry light. The sidewalk was solid silver on
which black shadows moved. Douglas moved with the thing of velvet and
fairy wax in his arms, stopping to hide in pools of shadow under
trembling trees, alone. He listened, looking back. A sound of running
mice. Tom burst around the corner and pulled up beside him.
"Doug, I stayed behind. I was afraid Mr. Black was, well ... then he
began to come alive ... swearing.... Oh, Doug, if he catches you with
his dummy! What will our folks think? Stealing!"
"Quiet!"
They listened to the moonlit river of street behind them. "Now, Tom, you
can come help me rescue her, but you can't if you say 'dummy' or talk
loud or drag along as so much dead weight."
"I'll help!" Tom assumed half the weight. "My gosh, she's light."
"She was real young when Napoleon .. ." Douglas stopped. "Old people are
heavy. That's how you tell."
"But why? Tell me why all this running around for her, Doug. Why?"
Why? Douglas blinked and stopped. Things had gone so fast, he had run so
far and his blood was so high, he had long since forgotten why. Only
now, as they moved again along the sidewalk, shadows like black
butterflies on their eyelids, the thick smell of dusty wax on their
hands, did he have time to reason why, and, slowly, speak of it, his
voice as strange as moonlight.
"Tom, a couple weeks ago, I found out I was alive. Boy, did I hop
around. And then, just last week in the movies, I found out I'd have to
die someday. I never thought of that, really. And all of a sudden it was
like knowing the Y.M.C.A. was going to be shut up forever or school,
which isn't so bad as we like to think, being over for good, and all the
peach trees outside town shriveling up and the ravine being filled in
and no place to play ever again and me sick in bed for as long as I
could think and everything dark, and I got scared. So, I don't know;
what I want to do is this: help Mme. Tarot. I'll hide her a few weeks or
months while I look up in the black-magic books at the library how to
undo spells and get her out of the wax to run around in the world again
after all this time. And she'll be so grateful, she'll lay out the cards
with all those devils and cups and swords and bones on them and tell me
what sump holes to walk around and when to stay in bed on certain
Thursday afternoons. I'll live forever, or next thing to it."
"You don't believe that."
"Yes, I do, or most of it. Watch it now, here's the ravine. We'll cut
down through by the dump heap, and ..."
Tom stopped. Douglas had stopped him. The boys did not turn, but they
heard the heavy clubbing blows of feet behind them, each one like a
shotgun set off in the bed of a dry lake not far away. Someone was
shouting and cursing.
"Tom, you let him follow you!"
As they ran a giant hand lifted and tossed them aside, and Mr. Black was
there laying to left and right and the boys, crying out, on the grass,
saw the raving man, spittle showering the air from his biting teeth and
widened lips. He held the witch by her neck and one arm and glared with
fiery eyes down on the boys.
"This is mine! To do with like I want. What you mean, taking her? Caused
all my trouble--money, business, everything. Here's what I think of
her!"
"No!" shouted Douglas.
But like a great iron catapult, the huge arms hoisted the figure up
against the moon and flourished and wheeled the fragile body upon the
stars and let it fly out with a curse and a rustling wind down the air
into the ravine to tumble and take avalanches of junk with her into
white dust and cinders.
"No!" said Douglas, sitting there, looking down. "NO!"
The big man toppled on the rim of the hill, gasping. "You just thank God
it wasn't you I did that to!" He moved unsteadily away, falling once,
getting up, talking to himself, laughing, swearing, then gone.
Douglas sat on the edge of the ravine and wept. After a long while he
blew his nose. He looked at Tom.
"Tom, it's late. Dad'll be out walking, looking for us. We should've
been home an hour ago. Run back along Washington Street, get Dad and
bring him here."
"You're not going down in that ravine?"
"She's city property now, on the trash dump, and nobody cares what
happens, not even Mr. Black. Tell Dad what he's coming here for and he
don't have to be seen coming home with me and her. I'll take her the
back way around and nobody'll ever know."
"She won't be no good to you now, her machinery all busted."
"We can't leave her out in the rain, don't you see, Tom?"
"Sure."
Tom moved slowly off.
Douglas let himself down the hill, walking in piles of cinder and old
paper and tin cans. Halfway down he stopped and listened. He peered at
the multicolored dimness, the great landslide below. "Mme. Tarot?" he
almost whispered. "Mme. Tarot?"
At the bottom of the hill in the moonlight he thought he saw her white
wax hand move. It was a piece of white paper blowing. But he went toward
it anyway....
The town dock struck midnight The house Lights around were mostly turned
out. In the workshop garage the two boys and the man stood back from the
witch, who now sat, rearranged and at peace, in an old wicker chair
before an oilcloth-covered card table, upon which were spread, in
fantastic fans of popes and clowns and cardinals and deaths and suns and
comets, the tarot cards upon which one wax hand touched.
Father was speaking.
"... know how it is. When I was a boy, when the circus left town I ran
around collecting a million posters. Later it was breeding rabbits, and
magic. I built illusions in the attic and couldn't get them out." He
nodded to the witch. "Oh, I remember she told my fortune once, thirty
years ago. Well, clean her up good, then come in to bed. We'll build her
a special case Saturday." He moved out the garage door but stopped when
Douglas spoke softly.
"Dad. Thanks. Thanks for the walk home. Thanks."
"Heck," said Father, and was gone.
The two boys left alone with the witch looked at each other. "Gosh,
right down the main street we go, all four of us, you, me, Dad, the
witch! Dad's one in a million!"
"Tomorrow," said Douglas, "I go down and buy the rest of the machine
from Mr. Black, for ten bucks, or he'll throw it out."
"Sure." Tom looked at the old woman there in the wicker chair. "Boy she
sure looks alive. I wonder what's inside."
"Little tiny bird bones. All that's left of Mme. Tarot after Napoleon--"
"No machinery at all? Why don't we just cut her open and see?"
"Plenty of time for that, Tom."
"When?"
"Well, in a year, two years, when I'm fourteen or fifteen, then's the
time to do it. Right now I don't want to know nothing except she's here.
And tomorrow I get to work on the spells to let her escape forever. Some
night you'll hear that a strange, beautiful Italian girl was seen
downtown in a summer dress, buying a ticket for the East and everyone
saw her at the station and saw her on the train as it pulled out and
everyone said she was the prettiest girl they ever saw, and when you
hear that, Tom--and believe me, the news will get around fast! nobody
knowing where she came from or where she went--then you'll know I worked
the spell and set her free. And then, as I said, a year, two years from
now, on that night when that train pulls out, it'll be the time when we
can cut through the wax. With her gone, you're liable to find nothing
but little cogs and wheels and stuff inside her. That's how it is."
Douglas picked up the witch's hand and moved it over the dance of life,
the frolic of bone-white death, the dates and dooms, the fates and
follies, tapping, touching, whispering her worn-down fingernails. Her
face tilted with some secret equilibrium and looked at the boys and the
eyes flashed bright in the raw bulb light, unblinking.
"Tell your fortune, Tom?" asked Douglas quietly.
"Sure."
A card fell from the witch's voluminous sleeve.
"Tom, you see that? A card, hidden away, and now she throws it out at
us!" Douglas held the card to the light. "It's blank. I'll put it in a
matchbox full of chemicals during the night. Tomorrow we'll open the box
and there the message'll be!"
"What'll it say?"
Douglas closed his eyes the better to see the words.
"It'll say,'Thanks from your humble servant and grateful friend, Mme.
Floristan Mariani Tarot, the Chiromancer, Soul Healer, and Deep-Down
Diviner of Fates and Furies.' "
Tom laughed and shook his brother's arm.
"Go on, Doug, what else, what else?"
"Let me see ... And it'll say,'Hey nonny no! ... is't not fine to dance
and sing? ... when the bells of death do ring ... and turn upon the toe
... and sing Hey nonny no!' And it'll say,'Tom and Douglas Spaulding,
everything you wish for, all your life through, you'll get...' And it'll
say that we'll live forever, you and me, Tom, we'll live forever... ."
"All that on just this one card?"
"All that, every single bit of it, Tom."
In the light of the electric bulb they bent, the two boys' heads down,
the witch's head down, staring and staring at the beautiful blank but
promising white card, their bright eyes sensing each and every
incredibly hidden word that would soon rise up from pale oblivion.
"Hey," said Tom in the softest of voices.
And Douglas repeated in a glorious whisper, "Hey ..."
Faintly, the voice chanted under the fiery green trees at noon.
"... nine, ten, eleven, twelve.. ."
Douglas moved slowly across the lawn. "Tom, what you counting?"
"... thirteen, fourteen, shut up, sixteen, seventeen, cicadas, eighteen,
nineteen...!"
"Cicadas?"
"Oh hell!" Tom unsqueezed his eyes. "Hell, hell, hell!"
"Better not let people hear you swearing."
"Hell, hell, hell is a place!" Tom cried. "Now I got to start all over.
I was counting the times the cicadas buzz every fifteen seconds." He
held up his two dollar watch. "You time it, then add thirty-nine and you
get the temperature at that very moment." He looked at the watch, one
eye shut, tilted his head and whispered again, "One, two, three ...!"
Douglas turned his head slowly, listening. Somewhere in the burning
bone-colored sky a great copper wire was strummed and shaken. Again and
again the piercing metallic vibrations, like charges of raw electricity,
fell in paralyzing shocks from the stunned trees.
"Seven!" counted Tom. "Eight."
Douglas walked slowly up the porch steps. Painfully he peered into the
hall. He stayed there a moment, then slowly he stepped back out on the
porch and called weakly to Tom. "It's exactly eighty-seven degrees
Fahrenheit."
"-twenty-seven, twenty-eight--"
"Hey, Tom you hear me?"
"I hear you--thirty, thirty-one! Get away! Two, three thirty-four!"
"You can stop counting now, right inside on that old thermometer it's
eighty-seven and going up, without the help of no katydids."
"Cicadas! Thirty-nine, forty! Not katydids! Forty-two!"
"Eighty-seven degrees, I thought you'd like to know.
"Forty-five, that's inside, not outside! Forty-nine, fifty, fifty-one!
Fifty-two, fifty-three! Fifty-three plus thirty-nine is--ninety-two
degrees!"
"Who says?"
"I say! Not eighty-seven degrees Fahrenheit! But ninety-two degrees
Spaulding!"
"You and who else?"
Tom jumped up and stood red-faced, staring at the sun. "Me and the
cicadas, that's who! Me and the cicadas! You're out-numbered!
Ninety-two, ninety-two, ninety-two degrees Spaulding, by gosh!"
They both stood looking at the merciless unclouded sky like a camera
that has broken and stares, shutter wide, at a motionless and stricken
town dying in a fiery sweat.
Douglas shut his eyes and saw two idiot suns dancing on the reverse side
of the pinkly translucent lids.
"One... two... three.. ."
Douglas felt his lips move.
"... four... five... six..."
This time the cicadas sang even faster.
From noontime to sundown, from midnight to sunrise, one man, one horse,
and one wagon were known to all twenty-six thousand three hundred
forty-nine inhabitants of Green Town, Illinois.
In the middle of the day, for no reason quickly apparent, children would
stop still and say:
"Here comes Mr. Jonas!"
"Here comes Ned!"
"Here comes the wagon!"
Older folks might peer north or south, east or west and see no sign of
the man named Jonas, the horse named Ned, or the wagon which was a
Conestoga of the kind that bucked the prairie tides to beach on the
wilderness.
But then if you borrowed the ear of a dog and tuned it high and
stretched it taut you could hear, miles and miles across the town a
singing like a rabbi in the lost lands, a Moslem in a tower. Always, Mr.
Jonas's voice went clear before him so people had a half an hour, an
hour, to prepare for his arrival. And by the time his wagon appeared,
the curbs were lined by children, as for a parade.
So here came the wagon and on its high board seat under a
persimmon-colored umbrella, the reins like a stream of water in his
gentle hands, was Mr. Jonas, singing.
"Junk! Junk! No, sir, not Junk! Junk! Junk! No, ma'am, not Junk!
Bricabracs, brickbats! Knitting needles, knick-knacks! Kickshaws!
Curies! Camisoles! Cameos! But... Junk! Junk! No, sir, not ... Junk!"
As anyone could tell who had heard the songs Mr. Jonas made up as he
passed, he was no ordinary junkman. To all appearances, yes, the way he
dressed in tatters of moss-corduroy and the felt cap on his head,
covered with old presidential campaign buttons going back before Manila
Bay. But he was unusual in this way: not only did he tread the sunlight,
but often you could see him and his horse swimming along the moonlit
streets, circling and recircling by night the islands, the blocks where
all the people lived he had known all of his life. And in that wagon he
carried things he had picked up here and there and carried for a day or
a week or a year until someone wanted and needed them. Then all they had
to say was, "I want that clock," or "How about the mattress?" And Jonas
would hand it over, take no money, and drive away, considering the words
for another tune.
So it happened that often he was the only man alive in all Green Town at
three in the morning and often people with headaches, seeing him amble
by with his moon-shimmered horse, would run out to see if by chance he
had aspirin, which he did. More than once he had delivered babies at
four in the morning and only then had people noticed how incredibly
clean his hands and fingernails were--the hands of a rich man who had
another life somewhere they could not guess. Sometimes he would drive
people to work downtown, or sometimes, when men could not sleep, go up
on their porch and bring cigars and sit with them and smoke and talk
until dawn.
Whoever he was or whatever he was and no matter how different and crazy
he seemed, he was not crazy. As he himself had often explained gently,
he had tired of business in Chicago many years before and looked around
for a way to spend the rest of his life. Couldn't stand churches, though
he appreciated their ideas, and having a tendency toward preaching and
decanting knowledge, he bought the horse and wagon and set out to spend
the rest of his life seeing to it that one part of town had a chance to
pick over what the other part of town had cast off. He looked upon
himself as a kind of process, like osmosis, that made various cultures
within the city limits available one to another. He could not stand
waste, for he knew that one man's junk is another man's luxury.
So adults, and especially children, clambered up to peer over into the
vast treasure horde in the back of the wagon.
"Now, remember," said Mr. Jonas, "you can have what you want if you
really want it. The test is, ask yourself, Do I want it with all my
heart? Could I live through the day without it? If you figure to be dead
by sundown, grab the darned thing and run. I'll be happy to let you have
whatever it is."
And the children searched the vast heaps of parchments and brocades and
bolts of wallpaper and marble ash trays and vests and roller skates and
great fat overstuffed chairs and end tables and crystal chandeliers. For
a while you just heard whispering and rattling and tinkling. Mr. Jonas
watched, comfortably puffing on his pipe, and the children knew he
watched. Sometimes their hands reached out for a game of checkers or a
string of beads or an old chair, and just as they touched it they looked
up and there were Mr. Jonas's eyes gently questioning them. And they
pulled their hand away and looked further on. Until at last each of them
put their hand on a single item and left it there. Their faces came up
and this time their faces were so bright Mr. Jonas had to laugh. He put
up his hand as if to fend off the brightness of their faces from his
eyes. He covered his eyes for a moment. When he did this, the children
yelled their thanks, grabbed their roller skates or clay tiles or
bumbershoots and, dropping off, ran.
And the children came back in a moment with something of their own in
their hands, a doll or a game they had grown tired of, something the fun
had gone out of, like the flavor from gum, and now it was time for it to
pass on to some other part of town where, seen for the first time, it
would be revivified and would revivify others. These tokens of exchange
were shyly dropped over the rim of the wagon down into unseen riches and
then the wagon was trundling on, flickering light on its great spindling
sunflower wheels and Mr.. Jonas singing again...
"Junk! Junk! No, sir, not Junk! No, ma'am, not Junk!"
until he was out of sight and only the dogs, in the shadow pools under
trees, heard the rabbi in the wilderness, and twitched their tails ...
"...junk..." Fading. "... junk..." A whisper. "... junk ..."Gone. And
the dogs asleep.
The sidewalks were haunted by dust ghosts all night as the furnace wind
summoned them up, swung them about, and gentled them down in a warm
spice on the lawns. Trees, shaken by the footsteps of late-night
strollers, sifted avalanches of dust. From midnight on, it seemed a
volcano beyond the town was showering red-hot ashes everywhere, crusting
slumberless night watchmen and irritable dogs. Each house was a yellow
attic smoldering with spontaneous combustion at three in the morning.
Dawn, then, was a time where things changed element for element. Air ran
like hot spring waters nowhere, with no sound. The lake was a quantity
of steam very still and deep over valleys of fish and sand held baking
under its serene vapors. Tar was poured licorice in the streets, red
bricks were brass and gold, roof tops were paved with bronze. The
high-tension wires were lightning held forever, blazing, a threat above
the unslept houses.
The cicadas sang louder and yet louder.
The sun did not rise, it overflowed.
In his room, his face a bubbled mass of perspiration, Douglas melted on
his bed.
"Wow," said Tom, entering. "Come on, Doug. We'll drown in the river all
day."
Douglas breathed out. Douglas breathed in. Sweat trickled down his neck.
"Doug, you awake?"
The slightest nod of the head.
"You don't feel good, huh? Boy, this house'll burn down today." He put
his hand on Douglas's brow. It was like touching a blazing stove lid. He
pulled his fingers away, startled. He turned and went downstairs.
"Mom," he said, "Doug's really sick."
His mother, taking eggs out of the icebox, stopped, let a quick look of
concern cross her face, put the eggs back, and followed Tom upstairs.
Douglas had not moved so much as a finger.
The cicadas were screaming now.
At noon, running as if the sun were after him to smash him to the
ground, the doctor pulled up on the front porch, gasping, his eyes weary
already, and gave his bag to Tom.
At one o'clock the doctor came out of the house, shaking his head. Tom
and his mother stood behind the screen door, as the doctor talked in a
low voice, saying over and over again he didn't know, he didn't know. He
put his Panama hat on his head, gazed at the sunlight blistering and
shriveling the trees overhead, hesitated like a man plunging into the
outer rim of hell, and ran again for his car. The exhaust of the car
left a great pall of blue smoke in the pulsing air for five minutes
after he was gone.
Tom took the ice pick in the kitchen and chipped a pound of ice into
prisms which he carried upstairs. Mother was sitting on the bed and the
only sound in the room was Douglas breathing in steam and breathing out
fire. They put the ice in handkerchiefs on his face and along his body.
They drew the shades and made the room like a cave. They sat there until
two o'clock, bringing up more ice. Then they touched Douglas's brow
again and it was like a lamp that had burned all night. After touching
him you looked at your fingers to make sure they weren't seared to the
bone.
Mother opened her mouth to say something, but the cicadas were so loud
now they shook dust down from the ceiling.
Inside redness, inside blindness, Douglas lay listening to the dim
piston of his heart and the muddy ebb and flow of the blood in his arms
and legs.
His lips were heavy and would not move. His thoughts were heavy and
barely ticked like seed pellets falling in an hourglass slow one by
falling one. Tick.
Around a bright steel comer of rail a trolley swung, throwing a
crumbling wave of sizzling sparks, its clamorous bell knocking ten
thousand times until it blended with the cicadas. Mr. Tridden waved. The
trolley stormed around a comer like a cannonade and dissolved. Mr.
Tridden!
Tick. A pellet fell. Tick.
"Chug-a-chug-ding! Woo-woooo!"
On the roof top a boy locomoted, pulling an invisible whistle string,
then froze into a statue. "John! John Huff, you! Hate you, John! John,
we're pals! Don't hate you, no.
John fell down the elm-tree corridor like someone falling down an
endless summer well, dwindling away.
Tick. John Huff. Tick. Sand pellet dropping. Tick. John ...
Douglas moved his head flat over, crashing on the white white terribly
white pillow.
The ladies in the Green Machine sailed by in a sound of black seal
barking, lifting hands as white as doves. They sank into the lawn's deep
waters, their gloves still waving to him as the grass closed over....
Miss Fern! Miss Roberta!
Tick... tick...
And quickly then from a window across the way Colonel Freeleigh leaned
out with the face of a clock, and buffalo dust sprang up in the street.
Colonel Freeleigh spanged and rattled, his jaw fell open, a mainspring
shot out and dangled on the air instead of his tongue. He collapsed like
a puppet on the sill, one arm still waving....
Mr. Auffmann rode by in something that was bright and something like the
trolley and the green electric runabout; and it trailed glorious clouds
and it put out your eyes like the sun. "Mr. Auffmann, did you invent
it?" he cried. "Did you finally build the Happiness Machine?"
But then he saw there was no bottom to the machine. Mr. Auffmann ran
along on the ground, carrying the whole incredible frame from his
shoulders.
"Happiness, Doug, here goes happiness!" And he went the way of the
trolley, John Huff, and the dove-fingered ladies.
Above on the roof a tapping sound. Tap-rap-bang. Pause. Tap-rap-bang.
Nail and hammer. Hammer and nail. A bird choir. And an old woman singing
in a frail but hearty voice.
"Yes, we'll gather at the river ...river...river... Yes, we'll gather at
the river ... That flows by the throne of God..."
"Grandma! Great-grandma!"
Tap, softly, tap. Tap, softly,
"... river... river.. ."
And now it was only the birds picking up their tiny feet and putting
them down again on the roof. Rattle-rattle. Scratch. Peep. Peep. Soft.
Soft.
"... river.. ."
Douglas took one breath and let it all out at once, wailing.
He did not hear his mother run into the room.
A fly, like the burning ash of a cigarette, fell upon his senseless
hand, sizzled, and flew away.
Four o'clock in the afternoon. Flies dead on the pavement. Dogs wet mops
in their kennels. Shadows herded under trees. Downtown stores shut up
and locked. The lake shore empty. The lake full of thousands of people
up to their necks in the warm but soothing water.
Four-fifteen. Along the brick streets of town the junk wagon moved, and
Mr. Jonas singing on it.
Tom, driven out of the house by the scorched look on Douglas's face,
walked slowly down to the curb as the wagon stopped.
"Hi, Mr. Jonas."
"Hello, Tom."
Tom and Mr. Jonas were alone on the street with all that beautiful junk
in the wagon to look at and neither of them looking at it. Mr. Jonas
didn't say anything right away. He lit his pipe and puffed it, nodding
his head as if he knew before he asked, that something was wrong.
"Tom?" he said.
"It's my brother," said Tom. "It's Doug."
Mr. Jonas looked up at the house.
"He's sick," said Tom. "He's dying!"
"Oh, now, that can't be so," said Mr. Jonas, scowling around at the very
real world where nothing that vaguely looked like death could be found
on this quiet day.
"He's dying," said Tom. "And the doctor doesn't know what's wrong. The
heat, he said, nothing but the heat. Can that be, Mr. Jonas? Can the
heat kill people, even in a dark room?"
"Well," said Mr. Jonas and stopped.
For Tom was crying now.
"I always thought I hated him ... that's what I thought ... we fight
half the time ... I guess I did hate him ... sometimes ... but now ...
now. Oh, Mr. Jonas, if only ..."
"If only what, boy?"
"If only you had something in this wagon would help. Something I could
pick and take upstairs and make him okay."
Tom cried again.
Mr. Jonas took out his red bandanna handkerchief and handed it to Tom.
Tom wiped his nose and eyes with the handkerchief.
"It's been a tough summer," Tom said. "Lots of things have happened to
Doug."
"Tell me about them," said the junkman.
"Well," said Tom, gasping for breath, not quite done crying yet, "he
lost his best aggie for one, a real beaut. And on top of that somebody
stole his catcher's mitt, it cost a dollar ninety-five. Then there was
the bad trade he made of his fossil stones and shell collection with
Charlie Woodman for a Tarzan clay statue you got by saving up macaroni
box tops. Dropped the Tarzan statue on the sidewalk second day he had
it."
"That's a shame," said the junkman and really saw all the pieces on the
cement.
"Then he didn't get the book of magic tricks he wanted for his birthday,
got a pair of pants and a shirt instead. That's enough to ruin the
summer right there."
"Parents sometimes forget how it is," said Mr. Jonas.
"Sure," Tom continued in a low voice, "then Doug's genuine set of
Tower-of-London manacles got left out all night and rusted. And worst of
all, I grew one inch taller, catching up with him almost."
"Is that all?" asked the junkman quietly.
"I could think of ten dozen other things, all as bad or worse. Some
summers you get a run of luck like that. It's been silverfish getting in
his comics collection or mildew in his new tennis shoes ever since Doug
got out of school."
"I remember years like that," said the junkman.
He looked off at the sky and there were all the years.
"So there you are, Mr. Jonas. That's it. That's why he's dying... ."
Tom stopped and looked away.
"Let me think," said Mr. Jonas.
"Can you help, Mr. Jonas? Can you?"
Mr. Jonas looked deep in the big old wagon and shook his head. Now, in
the sunlight, his face looked tired and he was beginning to perspire.
Then he peered into the mounds of vases and peeling lamp shades and
marble nymphs and satyrs made of greening copper. He sighed. He turned
and picked up the reins and gave them a gentle shake. "Tom," he said,
looking at the horse's back, "I'll see you later. I got to plan. I got
to look around and come again after supper. Even then, who knows? Until
then ..." He reached down and picked up a little set of Japanese
wind-crystals. "Hang these in his upstairs window. They make a nice cool
music!"
Tom stood with the wind-crystals in his hands as the wagon rolled away.
He held them up and there was no wind, they did not move. They could not
make a sound.
Seven o'clock. The town resembled a vast hearth over which the
shudderings of heat moved again and again from the west.
Charcoal-colored shadows quivered outward from every house, every tree.
A red-haired man moved along below. Tom, seeing him illumined by the
dying but ferocious sun, saw a torch proudly carrying itself, saw a
fiery fox, saw the devil marching in his own country.
At seven-thirty Mrs. Spaulding came out of the back door of the house to
empty some watermelon rinds into the garbage pail and saw Mr. Jonas
standing there. "How is the boy?" said Mr. Jonas.
Mrs. Spaulding stood there for a moment, a response trembling on her
lips.
"May I see him, please?" said Mr. Jonas.
Still she could say nothing.
"I know the boy well," he said. "Seen him most every day of his life
since he was out and around. I've something for him in the wagon."
"He's not--" She was going to say "conscious," but she said, "awake.
He's not awake, Mr. Jonas. The doctor said he's not to be disturbed. Oh,
we don't know what's wrong!"
"Even if he's not 'awake,' " said Mr. Jonas, "I'd like to talk to him.
Sometimes the things you hear in your sleep are more important, you
listen better, it gets through."
"I'm sorry, Mr. Jonas, I just can't take the chance." Mrs. Spaulding
caught hold of the screen-door handle and held fast to it. "Thanks.
Thank you, anyway, for coming by."
"Yes, ma'am," said Mr. Jonas.
He did not move. He stood looking up at the window above. Mrs. Spaulding
went in the house and shut the screen door.
Upstairs, on his bed, Douglas breathed.
It was a sound like a sharp knife going in and out, in and out, of a
sheath.
At eight o'clock the doctor came and went again shaking his head, his
coat off, his tie untied, looking as if he had lost thirty pounds that
day. At nine o'clock Tom and Mother and Father carried a cot outside and
brought Douglas down to sleep in the yard under the apple tree where, if
there might be a wind, it would find him sooner than in the terrible
rooms above. Then they went back and forth until eleven o'clock, when
they set the alarm clock to wake them at three and chip more ice to
refill the packs.
The house was dark and still at last, and they slept.
At twelve thirty-five, Douglas's eyes flinched.
The moon had begun to rise.
And far away a voice began to sing.
It was a high sad voice rising and falling. It was a clear voice and it
was in tune. You could not make out the words.
The moon came over the edge of the lake and looked upon Green Town,
Illinois, and saw it all and showed it all, every house, every tree,
every prehistoric-remembering dog twitching in his simple dreams.
And it seemed that the higher the moon the nearer and louder and clearer
the voice that was singing.
And Douglas turned in his fever and sighed.
Perhaps it was an hour before the moon spilled all its light upon the
world, perhaps less. But the voice was nearer now and a sound like the
beating of a heart which was really the motion of a horse's hoofs on the
brick streets muffled by the hot thick foliage of the trees.
And there was another sound like a door slowly opening or closing,
squeaking, squealing softly from time to time. The sound of a wagon.
And down the street in the light of the risen moon came the horse
pulling the wagon and the wagon riding the lean body of Mr. Jonas easy
and casual on the high seat. He wore his hat as if he were still out
under the summer sun and he moved his hands on occasion to ripple the
reins like a flow of water on the air above the horse's back. Very
slowly the wagon moved down the street with Mr. Jonas singing, and in
his sleep Douglas seemed for a moment to stop breathing and listen.
"Air, air... who will buy this air.... Air like water and air like ice
...buy it once and you'll buy it twice ... here's the April air ...
here's an autumn breeze ... here's papaya wind from the Antilles....
Air, air, sweet pickled air ... fair ... rare ... from everywhere ...
bottled and capped and scented with thyme, all that you want of air for
a dime!"
At the end of this the wagon was at the curb. And someone stood in the
yard, treading his shadow, carrying two beetle-green bottles which
glittered like cats' eyes. Mr. Jonas looked at the cot there and called
the boy's name once, twice, three times, softly. Mr. Jonas swayed in
indecision, looked at the bottles he carried, made his decision, and
moved forward stealthily to sit on the grass and look at this boy
crushed down by the great weight of summer.
"Doug," he said, "you just lie quiet. You don't have to say anything or
open your eyes. You don't even have to pretend to listen. But inside
there, I know you hear me, and it's old Jonas, your friend. Your
friend," he repeated and nodded.
He reached up and picked an apple off the tree, turned it round, took a
bite, chewed, and continued.
"Some people turn sad awfully young," he said. "No special reason, it
seems, but they seem almost to be born that way. They bruise easier,
tire faster, cry quicker, remember longer and, as I say, get sadder
younger than anyone else in the world. I know, for I'm one of them."
He took another bite of the apple and chewed it.
"Well, now, where are we?" he asked.
"A hot night, not a breath stirring, in August," he answered himself.
"Killing hot. And a long summer it's been and too much happening, eh?
Too much. And it's getting on toward one o'clock and no sign of a wind
or rain. And in a moment now I'm going to get up and go. But when I go,
and remember this clearly, I will leave these two bottles here upon your
bed. And when I've gone I want you to wait a little while and then
slowly open your eyes and sit up and reach over and drink the contents
of these bottles. Not with your mouth, no. Drink with your nose. Tilt
the bottles, uncork them, and let what is in them go right down into
your head. Read the labels first, of course. But here, let me read them
for you."
He lifted one bottle into the light.
"GREEN DUSK FOR DREAMING BRAND PURE NORTHERN AIR,' " he read. "'Derived
from the atmosphere of the white Arctic in the spring of 1900, and mixed
with the wind from the upper Hudson Valley in the month of April, 1910,
and containing particles of dust seen shining in the sunset of one day
in the meadows around Grinnell, Iowa, when a cool air rose to be
captured from a lake and a little creek and a natural spring.'
"Now the small print," he said. He squinted. "'Also containing molecules
of vapor from menthol, lime, papaya, and watermelon and all other
water-smelling, cool-savored fruits and trees like camphor and herbs
like wintergreen and the breath of a rising wind from the Des Plaines
River itself. Guaranteed most refreshing and cool. To be taken on summer
nights when the heat passes ninety.' "
He picked up the other bottle.
"This one the same, save I've collected a wind from the Aran Isles and
one from off Dublin Bay with salt on it and a strip of flannel fog from
the coast of Iceland."
He put the two bottles on the bed.
"One last direction." He stood by the cot and leaned over and spoke
quietly. "When you're drinking these, remember: It was bottled by a
friend. The S. J. Jonas Bottling Company, Green Town, Illinois--August,
1928. A vintage year, boy ... a vintage year."
A moment later there was the sound of reins slapping the back of the
horse in the moonlight, and the rumble of the wagon down the street and
away.
After a moment Douglas's eyes twitched and, very slowly, opened.
"Mother!.' whispered Tom. "Dad! Doug, it's Doug! He's going to be well.
I just went down to check and come on!"
Tom ran out of the house. His parents followed.
Douglas was asleep as they approached. Tom motioned to his parents,
smiling wildly. They bent over the cot.
A single exhalation, a pause, a single exhalation, a pause, as the three
bent there.
Douglas's mouth was slightly open and from his lips and from the thin
vents of his nostrils, gently there rose a scent of cool night and cool
water and cool white snow and cool green moss, and cool moonlight on
silver pebbles lying at the bottom of a quiet river and cool clear water
at the bottom of a small white stone well.
It was like holding their heads down for a brief moment to the pulse of
an apple-scented fountain flowing cool up into the air and washing their
faces.
They could not move for a long time.
The next morning was a morning of no caterpillars. The world that had
been full to bursting with tiny bundles of black and brown fur trundling
on their way to green leaf and tremulous grass blade, was suddenly
empty. The sound that was no sound, the billion footfalls of the
caterpillars stomping through their own universe, died. Tom, who said he
could hear that sound, precious as it was, looked with wonder at a town
where not a single bird's mouthful stirred. Too, the cicadas had ceased.
Then, in the silence, a great sighing rustle began and they knew then
why the absence of caterpillar and abrupt silence of cicada.
Summer rain.
The rain began light, a touch. The rain increased and fell heavily. It
played the sidewalks and roofs like great pianos.
And upstairs, Douglas, inside again, like a fall of snow in his bed,
turned his head and opened his eyes to see the freshly falling sky and
slowly slowly twitch his fingers toward his yellow nickel pad and yellow
Ticonderoga pencil. ...
There was a great flurry of arrival. Somewhere trumpets were shouting.
Somewhere rooms were teeming with boarders and neighbors having
afternoon tea. An aunt had arrived and her name was Rose and you could
hear her voice clarion clear above the others, and you could imagine her
warm and huge as a hothouse rose, exactly like her name, filling any
room she sat in. But right now, to Douglas, the voice, the commotion,
were nothing at all. He had come from his own house, and now stood
outside Grandma's kitchen door just as Grandma, having excused herself
from the chicken squabble in the parlor, whisked into her own domain and
set about making supper. She saw him standing there, opened the screen
door for him, kissed his brow, brushed his pale hair back from his eyes,
looked him straight on in the face to see if the fever had fallen to
ashes and, seeing that it had, went on, singing, to her work.
Grandma, he had often wanted to say, Is this where the world began? For
surely it had begun in no other than a place like this. The kitchen,
without doubt, was the center of creation, all things revolved about it;
it was the pediment that sustained the temple.
Eyes shut to let his nose wander, he snuffed deeply. He moved in the
hell-fire steams and sudden baking-powder flurries of snow in this
miraculous climate where Grandma, with the look of the Indies in her
eyes and the flesh of two firm warm hens in her bodice, Grandma of the
thousand arms, shook, basted, whipped, beat, minced, diced, peeled,
wrapped, salted, stirred.
Blind, he touched his way to the pantry door. A squeal of laughter rang
from the parlor, teacups tinkled. But he moved on into the cool
underwater green and wild-persimmon country where the slung and hanging
odor of creamy bananas ripened silently and bumped his head. Gnats
fitted angrily about vinegar cruets and his ears.
He opened his eyes. He saw bread waiting to be cut into slices of warm
summer cloud, doughnuts strewn like clown hoops from some edible game.
The faucets turned on and off in his cheeks. Here on the plum-shadowed
side of the house with maple leaves making a creek-water running in the
hot wind at the window he read spice-cabinet names.
How do I thank Mr. Jonas, he wondered, for what he's done? How do I
thank him, how pay him back? No way, no way at all. You just can't pay
What then? What? Pass it on somehow, he thought, pass it on to someone
else. Keep the chain moving. Look around, find someone, and pass it on.
That was the only way....
"Cayenne, marjoram, cinnamon."
The names of lost and fabulous cities through which storms of spice
bloomed up and dusted away.
He tossed the cloves that had traveled from some dark continent where
once they had spilled on milk marble, jackstones for children with
licorice hands.
And looking at one single label on a jar, he felt himself gone round the
calendar to that private day this summer when he had looked at the
circling world and found himself at its center.
The word on the jar was RELISH.
And he was glad he had decided to live.
RELISH! What a special name for the minced pickle sweetly crushed in its
white-capped jar. The man who had named it, what a man he must have
been. Roaring, stamping around, he must have tromped the joys of the
world and jammed them in this jar and writ in a big hand, shouting,
RELISH! For its very sound meant rolling in sweet fields with roistering
chestnut mares, mouths bearded with grass, plunging your head fathoms
deep in trough water so the sea poured cavernously through your head.
RELISH!
He put out his hand. And here was--SAVORY.
"What's Grandma cooking for dinner tonight?" said Aunt Rose's voice from
the real world of afternoon in the parlor.
"No one knows what Grandma cooks," said Grandfather, home from the
office early to tend this immense flower, "until we sit at table.
There's always mystery, always suspense."
"Well, I always like to know what I'm going to eat," cried Aunt Rose,
and laughed. The chandelier prisms in the dining room rang with pain.
Douglas moved deeper into pantry darkness.
"Savory ... that's a swell word. And Basil and Betel. Capsicum. Curry.
All great. But Relish, now, Relish with a capital R. No argument, that's
the best."
Trailing veils of steam, Grandma came and went and came again with
covered dishes from kitchen to table while the assembled company waited
in silence. No one lifted lids to peer in at the hidden victuals. At
last Grandma sat down, Grandpa said grace, and immediately thereafter
the silverware flew up like a plague of locusts on the air.
When everyone's mouths were absolutely crammed full of miracles,
Grandmother sat back and said, "Well, how do you like it?"
And the relatives, including Aunt Rose, and the boarders, their teeth
deliciously mortared together at this moment, faced a terrible dilemma.
Speak and break the spell, or continue allowing this honey-syrup food of
the gods to dissolve and melt away to glory in their mouths? They looked
as if they might laugh or cry at the cruel dilemma. They looked as if
they might sit there forever, untouched by fire or earthquake, or
shooting in the street, a massacre of innocents in the yard, overwhelmed
with effluviums and promises of immortality. All villains were innocent
in this moment of tender herbs, sweet celeries, luscious roots. The eye
sped over a snow field where lay fricassees, salmagundis, gumbos,
freshly invented succotashes, chowders, ragouts. The only sound was a
primeval bubbling from the kitchen and the clocklike chiming of
fork-on-plate announcing the seconds instead of the hours.
And then Aunt Rose gathered her indomitable pinkness and health and
strength into herself with one deep breath and, fork poised on air,
looking at the mystery there impaled, spoke in much too loud a voice.
"Oh, it's beautiful food all right. But what is this thing we're
eating?"
The lemonade stopped tinkling in the frosty glasses, the forks ceased
flashing on the air and came to rest on the table.
Douglas gave Aunt Rose that look which a shot deer gives the hunter
before it falls dead. Wounded surprise appeared in each face down the
line. The food was self-explanatory, wasn't it? It was its own
philosophy, it asked and answered its own questions. Wasn't it enough
that your blood and your body asked no more than this moment of ritual
and rare incense?
"I really don't believe," said Aunt Rose, "that anyone heard my
question."
At last Grandma let her lips open a trifle to allow the answer out.
"I call this our Thursday Special. We have it regularly."
This was a lie.
In all the years not one single dish resembled another. Was this one
from the deep green sea? Had that one been shot from blue summer air?
Was it a swimming food or a flying food, had it pumped blood or
chlorophyll, had it walked or leaned after the sun? No one knew. No one
asked. No one cared.
The most people did was stand in the kitchen door and peer at the
baking-powder explosions, enjoy the clangs and rattles and bangs like a
factory gone wild where Grandma stared half blindly about, letting her
fingers find their way among canisters and bowls.
Was she conscious of her talent? Hardly. If asked about her cooking,
Grandma would look down at her hands which some glorious instinct sent
on journeys to be gloved in flour, ,r to plumb disencumbered turkeys,
wrist-deep in search of their animal souls. Her gray eyes blinked from
spectacles warped by forty years of oven blasts and blinded with
strewings of pepper and sage, so she sometimes flung cornstarch ,ver
steaks, amazingly tender, succulent steaks! And sometimes dropped
apricots into meat leaves, cross-pollinated meats, herbs, fruits,
vegetables with no prejudice, no tolerance for recipe or formula, save
that at the final moment of delivery, mouths watered, blood thundered in
response. Her lands then, like the hands of Great-grandma before her,
were Grandma's mystery, delight, and life. She looked at them in
astonishment, but let them live their life the way they must absolutely
lead it.
But now for the first time in endless years, here was an upstart, a
questioner, a laboratory scientist almost, speaking out where silence
could have been a virtue.
"Yes, yes, but what did you put in this Thursday Special?"
"Why," said Grandma evasively, "what does it taste like to you?"
Aunt Rose sniffed the morsel on the fork.
"Beef, or is it lamb? Ginger, or is it cinnamon? Ham sauce? Bilberries?
Some biscuit thrown in? Chives? Almonds?"
"That's it exactly," said Grandma. "Second helpings, everyone?"
A great uproar ensued, a clashing of plates, a swarming of arms, a rush
of voices which hoped to drown blasphemous inquiry forever, Douglas
talking louder and making more motions than the rest. But in their faces
you could see their world tottering, their happiness in danger. For they
were the privileged members of a household which rushed from work or
play when the first dinner bell was so much as clapped once in the hall.
Their arrival in the dining room had been for countless years a sort of
frantic musical chairs, as they shook out napkins in a white fluttering
and seized up utensils as if recently starved in solitary confinement,
waiting for the summons to fall downstairs in a mass of twitching elbows
and overflow themselves at table. Now they clamored nervously, making
obvious jokes, darting glances at Aunt Rose as if she concealed a bomb
in that ample bosom that was ticking steadily on toward their doom.
Aunt Rose, sensing that silence was indeed a blessing devoted herself to
three helpings of whatever it was on the plate and went upstairs to
unlace her corset.
Grandma," said Aunt Rose. down again. "Oh what a kitchen you keep. It's
really a mess, now, you must admit. Bottles and dishes and boxes all
over, the labels off most everything, so how do you tell what you're
using? I'd feel guilty if you didn't let me help you set things to
rights while I'm visiting here. Let me roll up my sleeves."
"No, thank you very much," said Grandma.
Douglas heard them through the library walls and his heart thumped.
"It's like a Turkish bath in here," said Aunt Rose. "Let's have some
windows open, roll up those shades so we can see what we're doing."
"Light hurts my eyes," said Grandma.
"I got the broom, I'll wash the dishes and stack them away neat. I got
to help, now don't say a word."
"Go sit down," said Grandma.
"Why, Grandma, think how it'd help your cooking. You're a wonderful
cook, it's true, but if you're this good in all this chaos--pure
chaos--why, think how fine you'd be, once things were put where you
could lay hands on them."
"I never thought of that...." said Grandma.
"Think on it, then. Say, for instance, modern kitchen methods helped you
improve your cooking just ten or fifteen per cent. Your menfolk are
already pure animal at the table. This time next week they'll be dying
like flies from overeating. Food so pretty and fine they won't be able
to stop the knife and fork."
"You really think so?" said Grandma, beginning to be interested.
"Grandma, don't give in!" whispered Douglas to the Library wall.
But to his horror he heard them sweeping and dusting, throwing out
half-empty sacks, pasting new labels on cans, putting dishes and pots
and pans in drawers that had stood empty for years. Even the knives,
which had lain like a catch of silvery fish on the kitchen tables, were
dumped into boxes.
Grandfather had been listening behind Douglas for a full five minutes.
Somewhat uneasily he scratched his chin. "Now that I think of it, that
kitchen's been a mess right on down the line. Things need a little
arrangement, no doubt. And if what Aunt Rose claims is true, Doug boy,
it'll be a rare experience at supper tomorrow night."
"Yes, sir," said Douglas. "A rare experience."
"What's that?" asked Grandma.
Aunt Rose took a wrapped gift from behind her back. Grandma opened it.
"A cookbook!" she cried. She let it drop on the table. "I don't need one
of those! A handful of this, a pinch of that, a thimbleful of something
else is all I ever use--"
"I'll help you market," said Aunt Rose. "And while we're at it, I been
noticing your glasses, Grandma. You mean to say you been going around
all these years peering through spectacles like those, with chipped
lenses, all kind of bent? How do you see your way around without falling
flat in the flour bin? We're taking you right down for new glasses."
And off they marched, Grandma bewildered, on Rose's elbow, into the
summer afternoon.
They returned with groceries, new glasses, and a hairdo for Grandma.
Grandma looked as if she had been chased around town. She gasped as Rose
helped her into the house.
"There you are, Grandma. Now you got everything where you can find it.
Now you can see!"
"Come on, Doug," said Grandfather. "Let's take a walk around the block
and work up an appetite. This is going to be a night in history. One of
the best darned suppers ever served, or I'll eat my vest."
Suppertime.
Smiling people stopped smiling. Douglas chewed one bit of food for three
minutes, and then, pretending to wipe his mouth, lumped it in his
napkin. He saw Tom and Dad do the same. People swashed the food
together, making roads and patterns, drawing pictures in the gravy,
forming castles of the potatoes, secretly passing meat chunks to the
dog.
Grandfather excused himself early. "I'm full," he said.
All the boarders were pale and silent.
Grandma poked her own plate nervously.
"Isn't it a fine meal?" Aunt Rose asked everyone. "Got it on the table
half an hour early, too!"
But the others were thinking that Monday followed Sunday, and Tuesday
followed Monday, and so on for an entire week of sad breakfasts,
melancholy lunches, and funereal dinners. In a few minutes the dining
room was empty. Upstairs the boarders brooded in their rooms.
Grandma moved slowly, stunned, into her kitchen.
"This," said Grandfather, "has gone far enough!" He went to the foot of
the stairs and called up into the dusty sunlight: "Come on down,
everyone!"
The boarders murmured, all of them, locked in the dim, comfortable
library. Grandfather quietly passed a derby hat. "For the kitty," he
said. Then he put his hand heavily on Douglas's shoulder. "Douglas, we
have a great mission for you, son. Now listen ..." And he whispered his
warm, friendly breath into the boy's ear.
Douglas found Aunt Rose, alone, cutting flowers in the garden the next
afternoon.
"Aunt Rose," he said gravely, "why don't we go for a walk right now?
I'll show you the butterfly ravine just down that way."
They walked together all around town. Douglas talked swiftly, nervously,
not looking at her, listening only to the courthouse clock strike the
afternoon hours.
Strolling back under the warm summer elms toward the house, Aunt Rose
suddenly gasped and put her hand to her throat.
There, on the bottom of the porch step, was her luggage, neatly packed.
On top of one suitcase, fluttering in the summer breeze, was a pink
railroad ticket.
The boarders, all ten of them, were seated on the porch stiffly.
Grandfather, like a train conductor, a mayor, a good friend, came down
the steps solemnly.
"Rose," he said to her, taking her hand and shaking it up and down, "I
have something to say to you"
"What is it?" said Aunt Rose.
"Aunt Rose," he said. "Good-bye."
They heard the train chant away into the late afternoon hours. The porch
was empty, the luggage gone, Aunt Rose's room unoccupied. Grandfather in
the library, groped behind E. A. Poe for a small medicine bottle,
smiling.
Grandma came home from a solitary shopping expedition to town.
"Where's Aunt Rose?"
"We said good-bye to her at the station," said Grandfather. "We all
wept. She hated to go, but she sent her best love to you and said she
would return again in twelve years." Grandfather took out his solid gold
watch. "And now I suggest we all repair to the library for a glass of
sherry while waiting for Grandma to fix one of her amazing banquets."
Grandma walked off to the back of the house.
Everyone talked and laughed and listened--the boarders, Grandfather, and
Douglas, and they heard the quiet sounds in the kitchen. When Grandma
rang the bell they herded to the dining room, elbowing their way.
Everyone took a huge bite.
Grandma watched the faces of her boarders. Silently they stared at their
plates, their hands in their laps, the food cooling, unchewed, in their
cheeks.
"I've lost it!" Grandma said. "I've lost my touch...."
And she began to cry.
She got up and wandered out into her neatly ordered, labeled kitchen,
her hands moving futilely before her.
The boarders went to bed hungry.
Douglas heard the courthouse clock chime ten-thirty, eleven, then
midnight, heard the boarders stirring in their beds, like a tide moving
under the moonlit roof of the vast house. He knew they were all awake,
thinking, and sad. After a long time, he sat up in bed. He began to
smile at the wall and the mirror. He saw himself grinning as he opened
the door and crept downstairs. The parlor was dark and smelled old and
alone. He held his breath.
He fumbled into the kitchen and stood waiting a moment.
Then he began to move.
He took the baking powder out of its fine new tin and put it in an old
flour sack the way it had always been. He dusted the white flour into an
old cookie crock. He removed the sugar from the metal bin marked sugar
and sifted it into a familiar series of smaller bins marked spices,
cutlery, string. He put the cloves where they had lain for years,
littering the bottom of half a dozen drawers. He brought the dishes and
knives and forks and spoons back out on top of the tables.
He found Grandma's new eyeglasses on the parlor mantel and hid them in
the cellar. He kindled a great fire in the old wood-burning stove, using
pages from the new cookbook. By one o'clock in the still morning a huge
husking roar shot up in the black stovepipe, such a wild roar that the
house, if it had ever slept at all, awoke. He heard the rustle of
Grandma's slippers down the hall stairs. She stood in the kitchen,
blinking at the chaos. Douglas was hidden behind the pantry door.
At one-thirty in the deep dark morning, the cooking odors blew up
through the windy corridors of the house. Down the stairs, one by one,
came women in curlers, men in bathrobes, to tiptoe and peer into the
kitchen--lit only by fitful gusts of red fire from the hissing stove.
And there in the black kitchen at two of a warm summer morning, Grandma
floated like an apparition, amidst bangings and clatterings, half blind
once more, her fingers groping instinctively in the dimness, shaking out
spice clouds over bubbling pots and simmering kettles, her face in the
firelight red, magical, and enchanted as she seized and stirred and
poured the sublime foods.
Quiet, quiet, the boarders laid the best linens and gleaming silver and
lit candles rather than switch on electric lights and snap the spell.
Grandfather, arriving home from a late evening's work at the printing
office, was startled to hear grace being said in the candlelit dining
room.
As for the food? The meats were deviled, the sauces curried, the greens
mounded with sweet butter, the biscuits splashed with jeweled honey;
everything toothsome, luscious, and so miraculously refreshing that a
gentle lowing broke out as from a pasturage of beasts gone wild in
clover. One and all cried out their gratitude for their loose-fitting
night clothes.
At three-thirty on Sunday morning, with the house warm with eaten food
and friendly spirits, Grandfather pushed back his chair and gestured
magnificently. From the library he fetched a copy of Shakespeare. He
laid it on a platter, which he presented to his wife.
"Grandma," he said, "I ask only that tomorrow night for supper you cook
us this very fine volume. I am certain we all agree that by the time it
reaches the table tomorrow at twilight it will be delicate, succulent,
brown and tender as the breast of the autumn pheasant."
Grandma held the book in her hands and cried happily.
They lingered on toward dawn, with brief desserts, wine from those wild
flowers growing in the front yard, and then, as the first birds winked
to life and the sun threatened the eastern sky, they all crept upstairs.
Douglas listened to the stove cooling in the faraway kitchen. He heard
Grandma go to bed.
Junkman, he thought, Mr. Jonas, wherever you are, you're thanked, you're
paid back. I passed it on, I sure did, I think I passed it on....
He slept and dreamed.
In the dream the bell was ringing and all of them were yelling and
rushing down to breakfast.
And then, quite suddenly, summer was over.
He knew it first when walking downtown. Tom grabbed his arm and pointed
gasping, at the dimestore window. They stood there unable to move
because of the things from another world displayed so neatly, so
innocently, so frighteningly, there.
"Pencils, Doug, ten thousand pencils!"
"Oh, my gosh!"
"Nickel tablets, dime tablets, notebooks, erasers, water colors, rulers,
compasses, a hundred thousand of them!"
"Don't look. Maybe it's just a mirage."
"No," moaned Tom in despair. "School. School straight on ahead! Why, why
do dime stores show things like that in windows before summer's even
over! Ruin half the vacation!"
They walked on home and found Grandfather alone on the sere,
bald-spotted lawn, plucking the last few dandelions. They worked with
him silently for a time and then Douglas, bent in his own shadow, said:
"Tom, if this year's gone like this, what will next year be, better or
worse?"
"Don't ask me." Tom blew a tune on a dandelion stem. "I didn't make the
world." He thought about it. "Though some days I feel like I did." He
spat happily.
"I got a hunch," said Douglas.
"What?"
"Next year's going to be even bigger, days will be brighter, nights
longer and darker, more people dying, more babies born, and me in the
middle of it all."
"You and two zillion other people, Doug, remember."
"Day like today," murmured Douglas, "I feel it'll be ... just me!"
"Need any help," said Tom, "just yell."
"What could a ten-year-old brother do?"
"A ten-year-old brother'll be eleven next summer. I'll unwind the world
like the rubber band on a golf ball's insides every morning, put it back
together every night. Show you how, if you ask."
"Crazy."
"Always was." Tom crossed his eyes, stuck out his tongue. "Always will
be."
Douglas laughed. They went down in the cellar with Grandpa and while he
decapitated the flowers they looked at all the summer shelves and
glimmering there in the motionless streams, the bottles of dandelion
wine. Numbered from one to ninety-odd, there the ketchup bottles, most
of them full now, stood burning in the cellar twilight, one for every
living summer day.
"Boy," said Tom, "what a swell way to save June, July, and August. Real
practical."
Grandfather looked up, considered this, and smiled.
"Better than putting things in the attic you never use again. This way,
you get to live the summer over for a minute or two here or there along
the way through the winter, and when the bottles are empty the summer's
gone for good and no regrets and no sentimental trash lying about for
you to stumble over forty years from now. Clean, smokeless, efficient,
that's dandelion wine."
The two boys pointed along the rows of bottles.
"There's the first day of summer."
"There's the new tennis shoes day."
"Sure! And there's the Green Machine!"
"Buffalo dust and Ching Ling Soo!"
"The Tarot Witch! The Lonely One!"
"It's not really over," said Tom. "It'll never be over. I'll remember
what happened on every day of this year, forever."
"It was over before it began," said Grandpa, unwinding the wine press.
"I don't remember a thing that happened except some new type of grass
that wouldn't need cutting."
"You're joking!"
"No, sir, Doug, Tom, you'll find as you get older the days kind of blur
... can't tell one from the other...."
"But, heck," said Tom. "On Monday this week It rollerskated at Electric
Park, Tuesday I ate chocolate cake, Wednesday I fell in the crick,
Thursday fell off a swinging vine, the week's been full of things! And
today, I'll remember today because the leaves outside are beginning to
get all red and yellow. Won't be long they'll be all over the lawn and
we'll jump in piles of them and burn them. I'll never forget today! I'll
always remember, I know!"
Grandfather looked up through the cellar window at the late-summer trees
stirring in a colder wind. "Of course you will, Tom," he said. "Of
course you will."
And they left the mellow light of the dandelion wine and went upstairs
to carry out the last few rituals of summer, for they felt that now the
final day, the final night had come. As the day grew late they realized
that for two or three nights now, porches had emptied early of their
inhabitants. The air had a different, drier smell and Grandma was
talking of hot coffee instead of iced tea; the open,
white-flutter-curtained windows were closing in the great bays; cold
cuts were giving way to steamed beef. The mosquitoes were gone from the
porch, and surely when they abandoned the conflict the war with Time was
really done, there was nothing for it but that humans also forsake the
battleground.
Now Tom and Douglas and Grandfather stood, as they had stood three
months, or was it three long centuries ago, on this front porch which
creaked like a ship slumbering at night in growing swells, and they
sniffed the air. Inside, the boys' bones felt like chalk and ivory
instead of green mint sticks and licorice whips as earlier in the year.
But the new cold touched Grandfather's skeleton first, like a raw hand
chording the yellow bass piano keys in the dining room.
As the compass turns, so turned Grandfather, north.
"I guess," he said, deliberating, "we won't be coming out here anymore."
And the three of them clanked the chains shaken down from the
porch-ceiling eyelets and carried the swing like a weathered bier around
to the garage, followed by a blowing of the first dried leaves. Inside,
they heard Grandma poking up a fire in the library. The windows shook
with a sudden gust of wind.
Douglas, spending a last night in the cupola tower above Grandma and
Grandpa, wrote in his tablet:
"Everything runs backward now. Like matinee films sometimes, where
people jump out of water onto diving boards. Come September you push
down the windows you pushed up, take off the sneakers you put on, pull
on the hard shoes you threw away last June. People run in the house now
like birds jumping back inside clocks. One minute, porches loaded,
everyone gabbing thirty to a dozen. Next minute, doors slam, talk stops,
and leaves fall off trees like crazy."
He looked from the high window at the land where the crickets were
strewn like dried figs in the creek beds, at a sky where birds would
wheel south now through the cry of autumn loons and where trees would go
up in a great fine burning of color on the steely clouds. Way out in the
country tonight he could smell the pumpkins ripening toward the knife
and the triangle eye and the singeing candle. Here in town the first few
scarves of smoke unwound from chimneys and the faint faraway quaking of
iron was the rush of black hard rivers of coal down chutes, building
high dark mounds in cellar bins.
But it was late and getting later.
Douglas in the high cupola above the town, moved his hand.
"Everyone, clothes off!"
He waited. The wind blew, icing the windowpane.
"Brush teeth."
He waited again.
"Now," he said at last, "out with the lights!"
He blinked. And the town winked out its lights, sleepily, here, there,
as the courthouse clock struck ten, ten-thirty, eleven, and drowsy
midnight.
"The last ones now ... there ... there ..."
He lay in his bed and the town slept around him and the ravine was dark
and the lake was moving quietly on its shore and everyone, his family,
his friends, the old people and the young, slept on one street or
another, in one house or another, or slept in the far country
churchyards.
He shut his eyes.
June dawns, July noons, August evenings over, finished, done, and gone
forever with only the sense of it all left here in his head. Now, a
whole autumn, a white winter, a cool and greening spring to figure sums
and totals of summer past. And if he should forget, the dandelion wine
stood in the cellar, numbered huge for each and every day. He would go
there often, stare straight into the sun until he could stare no more,
then close his eyes and consider the burned spots, the fleeting scars
left dancing on his warm eyelids; arranging, rearranging each fire and
reflection until the pattern was clear. ...
So thinking, he slept.
And, sleeping, put an end to Summer, 1928.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