                                 
                              Here There Be Tygers
                                      1951

     "You  have to beat a planet at its own game," said Chatterton. "Get in, rip
it  up, poison its animals, dam its rivers, sow its fields, depollinate its air,
mine it, nail it down, hack away at it, and get the hell out from under when you
have  what  you  want.  Otherwise,  a  planet will fix you good. You can't trust
planets.  They're bound to be different, bound to be bad, bound to be out to get
you,  especially  this  far  off,  a billion miles from nowhere, so you get them
first. Tear their skin off, I say. Drag out the minerals and run away before the
damn world explodes in your face. That's the way to treat them."
     The  rocket  ship  sank  down  towards planet 7 of star system 84. They had
travelled  millions  upon  millions of miles. Earth was far away, her system and
her  sun  forgotten,  her  system  settled and investigated and profited on, and
other  systems rummaged through and milked and tidied up, and now the rockets of
these  tiny  men  from  an  impossibly  remote  planet  were  probing out to far
universes.  In  a  few  months, a few years, they could travel anywhere, for the
speed  of  their  rocket  was the speed of a god, and now for the ten thousandth
time  one of the rockets of the far-circling hunt was feathering down towards an
alien world.
     "No,"  said  Captain Forester. "I have too much respect for other worlds to
treat  them  the  way  you  want to, Chatterton. It's not my business to rape or
ruin,   anyway,  thank  God.  I'm  glad  I'm  just  a  rocket  man.  You're  the
anthropologist-mineralogist.  Go ahead, do your mining and ripping and scraping.
I'll  just watch. I'll just go around looking at this new world, whatever it is,
however it seems. I like to look. All rocket men are lookers or they wouldn't be
rocket  men.  You  like  to  smell new airs, if you're a rocket man, and see new
colours  and  new  people  if  there  are  new people to see, and new oceans and
islands."
     "Take  your  gun  along,"  said Chatterton. "In my holster," said Forester.
They  turned  to  the port together and saw the green world rising to meet their
ship. "I wonder what it thinks of us?" said Forester.
     "It  won't like me," said Chatterton. "By God, I'll see to it it won't like
me. And I don't care, you know. I don't give a damn. I'm out for the money. Land
us  over  there,  will  you, Captain; that looks like iron country if I ever saw
it." It was the freshest green colour they had seen since childhood.
     Lakes lay like clear blue water droplets through the soft hills; there were
no loud highways, signboards, or cities. It's a sea of green golf-links, thought
Forester, which goes on for ever. Putting greens, driving greens, you could walk
ten thousand miles in any direction and never finish your game. A Sunday planet,
a  croquet-lawn  world,  where  you could lie on your back, clover in your lips,
eyes  half-shut,  smiling  at  the  sky,  smelling  the grass, drowse through an
eternal Sabbath, rousing only on occasion to turn the
     Sunday paper or crack the red-striped wooden ball through the hoop.
     "If ever a planet was a woman, this one is."
     "Woman  on  the  outside,  man  on  the inside," said Chatterton. "All hard
underneath,  all  male iron, copper, uranium, black sod. Don't let the cosmetics
fool you."
     He  walked  to  the bin where the Earth Drill waited. Its great screw-snout
glittered  bluely,  ready to stab seventy feet deep and suck out corks of earth,
deeper  still with extensions into the heart of the planet. Chatterton winked at
it. "We'll fix your woman, Forester, but good."
     "Yes, I know you will," said Forester, quietly.
     The rocket landed.
     "It's too green, too peaceful," said Chatterton; "I don't like it."
     He turned to the captain. "We'll go out with our rifles."
     "I give orders, if you don't mind."
     "Yes,  and my company pays our way with millions of dollars of machinery we
must protect; quite an investment."
     The  air  on  the  new  planet 7 in star system 84 was good. The port swung
wide. The men filed out into the greenhouse world.
     The last man to emerge was Chatterton, gun in hand.
     As  Chatterton  set  foot  to the green lawn, the earth trembled. The grass
shook.  The  distant  forest  rumbled.  The  sky  seemed  to  blink  and  darken
imperceptibly. The men were watching Chatterton when it happened.
     "An earthquake, by God!"
     Chatterton's face paled. Everyone laughed.
     "It doesn't like you, Chatterton!"
     "Nonsense!"
     The trembling died away at last.
     "Well,"  said Captain Forester, "it didn't quake for us, so it must be that
it doesn't approve of your philosophy."
     "Coincidence,"  Chatterton  smiled.  "Come on now on the double. I want the
Drill out here in a half-hour for a few samplings."
     "Just  a  moment."  Forester stopped laughing. "We've got to clear the area
first, be certain there're no hostile people or animals. Besides, it isn't every
year  you hit a planet like this, very nice; can you blame us if we want to have
a look at it?"
     "All right." Chatterton joined them. "Let's get it over with.
     They left a guard at the ship and they walked away over fields and meadows,
over small hills and into little valleys. Like a bunch of boys out hiking on the
finest  day of the best summer in the most beautiful year in history, walking in
the  croquet  weather  where  if  you listened you could hear the whisper of the
wooden  ball across grass, the click through the hoop, the gentle undulations of
voices,  a sudden high drift of women's laughter from some ivy-shaded porch, the
tinkle of ice in the summer tea-pitcher.
     "Hey,"  said  Driscoll,  one  of  the younger crewmen, sniffing the air. "I
brought a baseball and bat; we'll have a game later. What a diamond!"
     The  men laughed quietly in the baseball season, in the good quiet wind for
tennis, in the weather for bicycling and picking wild grapes.
     "How'd you like the job of mowing all this?" asked Driscoll.
     The men stopped.
     "I  knew  there  was something wrong!" cried Chatter-ton. "This grass; it's
freshly cut!"
     "Probably a species of dichondra, always short."
     Chatterton spat on the green grass and rubbed it in with his boot. "I don't
like it, I don't like it. If anything happened to us, no one on Earth would ever
know.  Silly  policy: if a rocket fails to return, we never send a second rocket
to check the reason why."
     "Natural  enough,"  explained  Forester. "We can't waste time on a thousand
hostile  worlds,  fighting  futile  wars.  Each  rocket represents years, money,
lives.  We  can't  afford  to  waste  two  rockets if one rocket proves a planet
hostile. We go on to peaceful planets. Like this one."
     "I  often  wonder,"  said  Driscolt,  "what  happened  to  all  those  lost
expeditions on worlds we'll never try again."
     Chatterton  eyed  the distant forest. "They were shot, stabbed, broiled for
dinner. Even as we may be, any minute. It's time we got back to work, Captain!"
     They stood at the top of a little rise.
     "Feel,"  said  Driscoll,  his hands and arms out loosely. "Remember how you
used  to  run  when you were a kid, and how the wind felt? Like feathers on your
arms. You ran and thought any minute you'd fly, but you never quite did."
     The  men stood remembering. There was a smell of pollen and new rain drying
upon a million grass blades.
     Driscoll  gave a little run. "Feel it, by God, the wind! You know, we never
have  really  flown by ourselves. We have to sit inside tons of metal, away from
flying,  really. We've never flown like birds fly, to themselves. Wouldn't it be
nice  to  put your arms out like this -" He extended his arms. "And run." He ran
ahead of them, laughing at his idiocy. "And fly!" he cried. He flew.
     Time  passed  on  the  silent gold wrist-watches of the men standing below.
They  stared  up.  And  from  the  sky  came a high sound of almost unbelievable
laughter.
     "Tell him to come down," whispered Chatterton. "He'll be killed."
     Nobody  heard.  Their  faces  were  raised  away from Chatterton; they were
stunned and smiling.
     At  last  Driscoll  landed at their feet. "Did you see me? My God, I flew!"
They had seen.
     "Let  me  sit  down, oh Lord, Lord." Driscoll slapped his knees, chuckling.
"I'm a sparrow, I'm a hawk, God bless me. Go on, all of you, try it!"
     "It's  the  wind.  It  picked  me up and flew me!" he said, a moment later,
gasping, shivering with delight.
     "Let's  get  out  of  here."  Chatterton started turning slowly in circles,
watching  the  blue  sky.  "It's a trap, it wants us all to fly in the air. Then
it'll drop us all at once and kill us. I'm going back to the ship."
     "You'll  wait  for my order on that," said Forester. The men were frowning,
standing  in  the  warm-cool  air, while the wind sighed about them. There was a
kite sound in the air, a sound of eternal March.
     "I asked the wind to fly me," said Driscoll. "And it did!"
     Forester  waved the others aside. "I'll chance it next. If I'm killed, back
to the ship, all of you."
     "I'm  sorry,  I can't allow this; you're the captain," said Chatterton. "We
can't  risk  you." He took out his gun. "I should have some sort of authority or
force here. This game's gone on too long; I'm ordering us back to the ship!"
     "Holster your gun," said Forester quietly.
     "Stand  still, you idiot!" Chatterton blinked now at this man, now at that.
"Haven't you felt it? This world's alive, it has a look to it, it's playing with
us, biding its time."
     "I'll be the judge of that," said Forester. "You're going back to the ship,
in a moment, under arrest, if you don't put up that gun."
     "If you fools won't come with me, you can die out here. I'm going back, get
my samples, and get out."
     "Chatterton!"
     "Don't try to stop me!"
     Chatterton started to run. Then, suddenly, he gave a cry.
     Everyone shouted and looked up.
     "There he goes," said Driscoll.
     Chatterton was up in the sky.
     Night  had  come  on like the closing of a great but gentle eye. Chatterton
sat stunned on the side of the hill. The other men sat around him, exhausted and
laughing. He would not look at them, he would not look at the sky, he would only
feel  of  the  earth,  and  his arms and his legs and his body, tightening in on
himself.
     "God, wasn't it perfect!" said a man named Koestler.
     They had all flown, like orioles and eagles and sparrows, and they were all
happy.
     "Come out of it, Chatterton, it was fun, wasn't it?" said Koestler.
     "It's impossible." Chatterton shut his eyes, tight, tight. "It can't do it.
There's  only one way for it to do it; it's alive. The air's alive. Like a fist,
it picked me up. Any minute now, it can kill us all. It's alive!"
     "All  right,"  said Koestler, "say it's alive. And a living thing must have
purposes. Suppose the purpose of this world is to make us happy."
     As  if  to  add to this, Driscoll came flying up, canteens in each hand. "I
found a creek, tested and pure water, wait'll you try it!"
     Forester  took  a  canteen,  nudged  Chatterton  with it, offering a drink.
Chatterton shook his head and drew hastily away. He put his hands over his face.
"It's  the  blood  of this planet. Living blood. Drink that, put that inside and
you  put  this  world  inside  you to peer out your eyes and listen through your
ears. No thanks!"
     Forester shrugged and drank.
     "Wine! "he said.
     "It can't be!"
     "It is. Smell it, taste it! A rare white wine!"
     "French domestic." Driscoll sipped his.
     "Poison," said Chatterton.
     They passed the canteens round.
     They  idled  on through the gentle afternoon, not wanting to do anything to
disturb  the peace that lay all about them. They were like very young men in the
presence  of great beauty, of a fine and famous woman, afraid that by some word,
some gesture, they might turn her face away, avert her loveliness and her kindly
attentions.  They  had  felt the earthquake that had greeted Chatterton, thought
Forester, and they did not want earthquake. Let them enjoy this Day After School
Lets  Out,  this  fishing weather. Let them sit under the shade trees or walk on
the tender hills, but let them drill no drillings, test no testings, contaminate
no contaminations.
     They  found  a  small  stream which poured into a boiling water pool. Fish,
swimming  in  the  cold  creek  above,  fell  glittering into the hot spring and
floated, minutes later, cooked, to the surface.
     Chatterton reluctantly joined the others, eating.
     "It'll  poison  us  all.  There's  always  a trick to things like this. I'm
sleeping  in the rocket tonight. You can sleep out if you want. To quote a map I
saw  in  medieval history: 'Here there be tigers.' Some time tonight when you're
sleeping, the tigers and cannibals will show up."
     Forester  shook  his  head.  "I'll go along with you, this planet is alive.
It's  a  race  unto  itself.  But  it needs us to show off to, to appreciate its
beauty. What's the use of a stage full of miracles if there's no audience?"
     But Chatterton was busy. He was bent over, being sick.
     "I'm poisoned! Poisoned!"
     They held his shoulders until the sickness passed. They gave him water. The
others were feeling fine.
     "Better  eat  nothing but ship's food from now on," advised Forester. "It'd
be safer."
     "We're  starting  work  right  now."  Chatterton  swayed, wiping his mouth.
"We've  wasted  a whole day. I'll work alone if I have to. I'll show this damned
thing."  He  staggered  away towards the rocket. "He doesn't know when he's well
off," murmured Driscoll. "Can't we stop him, Captain?"
     "He  practically  owns the expedition. We don't have to help him; there's a
clause  in  our  contract  that  guarantees  refusal  to  work  under  dangerous
conditions.  So...  do unto this Picnic Ground as you would have it do unto you.
No  initial-cutting  on the trees. Replace the turf on the greens. Clean up your
banana-peels after you."
     Now, below, in the ship there was an immense humming. From the storage port
rolled the great shining Drill. Chatterton followed it, called directions to its
robot radio. "This way, here!" "The fool."
     "Now!" cried Chatterton.
     The  Drill  plunged  its  long  screw-bore into the green grass. Chatterton
waved up at the other men. "I'll show it!"
     The sky trembled.
     The  Drill  stood  in  the centre of a little sea of grass. For a moment it
plunged  away, bringing up moist corks of sod which it spat unceremoniously into
a shaking analysis bin.
     Now  the  Drill gave a wrenched, metallic squeal like a monster interrupted
at its feed. From the soil beneath it, slow, bluish liquids bubbled up.
     Chatterton shouted, "Get back, you fool!"
     The  Drill lumbered in a prehistoric dance. It shrieked like a mighty train
turning  on  a  sharp  curve, throwing out red sparks. It was sinking. The black
slime gave under it in a dark pool.
     With  a coughing sigh, a series of pants and churnings, the Drill sank into
a  black scum like an elephant shot and dying, trumpeting, like a mammoth at the
end of an Age, vanishing limb by ponderous limb into the pit.
     "My  God,"  said Forester under his breath, fascinated with the scene. "You
know what that is, Driscoll? It's tar. The damn fool machine hit a tar-pit!'"
     "Listen,  listen!" cried Chatterton at the Drill, running about on the edge
of the oily lake.'This way, over here!"
     But  like  the old tyrants of the earth, the dinosaurs with their tubed and
screaming necks, the Drill was plunging and thrashing in the one lake from where
there was no returning to bask on the firm and understandable shore.
     Chatterton turned to the other men far away. "Do something, someone!"
     The Drill was gone.
     The  tar-pit  bubbled  and  gloated,  sucking the hidden monster bones. The
surface  of the pool was silent. A huge bubble, the last, rose, expelled a scent
of ancient petroleum, and fell apart.
     The men came down and stood on the edge of the little black sea.
     Chatterton stopped yelling.
     After  a long minute of staring into the silent tar-pool, Chatterton turned
and  looked at the hills, blindly, at the green rolling lawns. The distant trees
were growing fruit now and dropping it, softly, to the ground.
     "I'll show it," he said quietly.
     "Take it easy, Chatterton."
     "I'll fix it," he said.
     "Sit down, have a drink."
     "I'll fix it good, I'll show it it can't do this to me."
     Chatterton started off back to the ship.
     "Wait a minute, now," said Forester.
     Chatterton ran. "I know what to do, I know how to fix it!"
     "Stop  him!"  said  Forester.  He  ran,  then remembered he could fly. "The
A-Bomb's on the ship, if he should get to that...."
     The  other  men  had  thought of that and were in the air. A small grove of
trees  stood  between  the  rocket  and  Chatterton  as  he  ran  on the ground,
forgetting  that he could fly, or afraid to fly, or hot allowed to fly, yelling.
The  crew  headed  for  the  rocket to wait for him, the Captain with them. They
arrived,  formed  a  line,  and  shut  the  rocket  port.  The  last they saw of
Chatterton he was plunging through the edge of the tiny forest.
     The crew stood waiting.
     "That fool, that crazy guy."
     Chatterton did not come out on the other side of the small woodland.
     "He's turned back, waiting for us to relax our guard.'
     "Go bring him in," said Forester.
     Two men flew off.
     Now, softly, a great and gentle rain felt upon the green world.
     "The  final  touch,"  said Driscoll. "We'd never have to build houses here.
Notice it's not raining on us. It's raining all around, ahead, behind us. What a
world!"
     They  stood  dry in the middle of the blue, cool rain. The sun was setting.
The moon, a large one the colour of ice, rose over the freshened hills.
     "There's only one more thing this world needs."
     "Yes," said everyone, thoughtfully, slowly.
     "We'll have to go looking," said Driscoll "It's logical. The wind flies us,
the  trees  and  streams  feed  us, everything is alive. Perhaps if we asked for
companionship..."
     "I've thought a long time, today and other days," said Koestler. "We're all
bachelors,  been  travelling  for years, and tired of it. Wouldn't it be nice to
settle  down  somewhere.  Here,  maybe. On Earth you work like hell just to save
enough  to buy a house, pay taxes; the cities stink. Here, you won't even need a
house,  with  this  weather. If it gets monotonous you can ask for rain, clouds,
snow, changes. You don't have to work here for anything."
     "It'd be boring. We'd go crazy."
     "No," Koestler said, smiling. "If life got too soft, all we'd have to do is
repeat a few times what Chatterton said: 'Here there be tigers.' Listen!"
     Far  away,  wasn't  there  the  faintest roar of a giant cat, hidden in the
twilight forest?
     The men shivered.
     "A  versatile  world,"  said Koestler dryly. "A woman who'll do anything to
please her guests, as long as we're kind to her. Chatterton wasn't kind."
     "Chatterton. What about him?"
     As  if  to  answer this, someone cried from a distance. The two men who had
flown off to find Chatterton were waving at the edge of the woods.
     Forester, Driscoll, and Koestler flew down alone.
     "What's up?"
     The  men pointed into the forest. "Thought you'd want to see this, Captain.
It's damned eerie." One of the men indicated a pathway. "Look here, sir."
     The marks of great claws stood on the path, fresh and clear.
     "And over here." A few drops of blood.
     A heavy smell of some feline animal hung in the air. "Chatterton?"
     "I  don't  think  we'll  ever  find him, Captain." Faintly, faintly, moving
away, now gone in the breathing silence of twilight, came the roar of a tiger.
     The  men  lay  on the resilient grass by the rocket and the night was warm.
"Reminds me of nights when I was a kid," said Driscoll. "My brother and I waited
for  the  hottest  night  in  July  and  then  we slept on the Court House lawn,
counting  the  stars, talking; it was a great night, the best night of the year,
and now, when I think back on it, the
     best night of my life." Then he added, "Not counting tonight, of course."
     "I keep thinking about Chatterton," said Koestler.
     "Don't,"  said  Forester.  "We'll  sleep a few hours and take off. We can't
chance  staying  here  another day. I don't mean the danger that got Chatterton.
No.  I  mean, if we stayed on we'd get to liking this world too much. We'd never
want to leave."
     A soft wind blew over them.
     "I  don't want to leave now." Driscoll put his hands behind his head, lying
quietly. "And it doesn't want us to leave."
     "If  we go back to Earth and tell everyone what a lovely planet it is, what
then, Captain? They'll come smashing in here and ruin it."
     "No,"  said  Forester,  idly.  "First,  this  planet wouldn't put up with a
full-scale  invasion.  I don't know what it'd do, but it could probably think of
some  interesting  things.  Secondly, I like this planet too much; I respect it.
We'll  go back to Earth and lie about it. Say it's hostile. Which it would be to
the  average  man, like Chatterton, jumping in here to hurt it. I guess we won't
be lying after all."
     "Funny  thing,"  said  Koestler.  "I'm not afraid. Chatter-ton vanishes, is
killed  most  horribly,  perhaps, yet we lie here, no one runs, no one trembles.
It's idiotic. Yet it's right. We trust it, and it trusts us.'
     "Did you notice, after you drank just so much of the wine-water, you didn't
want more? A world of moderation."
     They  lay listening to something like the great heart of this earth beating
slowly and warmly under their bodies. Forester thought, 'I'm thirsty.' A drop of
rain  splashed  on  his  lips.  He  laughed  quietly.  'I'm lonely,' he thought.
Distantly, he heard soft high voices. He turned his eyes in upon a vision. There
was  a  group  of  hills from which flowed a clear river, and in the shallows of
that  river, sending up spray, their faces shimmering, were the beautiful women.
They  played  like  children on the shore. And it came to Forester to know about
them  and  their  life.  They were nomads, roaming the face of this world as was
their desire. There were no highways or cities, there were only hills and plains
and  winds  to  carry  them  like  white feathers where they wished. As Forester
shaped  the  question, some invisible answerer whispered the answers. There were
no  men.  These  women,  alone,  produced their race. The men had vanished fifty
thousand  years  ago. And where were these women now? A mile down from the green
forest, a mile over on the wine-stream by the six white stones, and a third mile
to  the  large river. There, in the shallows, were the women who would make fine
wives, and raise beautiful children.
     Forester opened his eyes. The other men were sitting up.
     "I had a dream."
     They had all dreamed.
     "A mile down from the green forest..."
     "... a mile over on the wine-stream..."
     "... by the six white stones..." said Koestler.
     "... and a third mile to the large river," said Driscoll, sitting there.
     Nobody  spoke again for a moment. They looked at the silver rocket standing
there in the starlight.
     "Do we walk or fly, Captain?"
     Forester said nothing.
     Driscoll  said, "Captain, let's stay. Let's never go back to Earth. They'll
never  come  and  investigate  to see what happened to us, they'll think we were
destroyed here. What do you say?"
     Forester's  face  was  perspiring.  His tongue moved again and again on his
lips. His hands twitched over his knees. The crew sat waiting.
     "It'd be nice," said the captain.
     "Sure."
     "But ..." Forester sighed. "We've got our job to do. People invested in our
ship. We owe it to them to go back."
     Forester got up. The men still sat on the ground, not listening to him.
     "It's such a goddamn nice night," said Koestler.
     They  stared  at  the soft hills and the trees and the river running off to
other horizons.
     "Let's get aboard ship," said Forester, with difficulty.
     "Captain..."
     "Get aboard," he said.
     The  rocket  rose into the sky. Looking back, Forester saw every valley and
every tiny lake.
     "We should've stayed," said Koestler. "Yes, I know."
     "It's  not  too  late  to  turn back." "I'm afraid it is." Forester made an
adjustment on the port telescope. "Look now." Koestler looked.
     The  face  of  the world was changed. Tigers, dinosaurs, mammoths appeared.
Volcanoes  erupted,  cyclones and hurricanes tore over the hills in a welter and
fury of weather.
     "Yes,  she was a woman all right," said Forester. "Waiting for visitors for
millions  of  years, preparing herself, making herself beautiful. She put on her
best face for us. When Chatterton treated her badly, she warned him a few times,
and then, when he tried to ruin her beauty, she eliminated him. She wanted to be
loved,  like every woman, for herself, not for her wealth. So now, after she had
offered  us  everything,  we turn our backs. She's the woman scorned. She let us
go,  yes, but we can never come back. She'll be waiting for us with those..." He
nodded  to  the  tigers  and  the cyclones and the boiling seas. "Captain," said
Koestler. "Yes."
     "It's a little late to tell you this. But just before we took off, I was in
charge of the air-lock. I let Driscoll slip away from the ship. He wanted to go.
I couldn't refuse him. I'm responsible. He's back there now on that planet."
     They both turned to the viewing port.
     After a long while, Forester said, "I'm glad. I'm glad one of us had enough
sense to stay."
     "But he's dead by now!"
     "No,  that  display  down  there is for us, perhaps a visual hallucination.
Underneath  all  the tigers and lions and hurricanes, Driscoll is quite safe and
alive,  because  he's  her only audience now. Oh, she'll spoil him rotten. He'll
lead  a  wonderful  life,  he  will, while we're slugging it out up and down the
system  looking  for  but  never  finding a planet quite like this again. No, we
won't  try  to  go  back  and  rescue Driscoll. I don't think 'she' would let us
anyway. Full speed ahead, Koestler, make it full speed."
     The rocket leaped forward into greater acceleration.
     And  just  before the planet dwindled away in brightness and mist, Forester
imagined  he  could  see Driscoll very clearly, walking away down from the green
forest,  whistling  quietly,  all  of  the fresh planet around him, a wine-creek
flowing  for  him,  baked fish lolling in the hot springs, fruit ripening in the
midnight  trees,  and  distant  forests  and lakes waiting for him to happen by.
Driscoll  walked away across the endless green lawns, near the six white stones,
beyond the forest to the edge of the large bright river.