                                 
                         The Town Where No One Got Off
                                      1958

     Crossing  the continental United States by night, by day, on the train, you
flash  past town after wilderness town where nobody ever gets off. Or rather, no
person  who  doesn't  belong,  no  person  who  hasn't  roots  in  these country
graveyards  ever  bothers  to visit their lonely stations or attend their lonely
views.
     I spoke of this to a fellow-passenger, another salesman like myself, on the
Chicago-Los Angeles train as we crossed Iowa.
     "True,"  he  said.  "People  get  off  in Chicago, everyone gets off there.
People  get off in New York, get off in Boston, get off in L.A. People who don't
live there go there to see and come back to tell. But what tourist ever just got
off  at Fox Hill, Nebraska, to look at it? You? Me? No! I don't know anyone, got
no business there, it's no health resort, so why bother?"
     "Wouldn't  it be a fascianting change," I said, "some year to plan a really
different  vacation? Pick some village lost on the plains where you don't know a
soul and go there for the hell of it?"
     "You'd be bored stiff."
     "I'm  not  bored,  thinking of it!" I peered out of the window. "What's the
next town coming up on this line?"
     "Rampart Junction."
     I smiled. "Sounds good. I might get off there."
     "You're  a  liar  and  a fool. What you want? Adventure? Romance? Go ahead,
jump off the train. Ten seconds later you'll call yourself an idiot, grab a taxi
and race us to the next town."
     "Maybe."
     I  watched  telephone poles flick by, flick by, flick by. Far ahead I could
see the first faint outlines of a town.
     "But I don't think so," I heard myself say.
     The salesman across from me looked faintly surprised.
     For slowly, very slowly, I was rising to stand. I reached for my hat. I saw
my hand fumble for my one suitcase. I was surprised, myself.
     "Hold on!" said the salesman. "What're you doing?"
     The  train  rounded a curve suddenly. I swayed. Far ahead, I saw one church
spire, a deep forest, a field of summer wheat.
     "It looks like I'm getting off the train," I said.
     "Sit down," he said.
     "No," I said. "There's a something about that town up ahead. I've got to go
see.  I've  got the time. I don't have to be in L.A., really, until next Monday.
If  I  don't get off the train now, I'll always wonder what I missed, what I let
slip by when I had the chance to see it."
     "We were just talking. There's nothing there."
     "You're wrong," I said. "There is."
     I put my hat on my head and lifted the suitcase in my hand.
     "By God," said the salesman, "I think you're really going to do it."
     My heart beat quickly. My face was flushed.
     The train whistled. The train rushed down the track. The town was near!
     "Wish me luck," I said.
     "Luck! "he cried.
     I ran for the porter, yelling.

     
     There  was  an  ancient flake-painted chair tilted back against the station
platform  wall.  In  this chair, completely relaxed so he sank into his clothes,
was  a  man  of  some  seventy years whose timbers looked as if he'd been nailed
there  since the station was built. The sun had burned his face dark and tracked
Ms  cheek  with  lizard  folds  and  stitches  that held his eyes in a perpetual
squint.  His  hair  smoked ash-white in the summer wind. His blue shirt, open at
the  neck  to  show  white  clocksprings,  was  bleached  like  the staring late
afternoon sky. His shoes were blistered as if he had held them, uncaring, in the
mouth  of  a  stove, motionless, for ever. His shadow under him was stencilled a
permanent black.
     As  I  stepped down, the old man's eyes flicked every door on the train and
stopped, surprised, at me.
     I thought he might wave.
     But there was only a sudden colouring of his secret eyes; a chemical change
that was recognition. Yet he had not twitched so much as his mouth, an eyelid, a
finger. An invisible bulk had shifted inside him.
     The  moving train gave me an excuse to follow it with my eyes. There was no
one  else on the platform. No autos waited by the cobwebbed, nail-shut office. I
alone  had departed the iron thunder to set foot on the choppy waves of platform
timber.
     The train whistled over the hill.
     Fool!  I  thought. My fellow-passenger had been right. I would panic at the
boredom  I  already  sensed  in this place. All right, I thought, fool, yes, but
run, no!
     I  walked  my  suitcase down the platform, not looking at the old man. As I
passed,  I  heard  his  thin bulk shift again, this time so I could hear it. His
feet were coming down to touch and tap the mushy boards.
     I kept walking.
     "Afternoon," a voice said, faintly.
     I  knew  he  did  not look at me but only at that great cloudless spread of
shimmering sky.
     "Afternoon," I said.
     I  started  up  the  dirt  road towards the town. One hundred yards away, I
glanced back.
     The  old  man,  still  seated  there,  stared  at  the  sun, as if posing a
question.
     I hurried on.

     
     I  moved  through  the  dreaming late-afternoon town, utterly anonymous and
alone,  a  trout going upstream, not touching the banks of a clear-running river
of life that drifted all about me.
     My  suspicions  were confirmed: it was a town where nothing happened, where
occurred only the following events:
     At four o'clock sharp, the Honneger Hardware door slammed as a dog came out
to  dust  himself in the road. Pour-thirty, a straw sucked emptily at the bottom
of  a soda-glass, making a sound like a great cataract in the drugstore silence.
Five  o'clock,  boys  and  pebbles plunged in the town river. Five-fifteen, ants
paraded in the slanting light under some elm-trees.
     And  yet - I turned in a slow circle - somewhere in this town there must be
something  worth  seeing.  I knew it was there. I knew I had to keep walking and
looking. I knew I would find it.
     I walked. I looked.
     All  through  the  afternoon  there  was  only  one constant and unchanging
factor:  the  old  man  in the bleached blue pants and shirt was never far away.
When  I  sat  in  the  drug  store he was out front spitting tobacco that rolled
itself  into  tumble-bugs in the dust. When I stood by the river he was crouched
downstream making a great thing of washing his hands.
     Along  about  seven-thirty in the evening, I was walking for the seventh or
eighth time through the quiet streets when I heard footsteps beside me.
     I  looked  over  and  the  old man was pacing me, looking straight ahead, a
piece of dried grass in his stained teeth.
     "It's been a long time," he said, quietly.
     We walked along in the twilight.
     "A long time," he said, "waitin' on that station platform."
     "You?" I said.
     "Me." He nodded in the tree shadows.
     "Were you waiting for someone at the station?"
     "Yes," he said. "You."
     "Me?"  The surprise must have shown in my voice. "But why...? You never saw
me before in your life."
     "Did I say I did? I just said I was waitin'."
     We  were  on  the edge of town now. He had turned and I had turned with him
along  the  darkening  river-bank towards the trestle where the night trains ran
over going east, going west, but stopping rare few times.
     "You want to know anything about me?" I asked, suddenly. "You the sheriff?"
     "No,  not  the sheriff. And no, I don't want to know nothin' about you." He
put  his  hands  in his pockets. The sun was set now. The air was suddenly cool.
"I'm just surprised you're here at last, is all."
     "Surprised?"
     "Surprised," he said, "and... pleased."
     I stopped abruptly and looked straight at him.
     "How long have you been sitting on that station platform?"
     "Twenty years, give or take a few."
     I  knew  he  was  telling the truth; his voice was as easy and quiet as the
river.
     "Waiting for me?" I said.
     "Or someone like you," he said.
     We walked on in the growing dark.
     "How you like our town?'
     "Nice, quiet," I said.
     "Nice, quiet." He nodded. "Like the people?"
     "People look nice and quiet."
     "They are," he said. "Nice, quiet."
     I  was  ready  to  turn  back  but the old man kept talking and in order to
listen and be polite I had to walk with him in the vaster darkness, the tides of
field and meadow beyond town.
     "Yes,"  said  the old man, "the day I retired, twenty years ago, I sat down
on  that  station  platform and there I been, sittin' doin' nothin', waitin' for
something to happen, I didn't know what, I didn't know. I couldn't say. But when
it  finally happened, I'd know it, I'd look at it and say. Yes, sir, that's what
I  was  waitin'  for.  Train wreck? No. Old woman friend come back to town after
fifty  years? No. No. It's hard to say. Someone. Something. And it seems to have
something to do with you. I wish I could tell -"
     "Why don't you try?" I said.
     The stars were coming out. We walked on.
     "Well," he said, slowly, "you know much about your own insides?"
     "You mean my stomach or you mean psychologically?"
     "That's the word. I mean your head, your brain, you know much about that7"
     The grass whispered under my feet. "A little."
     "You hate many people in your time?"
     "Some."
     "We  all  do.  It's normal enough to hate, ain't it, and not only hate but,
while we don't talk about it, don't we sometimes want to hit people who hurt us,
even kill them?"
     "Hardly  a  week  passes  we  don't  get that feeling," I said, "and put it
away."
     "We  put  away all our lives," he said. "The town says thus and so, mom and
dad  say  this and that, the law says such and such. So you put away one killing
and  another and two more after that. By the time you're my age, you got lots of
that  kind  of stuff between your ears. And unless you went to war, nothin' ever
happened to get rid of it."
     "Some men trap-shoot, or hunt ducks," I said. "Some men box or wrestle."
     "And  some  don't.  I'm talkin' about them that don't. Me. All my life I've
been  saltin'  down those bodies, put-tin' 'em away on ice in my head. Sometimes
you  get mad at a town and the people in it for makin' you put things aside like
that.  You  like  the  old  cavemen  who  just gave a hell of a yell and whanged
someone on the head with a club."
     "Which all leads up to...?"
     "Which  all leads up to: everybody'd like to do one killin' in his life, to
sort of work off that big load of stuff, all those killin's in his mind he never
did have the guts to do. And once in a while a man has a chance. Someone runs in
front  of  his  car  and he forgets the brakes and keeps goin'. Nobody can prove
nothin'  with  that sort of thing. The man don't even tell himself he did it. He
just  didn't  get  his  foot  on the brake in time. But you know and I know what
really happened, don't we?"
     "Yes," I said.
     The town was far away now. We moved over a small stream on a wooden bridge,
just near the railway embankment.
     "Now,"  said  the  old man, looking at the water, "the only kind of killin'
worth  doin'  is the one where nobody can guess who did it or why they did it or
who they did it to, right? Well, I got this idea maybe twenty years ago. I don't
think  about  it every day or every week. Sometimes months go by, but the idea's
this:  only  one train stops here each day, sometimes not even that. Now, if you
wanted  to  kill  someone you'd have to wait, wouldn't you, for years and years,
until  a  complete and actual stranger came to your town, a stranger who got off
the  train  for  no  reason, a man nobody knows and who don't know nobody in the
town.  Then,  and  only then, I thought, sittin' there on the station chair, you
could  just go up and when nobody's around, kill him and throw him in the river.
He'd  be  found  miles  downstream. Maybe he'd never be found. Nobody would ever
think  to come to Rampart Junction to find him. He wasn't goin' there. He was on
his  way some place else. There, that's my whole idea. And I'd know that man the
minute he got off the train. Know him, just as clear..."
     I had stopped walking. It was dark. The moon would not be up for an hour.
     "Would you?" I said.
     "Yes,"  he  said. I saw the motion of his head looking at the stars. "Well,
I've  talked  enough."  He  sidled  close  and  touched  my  elbow. His hand was
feverish,  as  if  he had held it to a stove before touching me. His other hand,
his  right  hand,  was  hidden,  tight  and bunched, in his pocket. "I've talked
enough."
     Something screamed.
     I jerked my head.
     Above,  a  fast-flying  night-express  razored  along  the  unseen  tracks,
flourished  light  on  hill, forest, farm, town dwellings, field, ditch, meadow,
ploughed earth, and water, then, raving high, cut off away, shrieking, gone. The
rails trembled for a little while after that. Then, silence.
     The  old  man  and I stood looking at each other in the dark. His left hand
was still holding my elbow. His other hand was still hidden.
     "May I say something?" I said, at last.
     The old man nodded.
     "About  myself,"  I  said.  I had to stop. I could hardly breathe. I forced
myself to go on. "It's funny. I've often thought the same way as you. Sure, just
today,  going  crosscountry,  I  thought,  how  perfect, how perfect, how really
perfect  it  could  be.  Business  has  been bad for me, lately. Wife sick. Good
friend died last week. War in the world. Full of boils, myself. It would do me a
world of good -"
     "What?" the old man said, his hand on my arm.
     "To  get  off  this train in a small town," I said, "where nobody knows me,
with  this gun under my arm, and find someone and kill them and bury them and go
back  down to the station and get on and go home and nobody the wiser and nobody
ever  to  know  who did it, ever. Perfect, I thought, a perfect crime. And I got
off the train."
     We  stood  there  in  the  dark  for another minute, staring at each other.
Perhaps  we  were  listening to each other's hearts beating very fast, very fast
indeed.
     The  world turned under me. I clenched my fists. I wanted to fall. I wanted
to scream, like the train.
     For  suddenly  I  saw that all the things I had just said were not lies put
forth to save my life.
     All the things I had just said to this man were true.
     And  now I knew why I had stepped from the train and walked up through this
town. I knew what I had been looking for.
     I  heard  the old man breathing hard and fast. His hand was tight on my arm
as  if  he might fall. His teeth were clenched. He leaned towards me as I leaned
towards  him.  There was a terrible silent moment of immense strain as before an
explosion.
     He  forced himself to speak at last. It was the voice of a man crushed by a
monstrous burden.
     "How do I know you got a gun under your arm?"
     "You don't know." My voice was blurred. "You can't be sure."
     He waited. I thought he was going to faint.
     "That's how it is?" he said.
     "That's how it is," I said.
     He shut his eyes tight. He shut his mouth tight.
     After  another  five  seconds, very slowly, heavily, he managed to take his
hand  away  from  my  own  immensely heavy arm. He looked down at his right hand
then, and took it, empty, out of his pocket.
     Slowly,  with  great  weight,  we  turned  away from each other and started
walking blind, completely blind, in the dark.
     The  midnight PASSENGER TO BE PICKED UP flare sputtered on the tracks. Only
when  the  train was pulling out of the station did I lean from the open Pullman
door and look back.
     The  old  man  was  seated  there with his chair tilted against the station
wall,  with  his  faded  blue  pants  and  shirt  and  his sunbaked face and his
sunbleached  eyes. He did not glance at me as the train slid past. He was gazing
east  along  the empty rails where tomorrow or the next day or the day after the
day  after  that, a train, some train, any train, might fly by here, might slow,
might  stop. His face was fixed, his eyes were blindly frozen, towards the east.
He looked a hundred years old.
     The train wailed.
     Suddenly old myself, I leaned out, squinting.
     Now  the  darkness that had brought us together stood between. The old man,
the station, the town, the forest, were lost in the night.
     For an hour I stood in the roaring blast staring back at all that darkness.