                                  
                     The Watchful Poker Chip of H. Matisse
                                      1954

     When  first  we meet George Garvey he is nothing at all. Later he'll wear a
white  poker  chip  monocle,  with  a blue eye painted on it by Matisse himself.
Later,  a golden bird cage might trill within George Garvey's false leg, and his
good left hand might possibly be fashioned of shimmering copper and jade.

     But at the beginning--gaze upon a terrifyingly ordinary man.

     "Financial section, dear?"

     The newspapers rattle in his evening apartment.

     "Weatherman says 'rain tomorrow.'"

     The  tiny  black  hairs  in  his  nostrils breathe in, breathe out, softly,
softly, hour after hour.

     "Time for bed."

     By  his  look, quite obviously born of several 1907 wax window dummies. And
with  the  trick,  much admired by magicians, of sitting in a green velour chair
and--vanishing! Turn your head and you forgot his face. Vanilla pudding.

     Yet  the  merest  accident made him the nucleus for the wildest avant-garde
literary movement in history!

     Garvey  and his wife had lived enormously alone for twenty years. She was a
lovely  carnation,  but the hazard of meeting him pretty well kept visitors off.
Neither  husband  nor  wife  suspected  Garvey's  talent  for  mummifying people
instantaneously.  Both  claimed they were satisfied sitting alone nights after a
brisk  day at the office. Both worked at anonymous jobs. And sometimes even they
could  not  recall  the name of the colorless company which used them like white
paint on white paint.

     _Enter the avant-garde!_ _Enter The Cellar Septet!_

     These  odd souls had flourished in Parisian basements listening to a rather
sluggish variety of jazz, preserved a highly volatile relationship six months or
more,   and,   returning  to  the  United  States  on  the  point  of  clamorous
disintegration, stumbled into Mr. George Garvey.

     "My  God!"  cried Alexander Pape, erstwhile potentate of the clique. "I met
the  most  astounding  bore. You simply must see him! At Bill Timmins' apartment
house  last  night,  a note said he'd return in an hour. In the hall this Garvey
chap asked if I'd like to wait in his apartment. There we sat, Garvey, his wife,
myself!  Incredible!  He's  a  monstrous  Ennui,  produced  by our materialistic
society.  He  knows  a  billion ways to paralyze you! Absolutely rococo with the
talent  to  induce  stupor,  deep slumber, or stoppage of the heart. What a case
study. Let's _all_ go visit!"

     They  swarmed  like vultures! Life flowed to Garvey's door, life sat in his
parlor. The Cellar Septet perched on his fringed sofa, eyeing their prey.

     Garvey fidgeted.

     "Anyone   wants   to   smoke--"   He   smiled   faintly.   "Why--go   right
ahead--_smoke_."

     Silence.

     The  instructions  were:  "Mum's  the word. Put him on the spot. That's the
only  way  to  see  what  a  colossal _norm_ he is. American culture at absolute
zero!"

     After  three  minutes of unblinking quiet, Mr. Garvey leaned forward. "Eh,"
he said, "what's _your_ business. Mr. . . . ?"

     "Crabtree. The poet."

     Garvey mused over this.

     "How's," he said, "business?"

     Not a sound.

     Here  lay  a  typical Garvey silence. Here sat the largest manufacturer and
deliverer  of  silences in the world; name one, he could provide it packaged and
tied  with  throat-clearings  and  whispers.  Embarrassed, pained, calm, serene,
indifferent, blessed, golden, or nervous silences; Garvey was _in_ there.

     Well,  The  Cellar  Septet  simply  wallowed  in  this particular evening's
silence.  Later, in their cold-water flat, over a bottle of "adequate little red
wine"  (they were experiencing a phase which led them to contact _real_ reality)
they tore this silence to bits and worried it.

     "Did you see how he fingered his collar! Ho!"

     "By  God,  though,  I must admit he's almost 'cool.' Mention Muggsy Spanier
and  Bix  Beiderbecke. Notice his expression. _Very_ cool. I wish _I_ could look
so uncaring, so unemotional."

     

     

     Ready  for  bed, George Garvey, reflecting upon this extraordinary evening,
realized  that when situations got out of hand, when strange books or music were
discussed, he panicked, he froze.

     This  hadn't seemed to cause undue concern among his rather oblique guests.
In  fact, on the way out, they had shaken his hand vigorously, thanked him for a
splendid time!

     "What a really expert A-number-1 bore!" cried Alexander Pape, across town.

     "Perhaps  he's  secretly  laughing  at us," said Smith, the minor poet, who
never agreed with Pape if he was awake.

     "Let's  fetch  Minnie and Tom; they'd love Garvey. A rare night. We'll talk
of it for months!"

     "Did  you  notice?"  asked Smith, the minor poet, eyes closed smugly. "When
you turn the taps in their bathroom?" He paused dramatically. "_Hot_ water."

     Everyone stared irritably at Smith.

     They hadn't thought to _try_.

     

     

     The clique, an incredible yeast, soon burst doors and windows, growing.

     "You  haven't met the Garveys? My God! lie back down in your coffin! Garvey
_must_  rehearse.  No  one's  _that_  boorish  without  Stanislavsky!"  Here the
speaker,  Alexander  Pape, who depressed the entire group because he did perfect
imitations, now aped Garvey's slow, self-conscious delivery:

     "'_Ulysses?_  Wasn't  that  the  book  about  the  Greek, the ship, and the
one-eyed  monster!  Beg  pardon?'"  A pause. "'Oh.'" Another pause. "'I see.'" A
sitting  back.  "'_Ulysses_  was  written  by _James ce?_ Odd. I could _swear_ I
remember, years ago, in school. . .'"

     In  spite of everyone _hating_ Alexander Pape for his brilliant imitations,
they roared as he went on:

     "'Tennessee Williams? Is he the man who wrote that hillbilly "Waltz?"

     "Quick! What's Garvey's home address?" everyone cried.

      

     "My," observed Mr. Garvey to his wife, "life is fun these days."

     "It's you," replied his wife. "Notice, they hang on your every word."

     "Their  attention is rapt," said Mr. Garvey, "to the point of hysteria. The
least  thing  I say absolutely explodes them. Odd. My jokes at the office always
met  a  stony wall. Tonight, for instance, I wasn't trying to be funny at all. I
suppose  it's  an  unconscious  little  stream  of  wit that flows quietly under
everything I do or say. Nice to know I have it in reserve. Ah, there's the bell.
Here we go!"

      

     "He's  especially  rare  if  you  get  him  out  of bed at four A.M.," said
Alexander  Pape. "The combination of exhaustion and _fin de siècle_ morality is
a regular salad!"

     Everyone  was  pretty  miffed  at  Pape  for being first to think of seeing
Garvey at dawn. Nevertheless, interest ran high after midnight in late October.

     Mr. Garvey's subconscious told him in utmost secrecy that he was the opener
of  a  theatrical  season,  his  success dependent upon the staying power of the
ennui he inspired in others. Enjoying himself, he nevertheless guessed why these
lemmings  thronged  to  his  private  sea. Underneath, Garvey was a surprisingly
brilliant  man,  but  his  unimaginative parents had crushed him in the Terribly
Strange  Bed  of  their  environment.  From there he had been thrown to a larger
lemon-squeezer:  his  Office,  his  Factory,  his  Wife. The result: a man whose
potentialities  were  a  time  bomb  in  his  own parlor. The Garvey's repressed
subconscious  half  recognized that the avant-gardists had never met anyone like
him,  or  rather had met millions like him but had never considered studying one
before.

     So  here  he was, the first of autumn's celebrities. Next month it might be
some  abstractionist  from Allentown who worked on a twelve-foot ladder shooting
house-paint,  in  two colors only, blue and cloud-gray, from cake-decorators and
insecticide-sprayers  on  canvas  covered  with  layers  of  mucilage and coffee
grounds,  who  simply  needed  appreciation  to grow! or a Chicago tin-cutter of
mobiles,  aged  fifteen,  already  ancient  with  knowledge. Mr. Garvey's shrewd
subconscious  grew  even  more  suspicious  when he made the terrible mistake of
reading the avant-garde's favorite magazine, _Nucleus_.

     "This  article  on Dante, now," said Garvey. "Fascinating. Especially where
it   discusses   the   spatial  metaphors  conveyed  in  the  foothills  of  the
_Antipurgatorio_  and  the  _Paradiso Terrestre_ on top of the Mountain. The bit
about Cantos XV--XVIII, the so-called 'doctrinal cantos' is brilliant!"

     How did The Cellar Septet react?

     Stunned, all of them!

     There was a noticeable chill.

     They  departed  in  short  order  when  instead  of  being  a  delightfully
mass-minded,   keep-up-with-the-Joneses,   machine-dominated   chap   leading  a
wishy_washy  life  of  quiet  desperation,  Garvey enraged them with opinions on
_Does Existentialism Still Exist, or Is Kraft-Ebbing?_ They didn't want opinions
on  alchemy and symbolism given in a piccolo voice, Garvey's subconscious warned
him.  They only wanted Garvey's good old-fashioned plain white bread and churned
country butter, to be chewed on later at a dim bar, exclaiming how priceless!

     Garvey retreated.

      

     Next  night he was his old precious self. Dale Carnegie? Splendid religious
leader!  Hart  Schaffner  &  Marx?  Better  than  Bond  Street!  Member  of  the
After-Shave  Club? That was Garvey! Latest Book-of-the-Month? Here on the table!
Had they ever tried Elinor Glyn?

     The  Cellar  Septet  was  horrified,  delighted.  They  let  themselves  be
bludgeoned  into watching Milton Berle. Garvey laughed at everything Berle said.
It  was  arranged for neighbors to tape-record various daytime soap operas which
Garvey  replayed  evenings  with religious awe, while the Cellar Septet analyzed
his face and his complete devotion to _Ma Perkins_ and _John's Other Wife_.

     Oh,  Garvey  was  getting sly. His inner self observed: You're on top. Stay
there! Please your public! Tomorrow, play the Two Black Crows records! Mind your
step!  Bonnie  Baker, now . . . that's it! They'll shudder, incredulous that you
really like her singing. What about Guy Lombardo? That's the ticket!

     The  mob-mind,  said  his  subconscious. You're symbolic of the crowd. They
came  to study the dreadful vulgarity of this imaginary Mass Man they pretend to
hate. But they're fascinated with the snake-pit.

     Guessing his thought, his wife objected. "They _like_ you."

     "In a frightening sort of way," he said. "I've lain awake figuring why they
should  come see me! Always hated and bored myself. Stupid, tattletale-gray man.
Not  an  original  thought  in  my mind. All I know now is: I love company. I've
always  wanted  to  be  gregarious, never had the chance. It's been a ball these
last  months!  But  their  interest is dying. I want company forever! What shall
Ido?"

     His subconscious provided shopping lists.

     _Beer. It's unimaginative_.

     _Pretzels. Delightfully "passé_."

     _Stop  by  Mother's.  Pick  up  Max field Parrish painting, the flyspecked,
sunburnt one. Lecture on same tonight_.

      

     By December Mr. Garvey was really frightened.

     The  Cellar  Septet  was  now  quite  accustomed  to  Milton  Berle and Guy
Lombardo.  In  fact, they had rationalized themselves into a position where they
acclaimed  Berle  as really too _rare_ for the American public, and Lombardo was
twenty  years ahead of his time; the nastiest people liked him for the commonest
reasons.

     Garvey's empire trembled.

     Suddenly  he  was  just  another  person, no longer diverting the tastes of
friends,  but  frantically  pursuing them as they seized at Nora Bayes, the 1917
Knickerbocker  Quartette,  Al  Jolson singing "Where Did Robinson Crusoe Go With
Friday  on  Saturday  Night,"  and Shep Fields and his Rippling Rhythm. Maxfield
Parrish's  rediscovery left Mr. Garvey in the north pasture. Overnight, everyone
agreed, "Beer's intellectual. What a shame so many _idiots_ drink it."

     In short, his friends vanished. Alexander Pape, it was rumored, for a lark,
was  even  considering  hot  water for his cold-water flat. This ugly canard was
quashed,   but   not  before  Alexander  Pape  suffered  a  comedown  among  the
_cognoscenti_.

     Garvey sweated to anticipate the shifting taste! He increased the free food
output, foresaw the swing back to the Roaring Twenties by wearing hairy knickers
and displaying his wife in a tube dress and boyish bob long before anyone else.

     But,  the  vultures  came, ate, and ran. Now that this frightful Giant, TV,
strode   the  world,  they  were  busily  re-embracing  radio.  Bootlegged  1935
transcriptions of _Vic and Sade_ and _Pepper Young's Family_ were fought over at
intellectual galas.

     At  long last, Garvey was forced to turn to a series of miraculous tours de
force, conceived and carried out by his panic-stricken inner self.

     The first accident was a slammed car door.

     Mr. Garvey's little fingertip was neatly cut off!

     In  the  resultant chaos, hopping about, Garvey stepped on, then kicked the
fingertip  into  a street drain. By the time they fished it out, no doctor would
bother sewing it back on.

     A  happy  accident! Next day, strolling by an oriental shop, Garvey spied a
beautiful  _objet  d'art_.  His peppy old subconscious, considering his steadily
declining  box  office and his poor audiencerating among the avant-garde, forced
him into the shop and dragged out his wallet.

     "Have  you  seen  Garvey lately!" screamed Alexander Pape on the phone. "My
God, go see!"

     "What's _that?_"

     Everyone stared.

     "Mandarin's  finger-guard."  Garvey  waved  his  hand  casually.  "Oriental
antique. Mandarins used them to protect the five-inch nails they cultivated." He
drank  his  beer,  the  gold-thimbled  little  finger  cocked.  "Everyone  hates
cripples,  the  sight  of  things  missing. It was sad losing my finger. But I'm
happier with this gold thingamajig."

     "It's  a  much  nicer  finger now than any of us can _ever_ have." His wife
dished them all a little green salad. "And George has the _right_ to use it."

     Garvey  was  shocked  and charmed as his dwindling popularity returned. Ah,
art!  Ah,  life!  The  pendulum swinging back and forth, from complex to simple,
again  to  complex. From romantic to realistic, back to romantic. The clever man
could  sense  intellectual  perihelions, and prepare for the violent new orbits.
Garvey's subconscious brilliance sat up, began to eat a bit, and some days dared
to walk about, trying its unused limbs. It caught fire!

     "How unimaginative the world is," his long-neglected other self said, using
his  tongue.  "If  somehow  my  leg  were severed accidentally I wouldn't wear a
wooden  leg, no! I'd have a gold leg crusted with precious stones made, and part
of  the leg would be a golden cage in which a bluebird would sing as I walked or
sat  talking  to  friends. And if my arm were cut off I'd have a new arm made of
copper  and jade, all hollow inside, a section for dry ice in it. And five other
compartments,  one  for  each  finger.  Drink,  anyone? I'd cry. Sherry? Brandy?
Dubonnet? Then I'd twist each finger calmly over the glasses. From five fingers,
five  cool  streams,  five  liqueurs  or wines. I'd tap the golden faucets shut.
'Bottoms up!' I'd cry.

     "But, most of all, one almost wishes that one's eye would offend one, Pluck
it  out,  the Bible says. It _was_ the Bible, wasn't it? If that happened to me,
I'd  use  no  grisly  glass eyes, by God. None of those black, pirate's patches.
Know  what  I'd do? I'd mail a poker chip to your friend in France, _what's_ his
name?  _Matisse!_ I'd say, 'Enclosed find poker chip, and personal check. Please
paint on this chip one beautiful blue human eye. Yrs. sincerely, G. Garvey!'"

      

     Well,  Garvey  had  always  abhorred  his  body, found his eyes pale, weak,
lacking  character.  So  he was not surprised a month later (when his Gallup ran
low again) to see his right eye water, fester, and then pull a complete blank!

     Garvey was absolutely bombed!

     But--equally--secretly pleased.

     With  the  Cellar  Septet smiling like a jury of gargoyles at his elbow, he
airmailed the poker chip to France with a check for fifty dollars.

     The check returned, uncashed, a week later.

     In the next mail came the poker chip.

     H.  Matisse had painted a rare, beautiful blue eye on it, delicately lashed
and browed. H. Matisse had tucked this chip in a greenplush jeweler's box, quite
obviously as delighted as was Garvey with the entire enterprise.

     _Harper's  Bazaar_  published  a  picture  of  Garvey,  wearing the Matisse
poker-chip  eye, and yet another of Matisse, himself, painting the monocle after
considerable experimentation with three dozen chips!

     H.  Matisse  had  had  the  uncommon good sense to summon a photographer to
Leica  the  affair  for  posterity.  He  was  quoted.  "After  I had thrown away
twenty-seven  eyes,  I  finally got the very one I wanted. It flies posthaste to
Monsieur Garvey!"

     Reproduced  in  six colors, the eye rested balefully in its greenplush box.
Duplicates were struck off for sales by the Museum of Modern Art. The Friends of
the Cellar Septet played poker, using red chips with blue eyes, white chips with
red eyes, and blue chips with white eyes.

     But  there  was  only  one  man  in  New York who wore the original Matisse
monocle and that was Mr. Garvey.

     "I'm  _still_  a  nerve_wracking  bore," he told his wife, "but now they'll
never  know  what  a  dreadful ox I am underneath the monocle and the Mandarin's
finger.  And  if  their  interest should happen to dwindle again, one can always
arrange  to  lose  an  arm  or  leg.  No  doubt of it. I've thrown up a wondrous
façade; no one will ever find the ancient boor again."

     And  as his wife put it only the other afternoon: "I hardly think of him as
the  old  George  Garvey any more. He's changed his name. Giulio, he wants to be
called.  Sometimes, at night, I look over at him and call, 'George,' but there's
no  answer. There he is, that mandarin's thimble on his little finger, the white
and blue Matisse Poker-Chip monocle in his eye. I wake up and look at him often.
And  do you know? Sometimes that incredible Matisse Poker Chip seems to give out
with a _monstrous_ wink."

     
