antiqueRayBradburyThe Illustrated ManundRayBradburycalibre
0.8.6522.8.201205bb4139-54bb-41c9-84bf-a2ca5e3e0e531.0
    The Illustrated Man</p>

By
Ray Bradbury
      Prologue: The Illustrated Man</p>

IT was a warm afternoon in early September when I first met the
Illustrated Man. Walking along an asphalt road, I was or the final leg
of a two weeks’ walking tour of Wisconsin. Late in the afternoon I
stopped, ate some pork, beans, and a doughnut, and was preparing to
stretch out and read when the Illustrated Man walked over the hill and
stood for a moment against the sky.
I didn’t know he was Illustrated then. I only knew that he was tall,
once well muscled, but now, for some reason, going to fat. I recall that
his arms were long, and the hands thick, but that his face was like a
child’s, set upon a massive body.
He seemed only to sense my presence, for he didn’t look directly at me
when he spoke his first words:
“Do you know where I can find a job?”
“I’m afraid not,” I said.
“I haven’t had a job that’s lasted in forty years,” he said.
Though it was a hot late afternoon, he wore his wool shirt buttoned
tight about his neck. His sleeves were rolled and buttoned down over his
thick wrists. Perspiration was streaming from his face, yet he made no
move to open his shirt.
“Well,” he said at last, “this is as good a place as any to spend the
night. Do you mind company?”
“I have some extra food you’d be welcome to,” I said.
He sat down heavily, grunting. “You’ll be sorry you asked me to stay,”
he said. “Everyone always is. That’s why I’m walking. Here it is, early
September, the cream of the Labor Day carnival season. I should be
making money hand over fist at any small town side show celebration, but
here I am with no prospects.”
He took off an immense shoe and peered at it closely. “I usually keep a
job about ten days. Then something happens and they fire me. By now
every carnival in America won’t touch me with a ten-foot pole.”
“What seems to be the trouble?” I asked.
For answer, he unbuttoned his tight collar, slowly. With his eyes shut,
he put a slow hand to the task of unbuttoning his shirt all the way
down. He slipped his fingers in to feel his chest. “Funny,” he said,
eyes still shut. “You can’t feel them but they’re there. I always hope
that someday I’ll look and they'll be gone. I walk in the sun for hours
on the hottest days, baking, and hope that my sweat’ll wash them off,
the sun’ll cook them off, but at sundown they’re still there.” He turned
his head slightly toward me and exposed his chest. “Are they still there
now?”
After a long while I exhaled. “Yes,” I said. “They’re still there.”
The Illustrations.
“Another reason I keep my collar buttoned up,” he said, opening his
eyes, “is the children. They follow me along country roads. Everyone
wants to see the pictures, and yet nobody wants to see them.”
He took his shirt off and wadded it in his hands. He was covered with
Illustrations from the blue tattooed ring about his neck to his belt
line.
“It keeps right on going,” he said, guessing my thought. “All of me is
Illustrated. Look.” He opened his hand. On his palm was a rose, freshly
cut, with drops of crystal water among the soft pink petals. I put my
hand out to touch it, but it was only an Illustration.
As for the rest of him, I cannot say how I sat and stared, for he was a
riot of rockets and fountains and people, in such intricate detail and
color that you could hear the voices murmuring small and muted, from the
crowds that inhabited his body. When his flesh twitched, the tiny mouths
flickered, the tiny green-and-gold eyes winked, the tiny pink hands
gestured. There were yellow meadows and blue rivers and mountains and
stars and suns and planets spread in a Milky Way across his chest. The
people themselves were in twenty or more odd groups upon his arms,
shoulders, back, sides, and wrists, as well as on the flat of his
stomach. You found them in forests of hair, lurking among a
constellation of freckles, or peering from armpit caverns, diamond eyes
aglitter. Each seemed intent upon his own activity; each was a separate
gallery portrait.
“Why, they’re beautiful!” I said.
How can I explain about his Illustrations? If El Greco had painted
miniatures in his prime, no bigger than your hand, infinitely detailed,
with all his sulphurous color, elongation, and anatomy, perhaps he might
have used this man’s body for his art. The colors burned in three
dimensions. They were windows looking in upon fiery reality. Here,
gathered on one wall, were all the finest scenes in the universe; the
man was a walking treasure gallery. This wasn’t the work of a cheap
carnival tattoo man with three colors and whisky on his breath. This was
the accomplishment of a living genius, vibrant, clear, and beautiful.
“Oh yes,” said the Illustrated Man. “I’m so proud of my Illustrations
that I’d like to burn them off. I’ve tried sandpaper, acid, a knife . .
.”
The sun was setting. The moon was already up in the East.
“For, you see,” said the Illustrated Man, “these Illustrations predict
the future.”
I said nothing.
“It’s all right in sunlight” he went on. “I could keep a carnival day
job. But at night—the pictures move. The pictures change.”
I must have smiled. “How long have you been Illustrated?”
“In 1900, when I was twenty years old and working a carnival, I broke my
leg. It laid me up; I had to do something to keep my hand in, so I
decided to get tattooed.”
“But who tattooed you? What happened to the artist?”
“She went back to the future,” he said. "I mean it. She was an old woman
in a little house in the middle of Wisconsin here somewhere not far from
this place. A little old witch who looked a thousand years old one
moment and twenty years old the next, but she said she could travel in
time. I laughed. Now, I know better.”
“How did you happen to meet her?”
He told me. He had seen her painted sign by the road: SKIN ILLUSTRATION!
Illustration instead of tattoo! Artistic! So he had sat all night while
her magic needles stung him wasp stings and delicate bee stings. By
morning he looked like a man who had fallen into a twenty-color print
press and been squeezed out, all bright and picturesque.
“I’ve hunted every summer for fifty years,” he said, putting his hands
out on the air. "When I find that witch I’m going to kill her.”
The sun was gone. Now the first stars were shining and the moon had
brightened the fields of grass and wheat. Still the Illustrated Man’s
pictures glowed like charcoals in the half light, like scattered rubies
and emeralds, with Rouault colors and Picasso colors and the long,
pressed-out El Greco bodies.
“So people fire me when my pictures move. They don’t like it when
violent things happen in my Illustrations. Each Illustration is a little
story. If you watch them, in a few minutes they tell you a tale. In
three hours of looking you could see eighteen or twenty stories acted
right on my body, you could hear voices and think thoughts. It’s all
here, just waiting for you to look. But most of all, there’s a special
spot on my body.” He bared his back. “See? There’s no special design on
my right shoulder blade, just a jumble.”
“Yes.”
“When I’ve been around a person long enough, that spot clouds over and
fills in. If I’m with a woman, her picture comes there on my back, in an
hour, and shows her whole life—how she’ll live, how she’ll die, what
she’ll look like when she’s sixty. And if it’s a man, an hour later his
picture’s here on my back. It shows him falling off a cliff, or dying
under a train. So I’m fired again.”
All the time he had been talking his hands had wandered over the
Illustrations, as if to adjust their frames, to brush away dust—the
motions of a connoisseur, an art patron. Now he lay back, long and full
in the moonlight. It was a warm night. There was no breeze and the air
was stifling. We both had our shirts off.
“And you’ve never found the old woman?”
“Never.”
“And you think she came from the future?”
“How else could she know these stories she painted on me?” He shut his
eyes tiredly. His voice grew fainter. “Sometimes at night I can feel
them, the pictures, like ants, crawling on my skin. Then I know they’re
doing what they have to do. I never look at them any more. I just try to
rest. I don’t sleep much. Don’t you look at them either, I warn you.
Turn the other way when you sleep.”
I lay back a few feet from him. He didn’t seem violent and the pictures
were beautiful. Otherwise I might have been tempted to get out and away
from such babbling. But the Illustrations . . . I let my eyes fill up on
them. Any person would go a little mad with such things upon his body.
The night was serene. I could hear the Illustrated Man’s breathing in
the moonlight. Crickets were stirring gently in the distant ravines. I
lay with my body sidewise so I could watch the Illustrations. Perhaps
half an hour passed. Whether the Illustrated Man slept I could not tell,
but suddenly I heard him whisper, “They’re moving, aren’t they?”
I waited a minute.
Then I said, “Yes.”
The pictures were moving, each in its turn, each for a brief minute or
two. There in the moonlight, with the tiny tinkling thoughts and the
distant sea voices, it seemed, each little drama was enacted. Whether it
took an hour or three hours for the dramas to finish, it would be hard
to say. I only know that I lay fascinated and did not move while the
stars wheeled in the sky.
Eighteen Illustrations, eighteen tales.  I counted them one by one.
Primarily my eyes focused upon a scene, a large house with two people in
it.  I saw a flight of vultures on a blazing flesh sky, I saw yellow
lions, and I heard voices.
The first Illustration quivered and came to life. . . .
      The Veldt</p>

“George, I wish you’d look at the nursery.”
“What’s wrong with it?”
“I don’t know.”
“Well, then.”
“I just want you to look at it, is all, or call a psychologist in to
look at it.”
“What would a psychologist want with a nursery?”
“You know very well what he’d want.” His wife paused in the middle of
the kitchen and watched the stove busy humming to itself, making supper
for four.
“It’s just that the nursery is different now than it was.”
“All right, let’s have a look.”
They walked down the hall of their soundproofed Happylife Home, which
had cost them thirty thousand dollars installed, this house which
clothed and fed and rocked them to sleep and played and sang and was
good to them. Their approach sensitized a switch somewhere and the
nursery light flicked on when they came within ten feet of it.
Similarly, behind them, in the halls, lights went on and off as they
left them behind, with a soft automaticity.
“Well,” said George Hadley.
They stood on the thatched floor of the nursery. It was forty feet
across by forty feet long and thirty feet high; it had cost half again
as much as the rest of the house. “But nothing’s too good for our
children,” George had said.
The nursery was silent. It was empty as a jungle glade at hot high noon.
The walls were blank and two dimensional. Now, as George and Lydia
Hadley stood in the center of the room, the walls began to purr and
recede into crystalline distance, it seemed, and presently an African
veldt appeared, in three dimensions, on all sides, in color reproduced
to the final pebble and bit of straw. The ceiling above them became a
deep sky with a hot yellow sun.
George Hadley felt the perspiration start on his brow.
“Let’s get out of this sun,” he said. “This is a little too real. But I
don’t see anything wrong.”
“Wait a moment, you’ll see,” said his wife.
Now the hidden odorophonics were beginning to blow a wind of odor at the
two people in the middle of the baked veldtland. The hot straw smell of
lion grass, the cool green smell of the hidden water hole, the great
rusty smell of animals, the smell of dust like a red paprika in the hot
air. And now the sounds: the thump of distant antelope feet on grassy
sod, the papery rustling of vultures. A shadow passed through the sky.
The shadow flickered on George Hadley’s upturned, sweating face.
“Filthy creatures,” he heard his wife say.
“The vultures.”
“You see, there are the lions, far over, that way. Now they’re on their
way to the water hole. They’ve just been eating,” said Lydia. “I don’t
know what.”
“Some animal.” George Hadley put his hand up to shield off the burning
light from his squinted eyes. “A zebra or a baby giraffe, maybe.”
“Are you sure?” His wife sounded peculiarly tense.
“No, it’s a little late to be sure,” be said, amused. “Nothing over
there I can see but cleaned bone, and the vultures dropping for what’s
left.”
“Did you hear that scream?” she asked.
“No.”
“About a minute ago?”
“Sorry, no.”
The lions were coming. And again George Hadley was filled with
admiration for the mechanical genius who had conceived this room. A
miracle of efficiency selling for an absurdly low price. Every home
should have one. Oh, occasionally they frightened you with their
clinical accuracy, they startled you, gave you a twinge, but most of the
time what fun for everyone, not only your own son and daughter, but for
yourself when you felt like a quick jaunt to a foreign land, a quick
change of scenery. Well, here it was!
And here were the lions now, fifteen feet away, so real, so feverishly
and startlingly real that you could feel the prickling fur on your hand,
and your mouth was stuffed with the dusty upholstery smell of their
heated pelts, and the yellow of them was in your eyes like the yellow of
an exquisite French tapestry, the yellows of lions and summer grass, and
the sound of the matted lion lungs exhaling on the silent noontide, and
the smell of meat from the panting, dripping mouths.
The lions stood looking at George and Lydia Hadley with terrible
green-yellow eyes.
“Watch out!” screamed Lydia.
The lions came running at them.
Lydia bolted and ran. Instinctively, George sprang after her. Outside,
in the hall, with the door slammed he was laughing and she was crying,
and they both stood appalled at the other’s reaction.
“George!”
“Lydia! Oh, my dear poor sweet Lydia!”
“They almost got us!”
“Walls, Lydia, remember; crystal walls, that’s all they are. Oh, they
look real, I must admit—Africa in your parlor—but it’s all dimensional,
superreactionary, supersensitive color film and mental tape film behind
glass screens. It’s all odorophonics and sonics, Lydia. Here’s my
handkerchief.”
“I’m afraid.” She came to him and put her body against him and cried
steadily. “Did you see? Did you  feel?  It’s too real.”
“Now, Lydia . . .”
“You’ve got to tell Wendy and Peter not to read any more on Africa.”
“Of course—of course.” He patted her.
“Promise?”
“Sure.”
“And lock the nursery for a few days until I get my nerves settled.”
“You know how difficult Peter is about that. When I punished him a month
ago by locking the nursery for even a few hours—the tantrum be threw!
And Wendy too. They  live  for the nursery.”
“It’s got to be locked, that’s all there is to it.”
“All right.” Reluctantly he locked the huge door. “You’ve been working
too hard. You need a rest.”
“I don’t know—I don’t know,” she said, blowing her nose, sitting down in
a chair that immediately began to rock and comfort her. “Maybe I don’t
have enough to do. Maybe I have time to think too much. Why don’t we
shut the whole house off for a few days and take a vacation?”
“You mean you want to fry my eggs for me?”
“Yes.” She nodded.
“And darn my socks?”
“Yes.” A frantic, watery-eyed nodding.
“And sweep the house?”
“Yes, yes—oh, yes!”
“But I thought that’s why we bought this house, so we wouldn’t have to
do anything?”
“That’s just it. I feel like I don’t belong here. The house is wife and
mother now, and nursemaid. Can I compete with an African veldt? Can I
give a bath and scrub the children as efficiently or quickly as the
automatic scrub bath can? I cannot. And it isn’t just me. It’s you.
You’ve been awfully nervous lately.”
“I suppose I have been smoking too much.”
“You look as if you didn’t know what to do with yourself in this house,
either. You smoke a little more every morning and drink a little more
every afternoon and need a little more sedative every night. You’re
beginning to feel unnecessary too.”
“Am I?” He paused and tried to feel into himself to see what was really
there.
“Oh, George!” She looked beyond him, at the nursery door. “Those lions
can’t get out of there, can they?”
He looked at the door and saw it tremble as if something had jumped
against it from the other side.
“Of course not,” he said.
At dinner they ate alone, for Wendy and Peter were at a special plastic
carnival across town and had televised home to say they’d be late, to go
ahead eating. So George Hadley, bemused, sat watching the dining-room
table produce warm dishes of food from its mechanical interior.
“We forgot the ketchup,” he said.
“Sorry,” said a small voice within the table, and ketchup appeared.
As for the nursery, thought George Hadley, it won’t hurt for the
children to be locked out of it awhile. Too much of anything isn’t good
for anyone. And it was clearly indicated that the children had been
spending a little too much time on Africa. That  sun.  He could feel it
on his neck, still, like a hot paw. And the  lions.  And the smell of
blood. Remarkable how the nursery caught the telepathic emanations of
the children’s minds and created life to fill their every desire. The
children thought lions, and there were lions. The children thought
zebras, and there were zebras. Sun—sun. Giraffes—giraffes. Death and
death.
That  last.  He chewed tastelessly on the meat that the table bad cut
for him. Death thoughts. They were awfully young, Wendy and Peter, for
death thoughts. Or, no, you were never too young, really. Long before
you knew what death was you were wishing it on someone else. When you
were two years old you were shooting people with cap pistols.
But this—the long, hot African veldt—the awful death in the jaws of a
lion. And repeated again and again.
“Where are you going?”
He didn’t answer Lydia. Preoccupied, be let the lights glow softly on
ahead of him, extinguish behind him as he padded to the nursery door. He
listened against it. Far away, a lion roared.
He unlocked the door and opened it. Just before he stepped inside, he
heard a faraway scream. And then another roar from the lions, which
subsided quickly.
He stepped into Africa. How many times in the last year had he opened
this door and found Wonderland, Alice, the Mock Turtle, or Aladdin and
his Magical Lamp, or Jack Pumpkinhead of Oz, or Dr. Doolittle, or the
cow jumping over a very real-appearing moon—all the delightful
contraptions of a make-believe world. How often had he seen Pegasus
flying in the sky ceiling, or seen fountains of red fireworks, or heard
angel voices singing. But now, this yellow hot Africa, this bake oven
with murder in the heat. Perhaps Lydia was right. Perhaps they needed a
little vacation from the fantasy which was growing a bit too real for
ten-year-old children. It was all right to exercise one’s mind with
gymnastic fantasies, but when the lively child mind settled on  one
 pattern . . . ? It seemed that, at a distance, for the past month, he
had heard lions roaring, and smelled their strong odor seeping as far
away as his study door. But, being busy, he had paid it no attention.
George Hadley stood on the African grassland alone. The lions looked up
from their feeding, watching him. The only flaw to the illusion was the
open door through which he could see his wife, far down the dark hall,
like a framed picture, eating her dinner abstractedly.
“Go away,” he said to the lions.
They did not go.
He knew the principle of the room exactly. You sent out your thoughts.
Whatever you thought would appear. “Let’s have Aladdin and his lamp,” he
snapped. The veldtland remained; the lions remained.
“Come on, room! I demand Aladdin!” he said.
Nothing happened. The lions mumbled in their baked pelts.
“Aladdin!”
He went back to dinner. “The fool room’s out of order,” he said. “It
won’t respond.”
“Or—“
“Or what?”
“Or it  can’t  respond,” said Lydia, “because the children have thought
about Africa and lions and killing so many days that the room’s in a
rut.”
“Could be.”
“Or Peter’s set it to remain that way.”
“Set  it?”
“He may have got into the machinery and fixed something.”
“Peter doesn’t know machinery.”
“He’s a wise one for ten. That I.Q. of his—“
“Nevertheless—“
“Hello, Mom. Hello, Dad.”
The Hadleys turned. Wendy and Peter were coming in the front door,
cheeks like peppermint candy, eyes like bright blue agate marbles, a
smell of ozone on their jumpers from their trip in the helicopter.
“You’re just in time for supper,” said both parents.
“We’re full of strawberry ice cream and hot dogs,” said the children,
holding hands. “But we’ll sit and watch.”
“Yes, come tell us about the nursery,” said George Hadley.
The brother and sister blinked at him and then at each other. “Nursery?”
“All about Africa and everything,” said the father with false joviality.
“I don’t understand,” said Peter.
“Your mother and I were just traveling through Africa with rod and reel;
Tom Swift and his Electric Lion,” said George Hadley.
“There’s no Africa in the nursery,” said Peter simply.
“Oh, come now, Peter. We know better.”
“I don’t remember any Africa,” said Peter to Wendy. “Do you?”
“No.”
“Run see and come tell.”
She obeyed.
“Wendy, come back here!” said George Hadley, but she was gone. The house
lights followed her like a flock of fireflies. Too late, he realized he
had forgotten to lock the nursery door after his last inspection.
“Wendy’ll look and come tell us,” said Peter.
“She doesn’t have to tell  me.  I’ve seen it.”
“I’m sure you’re mistaken, Father.”
“I’m not, Peter. Come along now.”
But Wendy was back. “It’s not Africa,” she said breathlessly.
“We’ll see about this,” said George Hadley, and they all walked down the
hall together and opened the nursery door.
There was a green, lovely forest, a lovely river, a purple mountain,
high voices singing, and Rima, lovely and mysterious, lurking in the
trees with colorful flights of butterflies, like animated bouquets,
lingering in her long hair. The African veldtland was gone. The lions
were gone. Only Rima was here now, singing a song so beautiful that it
brought tears to your eyes.
George Hadley looked in at the changed scene. “Go to bed,” he said to
the children.
They opened their mouths.
“You heard me,” he said.
They went off to the air closet, where a wind sucked them like brown
leaves up the flue to their slumber rooms.
George Hadley walked through the singing glade and picked up something
that lay in the corner near where the lions had been. He walked slowly
back to his wife.
“What is that?” she asked.
“An old wallet of mine,” he said.
He showed it to her. The smell of hot grass was on it and the smell of a
lion. There were drops of saliva on it, it had been chewed, and there
were blood smears on both sides.
He closed the nursery door and locked it, tight.
In the middle of the night he was still awake and he knew his wife was
awake. “Do you think Wendy changed it?” she said at last, in the dark
room.
“Of course.”
“Made it from a veldt into a forest and put Rima there instead of
lions?”
“Yes.”
“Why?”
“I don’t know. But it’s staying locked until I find out.”
“How did your wallet get there?”
“I don’t know anything,” he said, “except that I’m beginning to be sorry
we bought that room for the children. If children are neurotic at all, a
room like that—“
“It’s supposed to help them work off their neuroses in a healthful way.”
“I’m starting to wonder.” He stared at the ceiling.
“We’ve given the children everything they ever wanted. Is this our
reward—secrecy, disobedience?”
“Who was it said, ‘Children are carpets, they should be stepped on
occasionally’? We’ve never lifted a hand. They’re insufferable—let’s
admit it. They come and go when they like; they treat us as if we were
offspring. They’re spoiled and we’re spoiled.”
“They’ve been acting funny ever since you forbade them to take the
rocket to New York a few months ago.”
“They’re not old enough to do that alone, I explained.”
“Nevertheless, I’ve noticed they’ve been decidedly cool toward us
since.”
“I think I’ll have David McClean come tomorrow morning to have a look at
Africa.”
“But it’s not Africa now, it’s Green Mansions country and Rima.”
“I have a feeling it’ll be Africa again before then.”
A moment later they heard the screams.
Two screams. Two people screaming from downstairs. And then a roar of
lions.
“Wendy and Peter aren’t in their rooms,” said his wife.
He lay in his bed with his beating heart. “No,” he said. “They’ve broken
into the nursery.”
“Those screams—they sound familiar.”
“Do they?”
“Yes, awfully.”
And although their beds tried very hard, the two adults couldn’t be
rocked to sleep for another hour. A smell of cats was in the night air.
“Father?” said Peter.
“Yes.”
Peter looked at his shoes. He never looked at his father any more, nor
at his mother. “You aren’t going to lock up the nursery for good, are
you?”
“That all depends.”
“On what?” snapped Peter.
“On you and your sister. If you intersperse this Africa with a little
variety—oh, Sweden perhaps, or Denmark or China—“
“I thought we were free to play as we wished.”
“You are, within reasonable bounds.”
“What’s wrong with Africa, Father?”
“Oh, so now you admit you have been conjuring up Africa, do you?”
“I wouldn’t want the nursery locked up,” said Peter coldly. “Ever.”
“Matter of fact, we’re thinking of turning the whole house off for about
a month. Live sort of a carefree one-for-all existence.”
“That sounds dreadful! Would I have to tie my own shoes instead of
letting the shoe tier do it? And brush my own teeth and comb my hair and
give myself a bath?”
“It would be fun for a change, don’t you think?”
“No, it would be horrid. I didn’t like it when you took out the picture
painter last month.”
“That’s because I wanted you to learn to paint all by yourself, son.”
“I don’t want to do anything but look and listen and smell; what else 
is  there to do?”
“All right, go play in Africa.”
“Will you shut off the house sometime soon?”
“We’re considering it.”
“I don’t think you’d better consider it any more, Father.”
“I won’t have any threats from my son!”
“Very well.” And Peter strolled off to the nursery.
“Am I on time?” said David McClean.
“Breakfast?” asked George Hadley.
“Thanks, had some. What’s the trouble?”
“David, you’re a psychologist.”
“I should hope so.”
“Well, then, have a look at our nursery. You saw it a year ago when you
dropped by; did you notice anything peculiar about it then?”
“Can’t say I did; the usual violences, a tendency toward a slight
paranoia here or there, usual in children because they feel persecuted
by parents constantly, but, oh, really nothing.”
They walked down the ball. “I locked the nursery up,” explained the
father, “and the children broke back into it during the night. I let
them stay so they could form the patterns for you to see.”
There was a terrible screaming from the nursery.
“There it is,” said George Hadley. “See what you make of it.”
They walked in on the children without rapping.
The screams had faded. The lions were feeding.
“Run outside a moment, children,” said George Hadley. “No, don’t change
the mental combination. Leave the walls as they are. Get!”
With the children gone, the two men stood studying the lions clustered
at a distance, eating with great relish whatever it was they had caught.
“I wish I knew what it was,” said George Hadley. “Sometimes I can almost
see. Do you think if I brought high-powered binoculars here and—“
David McClean laughed dryly. “Hardly.” He turned to study all four
walls. “How long has this been going on?”
“A little over a month.”
“It certainly doesn’t  feel  good.”
“I want facts, not feelings.”
“My dear George, a psychologist never saw a fact in his life. He only
hears about feelings; vague things. This doesn’t feel good, I tell you.
Trust my hunches and my instincts. I have a nose for something bad. This
is very bad. My advice to you is to have the whole damn room torn down
and your children brought to me every day during the next year for
treatment.”
“Is it that bad?”
“I’m afraid so. One of the original uses of these nurseries was so that
we could study the patterns left on the walls by the child’s mind, study
at our leisure, and help the child. In this case, however, the room has
become a channel toward—destructive thoughts, instead of a release away
from them.”
“Didn’t you sense this before?”
“I sensed only that you had spoiled your children more than most. And
now you’re letting them down in some way. What way?”
“I wouldn’t let them go to New York.”
“What else?”
“I’ve taken a few machines from the house and threatened them, a month
ago, with closing up the nursery unless they did their homework. I did
close it for a few days to show I meant business.”
“Ah, ha!”
“Does that mean anything?”
“Everything. Where before they had a Santa Claus now they have a
Scrooge. Children prefer Santas. You’ve let this room and this house
replace you and your wife in your children’s affections. This room is
their mother and father, far more important in their lives than their
real parents. And now you come along and want to shut it off. No wonder
there’s hatred here. You can feel it coming out of the sky. Feel that
sun. George, you’ll have to change your life. Like too many others,
you’ve built it around creature comforts. Why, you’d starve tomorrow if
something went wrong in your kitchen. You wouldn’t know how to tap an
egg. Nevertheless, turn everything off. Start new. It’ll take time. But
we’ll make good children out of bad in a year, wait and see.”
“But won’t the shock be too much for the children, shutting the room up
abruptly, for good?”
“I don’t want them going any deeper into this, that’s all.”
The lions were finished with their red feast.
The lions were standing on the edge of the clearing watching the two
men.
“Now  I’m  feeling persecuted,” said McClean. “Let’s get out of here. I
never have cared for these damned rooms. Make me nervous.”
“The lions look real, don’t they?” said George Hadley. I don’t suppose
there’s any way—“
“What?”
“—that they could  become  real?”
“Not that I know.”
“Some flaw in the machinery, a tampering or something?”
“No.”
They went to the door.
“I don’t imagine the room will like being turned off,” said the father.
“Nothing ever likes to die—even a room.”
“I wonder if it hates me for wanting to switch it off?”
“Paranoia is thick around here today,” said David McClean. “You can
follow it like a spoor. Hello.” He bent and picked up a bloody scarf.
“This yours?”
“No.” George Hadley’s face was rigid. “It belongs to Lydia.”
They went to the fuse box together and threw the switch that killed the
nursery.
The two children were in hysterics. They screamed and pranced and threw
things. They yelled and sobbed and swore and jumped at the furniture.
“You can’t do that to the nursery, you can’t!”
“Now, children.”
The children flung themselves onto a couch, weeping.
“George,” said Lydia Hadley, “turn on the nursery, just for a few
moments. You can’t be so abrupt.”
“No.”
“You can’t be so cruel . . .”
“Lydia, it’s off, and it stays off. And the whole damn house dies as of
here and now. The more I see of the mess we’ve put ourselves in, the
more it sickens me. We’ve been contemplating our mechanical, electronic
navels for too long. My God, how we need a breath of honest air!”
And he marched about the house turning off the voice clocks, the stoves,
the heaters, the shoe shiners, the shoe lacers, the body scrubbers and
swabbers and massagers, and every other machine be could put his hand
to.
The house was full of dead bodies, it seemed. It felt like a mechanical
cemetery. So silent. None of the humming hidden energy of machines
waiting to function at the tap of a button.
“Don’t let them do it!” wailed Peter at the ceiling, as if he was
talking to the house, the nursery. “Don’t let Father kill everything.”
He turned to his father. “Oh, I hate you!”
“Insults won’t get you anywhere.”
“I wish you were dead!”
“We were, for a long while. Now we’re going to really start living.
Instead of being handled and massaged, we’re going to  live.”
Wendy was still crying and Peter joined her again. “Just a moment, just
one moment, just another moment of nursery,” they wailed.
“Oh, George,” said the wife, “it can’t hurt.”
“All right—all right, if they’ll just shut up. One minute, mind you, and
then off forever.”
“Daddy, Daddy, Daddy!” sang the children, smiling with wet faces.
“And then we’re going on a vacation. David McClean is coming back in
half an hour to help us move out and get to the airport. I’m going to
dress. You turn the nursery on for a minute, Lydia, just a minute, mind
you.”
And the three of them went babbling off while he let himself be vacuumed
upstairs through the air flue and set about dressing himself. A minute
later Lydia appeared.
“I’ll be glad when we get away,” she sighed.
“Did you leave them in the nursery?”
“I wanted to dress too. Oh, that horrid Africa. What can they see in
it?”
“Well, in five minutes we’ll be on our way to Iowa. Lord, how did we
ever get in this house? What prompted us to buy a nightmare?”
“Pride, money, foolishness.”
“I think we’d better get downstairs before those kids get engrossed with
those damned beasts again.”
Just then they heard the children calling, “Daddy, Mommy, come
quick—quick!”
They went downstairs in the air flue and ran down the hall. The children
were nowhere in sight. “Wendy? Peter!”
They ran into the nursery. The veldtland was empty save for the lions
waiting, looking at them. “Peter, Wendy?”
The door slammed.
“Wendy, Peter!”
George Hadley and his wife whirled and ran back to the door.
“Open the door!” cried George Hadley, trying the knob. “Why, they’ve
locked it from the outside! Peter!” He beat at the door. “Open up!”
He heard Peter’s voice outside, against the door.
“Don’t let them switch off the nursery and the house,” he was saying.
Mr. and Mrs. George Hadley beat at the door. “Now, don’t be ridiculous,
children. It’s time to go. Mr. McClean’ll be here in a minute and . . .”
And then they heard the sounds.
The lions on three sides of them, in the yellow veldt grass, padding
through the dry straw, rumbling and roaring in their throats.
The lions.
Mr. Hadley looked at his wife and they turned and looked back at the
beasts edging slowly forward crouching, tails stiff.
Mr. and Mrs. Hadley screamed.
And suddenly they realized why those other screams had sounded familiar.
“Well, here I am,” said David McClean in the nursery doorway, “Oh,
hello.” He stared at the two children seated in the center of the open
glade eating a little picnic lunch. Beyond them was the water hole and
the yellow veldtland; above was the hot sun. He began to perspire.
“Where are your father and mother?”
The children looked up and smiled. “Oh, they’ll be here directly.”
“Good, we must get going.” At a distance Mr. McClean saw the lions
fighting and clawing and then quieting down to feed in silence under the
shady trees.
He squinted at the lions with his hand tip to his eyes.
Now the lions were done feeding. They moved to the water hole to drink.
A shadow flickered over Mr. McClean’s hot face. Many shadows flickered.
The vultures were dropping down the blazing sky.
“A cup of tea?” asked Wendy in the silence.
The Illustrated Man shifted in his sleep.  He turned, and each time he
turned another picture came to view, coloring his back, his arm, his
wrist.  He flung a hand over the dry night grass.  The fingers uncurled
and there upon his palm another Illustration stirred to life.  He
twisted, and on his chest was an empty space of stars and blackness,
deep, deep, and something moving among those stars, something falling in
the blackness, falling while I watched. . . .
      Kaleidoscope</p>

THE first concussion cut the rocket up the side with a giant can opener.
The men were thrown into space like a dozen wriggling silverfish. They
were scattered into a dark sea; and the ship, in a million pieces, went
on, a meteor swarm seeking a lost sun.
“Barkley, Barkley, where are you?”
The sound of voices calling like lost children on a cold night.
“Woode, Woode!”
“Captain!”
“Hollis, Hollis, this is Stone.”
“Stone, this is Hollis. Where are you?”
“I don’t know. How can I? Which way is up? I’m falling. Good God, I’m
falling.”
They fell. They fell as pebbles fall down wells. They were scattered as
jackstones are scattered from a gigantic throw. And now instead of men
there were only voices—all kinds of voices, disembodied and impassioned,
in varying degrees of tenor and resignation.
“We’re going away from each other.”
This was true. Hollis, swinging head over heels, knew this was true. He
knew it with a vague acceptance. They were parting to go their separate
ways, and nothing could bring them back. They were wearing their
sealed-tight space suits with the glass tubes over their pale faces, but
they hadn’t had time to lock on their force units. With them they could
be small lifeboats in space, saving themselves, saving others,
collecting together, finding each other until they were an island of men
with some plan. But without the force units snapped to their shoulders
they were meteors, senseless, each going to a separate and irrevocable
fate.
A period of perhaps ten minutes elapsed while the first terror died and
a metallic calm took its place. Space began to weave its strange voices
in and out, on a great dark loom, crossing, recrossing, making a final
pattern.
“Stone to Hollis. How long can we talk by phone?”
“It depends on how fast you’re going your way and I’m going mine.
“An hour, I make it.”
“That should do it,” said Hollis, abstracted and quiet.
“What happened?” said Hollis a minute later.
“The rocket blew up, that’s all. Rockets do blow up.”
‘Which way are you going?”
“It looks like I’ll hit the moon.”
“It’s Earth for me. Back to old Mother Earth at ten thousand miles per
hour. I’ll burn like a match.” Hollis thought of it with a queer
abstraction of mind. He seemed to be removed from his body, watching it
fall down and down through space, as objective as he had been in regard
to the first falling snowflakes of a winter season long gone.
The others were silent, thinking of the destiny that had brought them to
this, falling, falling, and nothing they could do to change it. Even the
captain was quiet for there was no command or plan he knew that could
put things back together again.
“Oh, it’s a long way down. Oh, it’s a long way down, a long, long, long
way down,” said a voice. “I don’t want to die, I don’t want to die, it’s
a long way down.”
"Who's that?”
“I don’t know.”
“Stimson, I think. Stimson, is that you?”
“It’s a long, long way and I don’t like it. Oh, God, I don’t like it.”
“Stimson, this is Hollis. Stimson, you hear me?”
A pause while they fell separate from one another.
“Stimson?”
“Yes.” He replied at last.
“Stimson, take it easy; we’re all in the same fix.”
“I don’t want to be here. I want to be somewhere else.”
“There’s a chance we’ll be found.”
“I must be, I must be,” said Stimson. “I don’t believe this; I don’t
believe any of this is happening.”
“It’s a bad dream,” said someone.
“Shut up!” said Hollis.
“Come and make me,” said the voice. It was Applegate. He laughed easily,
with a similar objectivity. “Come and shut me up.”
Hollis for the first time felt the impossibility of his position. A
great anger filled him, for he wanted more than anything at this moment
to be able to do something to Applegate. He had wanted for many years to
do something and now it was too late. Applegate was only a telephonic
voice.
Falling, falling, falling
Now, as if they had discovered the horror, two of the men began to
scream. In a nightmare Hollis saw one of them float by, very near,
screaming and screaming.
“Stop it!” The man was almost at his fingertips, screaming insanely. He
would never stop. He would go on screaming for a million miles, as long
as he was in radio range, disturbing all of them, making it impossible
for them to talk to one another.
Hollis reached out. It was best this way. He made the extra effort and
touched the man. He grasped the man’s ankle and pulled himself up along
the body until he reached the head. The man screamed and clawed
frantically, like a drowning swimmer. The screaming filled the universe.
One way or the other, thought Hollis. The moon or Earth or meteors will
kill him, so why not now?
He smashed the man’s glass mask with his iron fist. The screaming
stopped. He pushed off from the body and let it spin away on its own
course, falling.
Falling, falling down space Hollis and the rest of them went in the
long, endless dropping and whirling of silence.
“Hollis, you still there?”
Hollis did not speak, but felt the rush of heat in his face.
“This is Applegate again.”
“All right, Applegate.”
“Let’s talk. We haven’t anything else to do.”
The captain cut in. “That’s enough of that. We’ve got to figure a way
out of this.”
“Captain, why don’t you shut up?” said Applegate.
“What!”
“You heard me, Captain. Don’t pull your rank on me, you’re ten thousand
miles away by now, and let’s not kid ourselves. As Stimson puts it, it’s
a long way down.”
“See here, Applegate!”
“Can it. This is a mutiny of one. I haven’t a damn thing to lose. Your
ship was a bad ship and you were a bad captain and I hope you break when
you hit the Moon.”
“I’m ordering you to stop!”
“Co on, order me again.” Applegate smiled across ten thousand miles. The
captain was silent. Applegate continued, “Where were we, Hollis? Oh yes,
I remember. I hate you too. But you know that. You’ve known it for a
long time.”
Hollis clenched his lists, helplessly.
“I want to tell you something,” said Applegate. “Make you happy. I was
the one who blackballed you with the Rocket Company five years ago.
A meteor flashed by. Hollis looked down and his left hand was gone.
Blood spurted. Suddenly there was no air in his suit. He had enough air
in his lungs to move his right hand over and twist a knob at his left
elbow, tightening the joint and sealing the leak. It had happened so
quickly that he was not surprised. Nothing surprised him any more. The
air in the suit came back to normal in an instant now that the leak was
sealed. And the blood that had flowed so swiftly was pressured as he
fastened the knob yet tighter, until it made a tourniquet.
All of this took place in a terrible silence on his part. And the other
men chatted. That one man, Lespere, went on and on with his talk about
his wife on Mars, his wife on Venus, his wife on Jupiter, his money, his
wondrous times, his drunkenness, his gambling, his happiness. On and on,
while they all fell. Lespere reminisced on the past, happy, while he
fell to his death.
It was so very odd. Space, thousands of miles of space, and these voices
vibrating in the center of it. No one visible at all, and only the radio
waves quivering and trying to quicken other men into emotion.
“Are you angry, Hollis?”
“No.” And he was not. The abstraction had returned and he was a thing of
dull concrete, forever falling nowhere.
“You wanted to get to the top all your life, Hollis. You always wondered
what happened. I put the black mark on you just before I was tossed out
myself.”
“That isn’t important,” said Hollis. And it was not. It was gone. When
life is over it is like a flicker of bright film, an instant on the
screen, all of its prejudices and passions condensed and illumined for
an instant on space, and before you could cry out, “There was a happy
day, there a bad one, there an evil face, there a good one,” the film
burned to a cinder, the screen went dark.
From this outer edge of his life, looking back, there was only one
remorse, and that was only that he wished to go on living. Did all dying
people feel this way, as if they had never lived? Did life seem that
short, indeed, over and done before you took a breath? Did it seem this
abrupt and impossible to everyone, or only to himself, here, now, with a
few hours left to him for thought and deliberation?
One of the other men, Lespere, was talking. “Well, I had me a good time:
I had a wife on Mars, Venus, and Jupiter. Each of them had money and
treated me swell. I got drunk and once I gambled away twenty thousand
dollars.”
But you’re here now, thought Hollis. I didn’t have any of those things.
When I was living I was jealous of you, Lespere; when I had another day
ahead of me I envied you your women and your good times. Women
frightened me and I went into space, always wanting them and jealous of
you for having them, and money, and as much happiness as you could have
in your own wild way. But now, falling here, with everything over, I’m
not jealous of you any more, because it’s over for you as it is for me,
and right now it’s like it never was. Hollis craned his face forward and
shouted into the telephone.
“It’s all over, Lespere!” Silence.
“It’s just as if it never was, Lespere!”
“Who’s that?” Lespere’s faltering voice. “This is Hollis.”
He was being mean. He felt the meanness, the senseless meanness of
dying. Applegate had hurt him; now he wanted to hurt another. Applegate
and space had both wounded him.
“You’re out here, Lespere. It’s all over. It’s just as if it had never
happened, isn’t it?”
“No.”
“When anything’s over, it’s just like it never happened. Where's your
life any better than mine, now? Now is what counts. Is it any better? Is
it?”
“Yes, it’s better!”
“How!”
“Because I got my thoughts, I remember!” cried Lespere, far away,
indignant, holding his memories to his chest with both hands.
And he was right. With a feeling of cold water rusting through his head
and body, Hollis knew he was right. There were differences between
memories and dreams. He had only dreams of things he had wanted to do,
while Lespere had memories of things done and accomplished. And this
knowledge began to pull Hollis apart, with a slow, quivering precision.
“What good does it do you?” he cried to Lespere. “Now? When a thing’s
over it’s not good any more. You’re no better off than me."
“I’m resting easy,” said Lespere. “I’ve had my turn. I’m not getting
mean at the end, like you.”
“Mean?” Hollis turned the word on his tongue. He had never been mean, as
long as he could remember, in his life. He had never dared to be mean.
He must have saved it all of these years for such a time as this.
“Mean.” He rolled the word into the back of his mind. He felt tears
start into his eyes and roll down his face. Someone must have heard his
gasping voice.
“Take it easy, Hollis.”
It was, of course, ridiculous. Only a minute before he had been giving
advice to others, to Stimson; he had felt a braveness which he had
thought to be the genuine thing, and now he knew that it had been
nothing but shock and the objectivity possible in shock. Now he was
trying to pack a lifetime of suppressed emotion into an interval of
minutes.
“I know how you feel, Hollis,” said Lespere, now twenty thousand miles
away, his voice fading. “I don’t take it personally.”
But aren’t we equal? he wondered. Lespere and I? Here, now? If a thing’s
over, it’s done, and what good is it? You die anyway. But he knew he was
rationalizing, for it was like trying to tell the difference between a
live man and a corpse. There was a spark in one, and not in the other—an
aura, a mysterious element.
So it was with Lespere and himself; Lespere had lived a good full life,
and it made him a different man now, and he, Hollis, had been as good as
dead for many years. They came to death by separate paths and, in all
likelihood, if there were kinds of death, their kinds would be as
different as night from day. The quality of death, like that of life,
must be of an infinite variety, and if one has already died once, then
what was there to look for in dying for good and all, as he was now?
It was a second later that he discovered his right foot was cut sheer
away. It almost made him laugh. The air was gone from his suit again. He
bent quickly, and there was blood, and the meteor had taken flesh and
suit away to the ankle. Oh, death in space was most humorous. It cut you
away, piece by piece, like a black and invisible butcher. He tightened
the valve at the knee, his head whirling into pain, fighting to remain
aware, and with the valve tightened, the blood retained, the air kept he
straightened up and went on falling, falling, for that was all there was
left to do.
“Hollis?"
Hollis nodded sleepily, tired of waiting for death.
“This is Applegate again,” said the voice.
“Yes.”
“I’ve had time to think. I listened to you. This isn’t good. It makes us
bad. This is a bad way to die. It brings all the bile out. You
listening, Hollis?”
“Yes.”
“I lied. A minute ago. I lied. I didn’t blackball you. I don’t know why
I said that. Guess I wanted to hurt you. You seemed the one to hurt.
We’ve always fought. Guess I’m getting old fast and repenting fast. I
guess listening to you be mean made me ashamed. Whatever the reason, I
want you to know I was an idiot too. There’s not an ounce of truth in
what I said. To hell with you.”
Hollis felt his heart begin to work again. It seemed as if it hadn’t
worked for five minutes, but now all of his limbs began to take color
and warmth. The shock was over, and the successive shocks of anger and
terror and loneliness were passing. He felt like a man emerging from a
cold shower in the morning, ready for breakfast and a new day.
“Thanks, Applegate.”
“Don’t mention it. Up your nose, you bastard”
“Hey,” said Stone.
“What?” Hollis called across space; for Stone, of all of them, was a
good friend.
“I’ve got myself into a meteor swarm, some little asteroids.”
“Meteors?”
“I think it’s the Myrmidone cluster that goes out past Mars and in
toward Earth once every five years. I’m right in the middle. It’s like a
big kaleidoscope. You get all kinds of colors and shapes and sizes. God,
it’s beautiful, all that metal.”
Silence.
“I’m going with them,” said Stone. “They’re taking me off with them.
I’ll be damned.” He laughed.
Hollis looked to see, but saw nothing. There were only the great
diamonds and sapphires and emerald mists and velvet inks of space, with
God’s voice mingling among the crystal fires. There was a kind of wonder
and imagination in the thought of Stone going off in the meteor swarm,
out past Mars for years and coming in toward Earth every five years,
passing in and out of the planet’s ken for the next million centuries,
Stone and the Myrmidone cluster eternal and unending, shifting and
shaping like the kaleidoscope colors when you were a child and held the
long tube to the sun and gave it a twirl.
“So long, Hollis.” Stone’s voice, very faint now. “So long.”
“Good luck,” shouted Hollis across thirty thousand miles.
“Don’t be funny,” said Stone, and was gone.
The stars closed in.
Now all the voices were fading, each on his own trajectory, some to
Mars, others into farthest space. And Hollis himself . . . He looked
down. He, of all the others, was going back to Earth alone.
“So long.”
“Take it easy.”
“So long, Hollis.” That was Applegate.
The many good-bys. The short farewells. And now the great loose brain
was disintegrating. The components of the brain which had worked so
beautifully and efficiently in the skull case of the rocket ship firing
through space were dying one by one; the meaning of their life together
was falling apart. And as a body dies when the brain ceases functioning,
so the spirit of the ship and their long time together and what they
meant to one another was dying. Applegate was now no more than a finger
blown from the parent body, no longer to be despised and worked against.
The brain was exploded, and the senseless, useless fragments of it were
far scattered. The voices faded and now all of space was silent. Hollis
was alone, falling.
They were all alone. Their voices had died like echoes of the words of
God spoken and vibrating in the starred deep. There went the captain to
the Moon; there Stone with the meteor swarm; there Stimson; there
Applegate toward Pluto; there Smith and Turner and Underwood and all the
rest, the shards of the kaleidoscope that had formed a thinking pattern
for so long, hurled apart.
And I? thought Hollis. What can I do? Is there anything I can do now to
make up for a terrible and empty life? If only I could do one good thing
to make up for the meanness I collected all these years and didn’t even
know was in me! But there’s no one here but myself, and how can you do
good all alone? You can’t. Tomorrow night I’ll hit Earth’s atmosphere.
I’ll burn, he thought, and be scattered in ashes all over the
continental lands. I’ll be put to use. Just a little bit, but ashes are
ashes and they’ll add to the land.
He fell swiftly, like a bullet, like a pebble, like an iron weight,
objective, objective all of the time now, not sad or happy or anything,
but only wishing he could do a good thing now that everything was gone,
a good thing for just himself to know about.
When I hit the atmosphere, I’ll burn like a meteor.
“I wonder,” he said, “if anyone’ll see me?”
The small boy on the country road looked up and screamed. “Look, Mom,
look! A falling star!”
The blazing white star fell down the sky of dusk in Illinois.
“Make a wish,” said his mother. “Make a wish.”
The Illustrated Man turned in the moonlight. He turned again . . . and
again . . . and again. . . .
      The Other Foot</p>

WHEN they heard the news they came out of the restaurants and cafés and
hotels and looked at the sky. They lifted their dark hands over their
upturned white eyes. Their mouths hung wide. In the hot noon for
thousands of miles there were little towns where the dark people stood
with their shadows under them, looking up.
In her kitchen Hattie Johnson covered the boiling soup, wiped her thin
fingers on a cloth, and walked carefully to the back porch.
“Come on, Ma! Hey, Ma, come on—you’ll miss it!”
“Hey, Mom!”
Three little Negro boys danced around in the dusty yard, yelling. Now
and then they looked at the house frantically.
“I’m coming,” said Hattie, and opened the screen door. “Where you hear
this rumor?”
“Up at Jones’s, Ma. They say a rocket’s coming, first one in twenty
years, with a white man in it!”
“What’s a white man? I never seen one.
“You’ll find out,” said Hattie. “Yes indeed, you’ll find out.”
“Tell us about one, Ma. Tell like you did.”
Hattie frowned. “Well, it’s been a long time. I was a little girl, you
see. That was back in 1965.”
“Tell us about a white man, Mom!”
She came and stood in the yard, looking up at the blue clear Martian sky
with the thin white Martian clouds, and in the distance the Martian
hills broiling in the heat. She said at last, “Well, first of all, they
got white hands.”
“White hands!” The boys joked, slapping each other.
“And they got white arms.
“White arms!” hooted the boys.
“And white faces.”
“White faces! Really?”
“White like  this,  Mom?” The smallest threw dust on his face, sneezing.
“This way?”
“Whiter than that” she said gravely, and turned to the sky again. There
was a troubled thing in her eyes, as if she was looking for a
thundershower up high, and not seeing it made her worry. “Maybe you
better go inside.”
“Oh, Mom!” They stared at her in disbelief. “We got to watch, we just
got to. Nothing’s going to happen, is it?”
“I don’t know. I got a feeling, is all.”
“We just want to see the ship and maybe run down to the port and see
that white man. What’s he like, huh, Mom?”
“I don’t know. I just don’t know,” she mused, shaking her head.
“Tell us some more!”
“Well, the white people live on Earth, which is where we all come from,
twenty years ago. We just up and walked away and came to Mars and set
down and built towns and here we are. Now we’re Martians instead of
Earth people. And no white men’ve come up here in all that time. That’s
the story.”
“Why didn’t they come up, Mom?”
“Well, ’cause. Right after we got up here, Earth got in an atom war.
They blew each other up terribly. They forgot us. When they finished
fighting, after years, they didn’t have any rockets. Took them until
recently to build more. So here they come now, twenty years later, to
visit.” She gazed at her children numbly and then began to walk. “You
wait here. I’m going down the line to Elizabeth Brown’s house. You
promise to stay?”
“We don’t want to but we will.”
“All right, then.” And she ran off down the road.
At the Browns’ she arrived in time to see everybody packed into the
family car. “Hey there, Hattie! Come on along!”
“Where you going?” she said, breathlessly running up.
“To see the white man!”
“That’s right,” said Mr. Brown seriously. He waved at his load. “These
children never saw one, and  I  almost forgot.”
“What you going to do with that white man?” asked Hattie.
“Do?” said everyone. “Why—just  look  at him, is all.”
“You sure?”
“What else can we do?”
“I don’t know,” said Hattie. “I just thought there might be trouble.”
“What kind of trouble?”
“You  know,”  said Hattie vaguely, embarrassed. “You ain’t going to
lynch him?”
“Lynch him?” Everyone laughed. Mr. Brown slapped his knee. “Why, bless
you, child, no! We’re going to shake his hand. Ain’t we, everyone?”
“Sure, sure!”
Another car drove up from another direction and Hattie gave a cry.
“Willie!”
“What you doing ’way down here? Where’re the kids?” shouted her husband
angrily. He glared at the others. “You going down like a bunch of fools
to see that man come in?”
‘That appears to be just right,” agreed Mr. Brown, nodding and smiling.
‘Well, take your guns along,” said Willie. “I’m on my way home for mine
right now!”
“Willie!”
“You get in this car, Hattie.” He held the door open firmly, looking at
her until she obeyed. Without another word to the others he roared the
car down the dusty road.
“Willie, not so fast!”
“Not so fast, huh? We’ll see about that.” He watched the road tear under
the car. “What right they got coming up here this late? Why don’t they
leave us in peace? Why didn’t they blow themselves up on that old world
and let us be?”
“Willie, that ain’t no Christian way to talk.”
“I’m not feeling Christian,” he said savagely, gripping the wheel. “I’m
just feeling mean. After all them years of doing what they did to our
folks—my mom and dad, and your mom and dad—— You remember? You remember
how they hung my father on Knockwood Hill and shot my mother? You
remember? Or you got a memory that’s short like the others?”
“I remember," she said.
“You remember Dr. Phillips and Mr. Burton and their big houses, and my
mother’s washing shack, and Dad working when he was old, and the thanks
he got was being hung by Dr. Phillips and Mr. Button. Well,” said
Willie, “the shoe’s on the other foot now. We’ll see who gets laws
passed against him, who gets lynched, who rides the back of streetcars,
who gets segregated in shows. We’ll just wait and see.”
“Oh, Willie, you’re talking trouble.”
“Everybody’s talking. Everybody’s thought on this day, thinking it’d
never be. Thinking, What kind of day would it be if the white man ever
came up here to Mars? But here’s the day, and we can’t run away.
“Ain’t you going to let the white people live up here?”
“Sure.” He smiled, but it was a wide, mean smile, and his eyes were mad.
“They can come up and live and work here; why, certainly. All they got
to do to deserve it is live in their own small part of town, the slums,
and shine our shoes for us, and mop up our trash, and sit in the last
row in the balcony. That’s all we ask. And once a week we hang one or
two of them. Simple!”
“You don’t sound human, and I don’t like it.”
“You’ll have to get used to it,” he said. He braked the car to a stop
before the house and jumped out. “Find my guns and some rope. We’ll do
this right.”
“Oh, Willie," she wailed, and just sat there in the car while he ran up
the steps and slammed the front door.
She went along. She didn’t want to go along, but he rattled around in
the attic, cursing like a crazy man until he found four guns. She saw
the brutal metal of them glittering in the black attic, and she couldn’t
see him at all, he was so dark; she heard only his swearing, and at last
his long legs came climbing down from the attic in a shower of dust, and
he stacked up bunches of brass shells and blew out the gun chambers and
clicked shells into them, his face stern and heavy and folded in upon
the gnawing bitterness there. “Leave us alone,” he kept muttering, his
hands flying away from him suddenly, uncontrolled. “Leave us blame
alone, why don’t they?”
“Willie, Willie.”
“You too—you too.” And he gave her the same look, and a pressure of his
hatred touched her mind.
Outside the window the boys gabbled to each other. “White as milk, she
said. White as milk.”
“White as this old flower, you see?”
“White as a stone, like chalk you write with.”
Willie plunged out of the house. “You children come inside, I’m locking
you up. You ain’t seeing no white man, you ain’t talking about them, you
ain’t doing nothing. Come on now.”
“But, Daddy——”
He shoved them through the door and went and fetched a bucket of paint
and a stencil and from the garage a long thick hairy rope coil into
which he fashioned a hangman’s knot, very carefully watching the sky
while his hands felt their way at their task.
And then they were in the car, leaving bolls of dust behind them down
the road. “Slow up, Willie.”
“This is no slowing-up time,” he said. “This is a hurrying time, and I’m
hurrying.”
All along the road people were looking up in the sky, or climbing in
their cars, or riding in cars, and guns were sticking up out of some
cars like telescopes sighting all the evils of a world coming to an end.
She looked at the guns. “You been talking,” she accused her husband.
“That’s what I been doing,” he grunted, nodding. He watched the road,
fiercely. “I stopped at every house and I told them what to do, to get
their guns, to get paint, to bring rope and be ready. And here we all
are, the welcoming committee, to give them the key to the city. Yes,
sir!”
She pressed her thin dark hands together to push away the terror growing
in her now, and she felt the car bucket and lurch around other ears. She
heard the voices yelling, Hey, Willie, look! and hands holding up ropes
and guns as they rushed by! and mouths smiling at them in the swift
rushing.
“Here we are,” said Willie, and braked the car into dusty halting and
silence. He kicked the door open with a big foot and, laden with
weapons, stepped out, lugging them across the airport meadow.
“Have you  thought  Willie?”
“That’s all I done for twenty years. I was sixteen when I left Earth,
and I was glad to leave,” he said. “There wasn’t anything there for me
or you or anybody like us. I’ve never been sorry I left. We’ve had peace
here, the first time we ever drew a solid breath. Now, come on.
He pushed through the dark crowd which came to meet him.
“Willie, Willie, what we gonna do?” they said.
“Here’s a gun,” he said. “Here’s a gun. Here’s another.” He passed them
out with savage jabs of his arms. “Here’s a pistol. Here’s a shotgun.”
The people were so close together it looked like one dark body with a
thousand arms reaching out to take the weapons. “Willie, Willie.”
His wife stood tall and silent by him, her fluted lips pressed shut, and
her large eyes wet and tragic. “Bring the paint,” be said to her. And
she lugged a gallon can of yellow paint across the field to where, at
that moment a trolley car was pulling up, with a fresh-painted sign on
its front, TO THE WHITE MAN’S LANDING, full of talking people who got
off and ran across the meadow, stumbling, looking up. Women with picnic
boxes, men with straw hats, in shirt sleeves. The streetcar stood
humming and empty. Willie climbed up, set the paint cans down, opened
them, stirred the paint, tested a brush, drew forth a stencil, and
climbed up on a seat.
“Hey, there!” The conductor came around behind him, his coin changer
jangling. “What you think you’re doing? Get down off there!”
“You see what I’m doing. Keep your shirt on.”
And Willie began the stenciling in yellow paint. He dabbed on an  F  and
an  O  and an  R  with terrible pride in his work. And when he finished
it the conductor squinted up and read the fresh glinting yellow words:
FOR WHITES: REAR SECTION. He read it again. FOR WHITES. He blinked. REAR
SECTION. The conductor looked at Willie and began to smile.
“Does that suit you?” asked Willie, stepping down.
Said the conductor, “That suits me just fine, sir.”
Hattie was looking at the sign from outside, and holding her hands over
her breasts.
Willie returned to the crowd, which was growing now, taking size from
every auto that groaned to a halt, and every new trolley car which
squealed around the bend from the nearby town.
Willie climbed up on a packing box. “Let’s have a delegation to paint
every streetcar in the next hour. Volunteers?”
Hands leapt up.
“Get going!”
They went.
“Let’s have a delegation to fix theater seats, roped off, the last two
rows for whites.”
More hands.
“Go on!”
They ran off.
Willie peered around, bubbled with perspiration, panting with exertion,
proud of his energy, his hand on his wife’s shoulder who stood under him
looking at the ground with her downcast eyes. “Let’s see now,” he
declared. “Oh yes. We got to pass a law this afternoon; no
intermarriages!”
“That’s right,” said a lot of people.
“All shoeshine boys quit their jobs today.”
“Quittin’ right now!” Some men threw down the rags they carried, in
their excitement, all across town.
“Got to pass a minimum wage law, don’t we?”
“Sure!”
“Pay them white folks at least ten cents an hour.”
“That’s right!”
The mayor of the town hurried up. “Now look here, Willie Johnson. Get
down off that box!”
“Mayor, I can’t be made to do nothing like that.”
“You’re making a mob, Willie Johnson.”
“That’s the idea.”
“The same thing you always hated when you were a kid. You’re no better
than some of those white men you yell about!”
“This is the other shoe, Mayor, and the other  foot,”  said Willie, not
even looking at the mayor, looking at the faces beneath him, some of
them smiling, some of them doubtful, others bewildered, some of them
reluctant and drawing away, fearful.
“You’ll be sorry,” said the mayor.
“We’ll have an election and get a new mayor,” said Willie. And he
glanced off at the town where up and down the streets signs were being
hung, fresh-painted: LIMITED CLIENTELE:  Right to serve customer
revokable at any time.  He grinned and slapped his hands. Lord! And
streetcars were being halted and sections being painted white in back,
to suggest their future inhabitants. And theaters were being invaded and
roped off by chuckling men, while their wives stood wondering on the
curbs and children were spanked into houses to be hid away from this
awful time.
“Are we all ready?” called Willie Johnson, the rope in his hands with
the noose tied and neat.
“Ready!” shouted half the crowd. The other half murmured and moved like
figures in a nightmare in which they wished no participation.
“Here it comes!” called a small boy.
Like marionette heads on a single string, the heads of the crowd turned
upward.
Across the sky, very high and beautiful, a rocket burned on a sweep of
orange fire. It circled and came down, causing all to gasp. It landed,
setting the meadow afire here and there; the fire burned out, the rocket
lay a moment in quiet, and then, as the silent crowd watched, a great
door in the side of the vessel whispered out a breath of oxygen, the
door slid back and an old man stepped out.
“A white man, a white man, a white man . . .” The words traveled back in
the expectant crowd, the children speaking in each other’s ears,
whispering, butting each other, the words moving in ripples to where the
crowd stopped and the streetcars stood in the windy sunlight, the smell
of paint coming out their opened windows. The whispering wore itself
away and it was gone.
No one moved.
The white man was tall and straight but a deep weariness was m his face.
He had not shaved this day, and his eyes were as old as the eyes of a
man can be and still be alive. His eyes were colorless; almost white and
sightless with things he had seen in the passing years. He was as thin
as a winter bush. His hands trembled and he had to lean against the
portway of the ship as he looked out over the crowd.
He put out a hand and half smiled, but drew his hand back.
No one moved.
He looked down into their faces, and perhaps he saw but did not see the
guns and the ropes, and perhaps he smelled the paint. No one ever asked
him. He began to talk. He started very quietly and slowly, expecting no
interruptions, and receiving none, and his voice was very tired and old
and pale.
“It doesn’t matter who I am,” he said. “I’d be just a name to you,
anyhow. I don’t know your names, either. That’ll come later.” He paused,
closed his eyes for a moment, and then continued:
“Twenty years ago you left Earth. That’s a long, long time. It’s more
like twenty centuries, so much has happened. After you left, the War
came.” He nodded slowly. “Yes, the  big  one. The Third One. It went on
for a long time. Until last year. We bombed all of the cities of the
world. We destroyed New York and London and Moscow and Paris and
Shanghai and Bombay and Alexandria. We ruined it all. And when we
finished with the big cities we went to the little cities and
atom-bombed and burned them.”
Now he began to name cities and places, and streets. And as he named
them, a murmur rose up in his audience.
“We destroyed Natchez . . .”
A murmur.
“And Columbus, Georgia . . .”
Another murmur.
“We burned New Orleans . . .”
A sigh.
“And Atlanta . . .”
 Still another.
“And there was nothing left of Greenwater, Alabama.”
Willie Johnson jerked his head and his mouth opened. Hattie saw this
gesture, and the recognition coming into his dark eyes.
“Nothing was left,” said the old man in the port, speaking slowly.
“Cotton fields, burned.”
Oh, said everyone.
“Cotton mills bombed out——”
“Oh?”
“And the factories, radioactive; everything radioactive. All the roads
and the farms and the foods, radioactive. Everything.” He named more
names of towns and villages.
“Tampa.”
“That’s my town,” someone whispered.
“Fulton.”
“That’s mine,” someone else said.
“Memphis.”
“Memphis. Did they burn  Memphis?”  A shocked query.
“Memphis, blown up.
“Fourth  Street in Memphis?”
“All of it,” said the old man.
It was stirring them now. After twenty years it was rushing back. The
towns and the places, the trees and the brick buildings, the signs and
the churches and the familiar stores, all of it was coming to the
surface among the gathered people. Each name touched memory, and there
was no one present without a thought of another day. They were all old
enough for that, save the children.
“Laredo.”
“I remember Laredo.”
“New York City.”
“I had a store in Harlem.”
“Harlem, bombed out.”
The ominous words. The familiar, remembered places. The struggle to
imagine all of those places in ruins.
Willie Johnson murmured the words, “Greenwater, Alabama. That’s where I
was born. I remember.”
Gone. All of it gone. The man said so.
The man continued, “So we destroyed everything and ruined everything,
like the fools that we were and the fools that we are. We killed
millions. I don’t think there are more than five hundred thousand people
left in the world, all kinds and types. And out of all the wreckage we
salvaged enough metal to build this one rocket, and we came to Mars in
it this month to seek your help.”
He hesitated and looked down among the faces to see what could be found
there, but he was uncertain.
Hattie Johnson felt her husband’s arm tense, saw his fingers grip the
rope.
“We’ve been fools,” said the old man quietly. “We’ve brought the Earth
and civilization down about our heads. None of the cities are worth
saving—they’ll be radioactive for a century. Earth is over and done
with. Its age is through. You have rockets here which you haven’t tried
to use to return to Earth in twenty years. Now I’ve come to ask you to
use them. To come to Earth, to pick up the survivors and bring them back
to Mars. To help us go on at this time. We’ve been stupid. Before God we
admit our stupidity and our evilness. All the Chinese and the Indians
and the Russians and the British and the Americans. We’re asking to be
taken in. Your Martian soil has lain fallow for numberless centuries;
there’s room for everyone; it’s good soil—I’ve seen your fields from
above. We’ll come and work it  for  you. Yes, we’ll even do that. We
deserve anything you want to do to us, but don’t shut us out. We can’t
force you to act now. If you want I’ll get into my ship and go back and
that will be all there is to it. We won’t bother you again. But we’ll
come here and we’ll work for you and do the things you did for us—clean
your houses, cook your meals, shine your shoes, and humble ourselves in
the sight of God for the things we have done over the centuries to
ourselves, to others, to you.
He was finished.
There was a silence of silences. A silence you could hold in your hand
and a silence that came down like a pressure of a distant storm over the
crowd. Their long arms hung like dark pendulums in the sunlight, and
their eyes were upon the old man and he did not move now, but waited.
Willie Johnson held the rope in his hands. Those around him watched to
see what he might do. His wife Hattie waited, clutching his arm.
She wanted to get at the hate of them all, to pry at it and work at it
until she found a little chink, and then pull out a pebble or a stone or
a brick and then a part of the wall, and, once started, the whole
edifice might roar down and be done away with. It was teetering now. But
which was the keystone, and how to get at it? How to touch them and get
a thing started in all of them to make a ruin of their hate?
She looked at Willie there in the strong silence and the only thing she
knew about the situation was him and his life and what had happened to
him, and suddenly he was the keystone; suddenly she knew that if he
could be pried loose, then the thing in all of them might be loosened
and torn away.
“Mister—” She stepped forward. She didn’t even know the first words to
say. The crowd stared at her back; she felt them staring. “Mister—”
The man turned to her with a tired smile.
“Mister,” she said, “do you know Knockwood Hill in Greenwater, Alabama?”
The old man spoke over his shoulder to someone within the ship. A moment
later a photographic map was handed out and the man held it, waiting.
“You know the big oak on top of that hill, mister?” The big oak. The
place where Willie’s father was shot and hung and found swinging in the
morning wind.
“Yes.”
“Is that still there?” asked Hattie.
“It’s gone,” said the old man. “Blown up. The hill’s all gone, and the
oak tree too. You see?” He touched the photograph.
“Let me see that,” said Willie, jerking forward and looking at the map.
Hattie blinked at the white man, heart pounding.
“Tell me about Greenwater,” she said quickly.
“What do you want to know?”
“About Dr. Phillips. Is he still alive?”
A moment in which the information was found in a clicking machine within
the rocket .
“Killed in the war.”
“And his son?”
“Dead.”
“What about their house?”
“Burned. Like all the other houses.”
“What about that other big tree on Knockwood Hill?”
“All the trees went—burned.”
“That  tree went, you’re sure?” said Willie.
“Yes.”
Willie’s body loosened somewhat.
“And what about that Mr. Burton’s house and Mr. Burton?”
“No houses at all left, no people.”
“You know Mrs. Johnson’s washing shack, my mother’s place?”
The place where she was shot.
“That’s gone too. Everything’s gone. Here are the pictures, you can see
for yourself.”
The pictures were there to be held and looked at and thought about. The
rocket was full of pictures and answers to questions. Any town, any
building, any place.
Willie stood with the rope in his hands.
He was remembering Earth, the green Earth and the green town where he
was born and raised, and he was thinking now of that town, gone to
pieces, to ruin, blown up and scattered, all of the landmarks with it,
all of the supposed or certain evil scattered with it, all of the hard
men gone, the stables, the ironsmiths, the curio shops, the soda founts,
the gin mills, the river bridges, the lynching trees, the
buckshot-covered hills, the roads, the cows, the mimosas, and his own
house as well as those big-pillared houses down near the long river,
those white mortuaries where the women as delicate as moths fluttered in
the autumn light, distant, far away. Those houses where the cold men
rocked, with glasses of drink in their hands, guns leaned against the
porch newels, sniffing the autumn airs and considering death. Gone, all
gone; gone and never coming back. Now, for certain, all of that
civilization ripped into confetti and strewn at their feet. Nothing,
nothing of it left to hate—not an empty brass gun shell, or a twisted
hemp, or a tree, or even a hill of it to hate. Nothing but some alien
people in a rocket, people who might shine his shoes and ride in the
back of trolleys or sit far up in midnight theaters
“You won’t have to do that,” said Willie Johnson.
His wife glanced at his big hands.
His fingers were opening.
The rope, released, fell and coiled upon itself along the ground.
They ran through the streets of their town and tore down the new signs
so quickly made, and painted out the fresh yellow signs on streetcars,
and they cut down the ropes in the theater balconies, and unloaded their
guns and stacked their ropes away.
“A new start for everyone,” said Hattie, on the way home in their car.
“Yes,” said Willie at last. “The Lord’s let us come through, a few here
and a few there. And what happens next is up to all of us. The time for
being fools is over. We got to be something else except fools. I knew
that when he talked. I knew then that now the white man’s as lonely as
we’ve always been. He’s got no home now, just like we didn’t have one
for so long. Now everything’s even. We can start all over again, on the
same level.”
He stopped the car and sat in it, not moving, while Hattie went to let
the children out. They ran down to see their father. “You see the white
man? You see him?” they cried.
“Yes, sir,” said Willie, sitting behind the wheel, rubbing his face with
his slow fingers. “Seems like for the first time today I really seen the
white man—I really seen him clear.”
      The Highway</p>

THE cooling afternoon rain had come over the valley, touching the corn
in the tilled mountain fields, tapping on the dry grass roof of the hut.
In the rainy darkness the woman ground corn between cakes of lava rock,
working steadily. In the wet lightlessness, somewhere, a baby cried.
Hernando stood waiting for the rain to cease so he might take the wooden
plow into the field again. Below, the river boiled brown and thickened
in its course. The concrete highway, another river, did not flow at all;
it lay shining, empty. A car had not come along it in an hour. This was,
in itself, of unusual interest. Over the years there had not been an
hour when a car had not pulled up, someone shouting, “Hey there, can we
take your picture?” Someone with a box that clicked, and a coin in his
hand. If he walked slowly across the field without his hat, sometimes
they called, “Oh, we want you with your hat on!” And they waved their
hands, rich with gold things that told time, or identified them, or did
nothing at all but winked like spider’s eyes in the sun. So he would
turn and go back to get his hat.
His wife spoke. “Something is wrong, Hernando?”
“Sí. The road. Something big has happened. Something big to make the
road so empty this way.”
He walked from the hut slowly and easily, the rain washing over the
twined shoes of grass and thick tire rubber he wore. He remembered very
well the incident of this pair of shoes. The tire had come into the hut
with violence one night, exploding the chickens and the pots apart! It
had come alone, rolling swiftly. The car, off which it had come, had
rushed on, as far as the curve, and hung a moment, headlights reflected,
before plunging into the river. The car was still there. One might see
it on a good day, when the river ran slow and the mud cleared. Deep
under, shining its metal, long and low and very rich, lay the car. But
then the mud came in again and you saw nothing.
The following day he had carved the shoe soles from the tire rubber.
He reached the highway now, and stood upon it, listening to the small
sounds it made in the rain.
Then, suddenly, as if at a signal, the cars came. Hundreds of them,
miles of them, rushing and rushing as he stood, by and by him. The big
long black cars heading north toward the United States, roaring, taking
the curves at too great a speed. With a ceaseless blowing and honking.
And there was something about the faces of the people packed into the
cars, something which dropped him into a deep silence. He stood back to
let the cars roar on. He counted them until he tired. Five hundred, a
thousand cars passed, and there was something in the faces of all of
them. But they moved too swiftly for him to tell what this thing was.
Finally the silence and emptiness returned. The swift long low
convertible cars were gone. He heard the last horn fade.
The road was empty again.
It had been like a funeral cortege. But a wild one, racing, hair out,
screaming to some ceremony ever northward. Why? He could only shake his
head and rub his fingers softly, at his sides.
Now, all alone, a final car. There was something very, very final about
it. Down the mountain road in the thin cool rain, fuming up great clouds
of steam, came an old Ford. It was traveling as swiftly as it might. He
expected it to break apart any instant. When this ancient Ford saw
Hernando it pulled up, caked with mud and rusted, the radiator bubbling
angrily.
“May we have some water, please, señor!”
A young man, perhaps twenty-one, was driving. He wore a yellow sweater,
an open-collared white shirt and gray pants. In the topless car the rain
fell upon him and five young women packed so they could not move in the
interior. They were all very pretty and they were keeping the rain from
themselves and the driver with old newspapers. But the rain got through
to them, soaking their bright dresses, soaking the young man. His hair
was plastered with rain. But they did not seem to care. None complained,
and this was unusual. Always before they complained; of rain, of heat,
of time, of cold, of distance.
Hernando nodded. “I’ll bring you water.”
“Oh, please hurry!” one of the girls cried. She sounded very high and
afraid. There was no impatience in her, only an asking out of fear. For
the first time Hernando ran when a tourist asked; always before he had
walked slower at such requests.
He returned with a hub lid full of water. This, too, had been a gift
from the highway. One afternoon it had sailed like a flung coin into his
field, round and glittering. The car to which it belonged had slid on,
oblivious to the fact that it had lost a silver eye. Until now, he and
his wife had used it for washing and cooking; it made a fine bowl.
As he poured the water into the boiling radiator, Hernando looked up at
their stricken faces. “Oh, thank you, thank you,” said one of the girls.
“You don’t know what this means.”
Hernando smiled. “So much traffic in this hour. It all goes one way.
North.”
He did not mean to say anything to hurt them. But when he looked up
again there all of them sat, in the rain, and they were crying. They
were crying very hard. And the young man was trying to stop them by
laying his hands on their shoulders and shaking them gently, one at a
time, but they held their papers over their heads and their mouths moved
and their eyes were shut and their faces changed color and they cried,
some loud, some soft.
Hernando stood with the half-empty lid in his fingers. “I did got mean
to say anything, señor,” he apologized.
“That’s all right,” said the driver.
“What is wrong, señor?”
“Haven’t you heard?” replied the young man, turning, holding tightly to
the wheel with one hand, leaning forward. “It’s happened.”
This was bad. The others, at this, cried still harder, holding onto each
other, forgetting the newspapers, letting the rain fall and mingle with
their tears.
Hernando stiffened. He put the rest of the water into the radiator. He
looked at the sky, which was black with storm. He looked at the river
rushing. He felt the asphalt under his shoes.
He came to the side of the car. The young man took his hand and gave him
a peso. “No.” Hernando gave it back. “It is my pleasure.”
“Thank you, you’re so kind,” said one of the girls, still sobbing. “Oh,
Mama, Papa. Oh, I want to be home, I want to be home. Oh, Mama, Dad.”
And others held her.
“I did not hear, señor,” said Hernando quietly.
“The war!” shouted the young man as if no one could hear. “It’s come,
the atom war, the end of the world!”
“Señor, señor,” said Hernando.
“Thank you, thank you for your help. Good-by,” said the young man.
“Good-by,” they all said in the rain, not seeing him.
He stood while the car engaged its gears and rattled off down, fading
away, through the valley. Finally it was gone, with the young women in
it, the last car, the newspapers held and fluttered over their heads.
Hernando did not move for a long time. The rain ran very cold down his
cheeks and along his fingers and into the woven garment on his legs. He
held his breath, waiting, tight and tensed.
He watched the highway, but it did not move again. He doubted that it
would move much for a very long time.
The rain stopped. The sky broke through the clouds. In ten minutes the
storm was gone, like a bad breath. A sweet wind blew the smell of the
jungle up to him. He could hear the river moving gently and easily on
its way. The jungle was very green; everything was fresh. He walked down
through the field to his house and picked up his plow. With his hands on
it he looked at the sky beginning to burn hot with the sun.
His wife called out from her work. “What happened, Hernando?”
“It is nothing,” he replied.
He set the plow in the furrow, he called sharply to his burro,
“Burrrrrrr-o!” And they walked together through the rich field, under
the clearing sky, on their tilled land by the deep river.
“What do they mean, ‘the world’?” he said.
      The Man</p>

CAPTAIN HART stood in the door of the rocket. “Why don’t they come?” he
said.
“Who knows?” said Martin, his lieutenant. “Do I know, Captain?”
“What kind of a place is this, anyway?” The captain lighted a cigar. He
tossed the match out into the glittering meadow. The grass started to
burn.
Martin moved to stamp it out with his boot.
“No,” ordered Captain Hart, “let it burn. Maybe they’ll come see what’s
happening then, the ignorant fools.”
Martin shrugged and withdrew his foot from the spreading fire.
Captain Hart examined his watch. “An hour ago we landed here, and does
the welcoming committee rush out with a brass band to shake our hands?
No indeed! Here we ride millions of miles through space and the fine
citizens of some silly town on some unknown planet ignore us!” He
snorted, tapping his watch. “Well, I’ll just give them five more
minutes, and then——”
“And then what?” asked Martin, ever so politely, watching the captain's
jowls shake.
“We’ll fly over their damned city again and scare hell out of them.” His
voice grew quieter. “Do you think, Martin, maybe they didn’t see us
land?”
“They saw us. They looked up as we flew over.
“Then why aren’t they running across the field? Are they hiding? Are
they yellow?”
Martin shook his head. “No. Take these binoculars, sir. See for
yourself. Everybody’s walking around. They’re not frightened. They—well,
they just don’t seem to care.
Captain Hart placed the binoculars to his tired eyes. Martin looked up
and had time to observe the lines and the grooves of irritation,
tiredness, nervousness there. Hart looked a million years old; he never
slept, he ate little, and drove himself on, on. Now his mouth moved,
aged and drear, but sharp, under the held binoculars.
“Really, Martin, I don’t know why we bother. We build rockets, we go to
all the trouble of crossing space, searching for them, and this is what
we get. Neglect. Look at those idiots wander about in there. Don’t they
realize how big this is? The first space flight to touch their
provincial land. How many times does that happen? Are they that blasé?”
Martin didn’t know.
Captain Hart gave him back the binoculars wearily. “Why do we do it,
Martin? This space travel, I mean. Always on the go. Always searching.
Our insides always tight, never any rest.”
“Maybe we’re looking for peace and quiet. Certainly there’s none on
Earth,” said Martin.
“No, there’s not, is there?” Captain Hart was thoughtful, the fire
damped down. “Not since Darwin, eh? Not since everything went by the
board, everything we used to believe in, eh? Divine power and all that.
And so you think maybe that’s why we’re going out to the stars, eh,
Martin? Looking for our lost souls, is that it? Trying to get away from
our evil planet to a good one?”
“Perhaps, sir. Certainly we’re looking for something.”
Captain Hart cleared his throat and tightened back into sharpness.
“Well, right now we’re looking for the mayor of that city there. Run in,
tell them who we are, the first rocket expedition to Planet Forty-three
in Star System Three. Captain Hart sends his salutations and desires to
meet the mayor. On the double!”
“Yes, sir.” Martin walked slowly across the meadow.
“Hurry!” snapped the captain.
“Yes, sir!” Martin trotted away. Then he walked again, smiling to
himself.
The captain had smoked two cigars before Martin returned. Martin stopped
and looked up into the door of the rocket, swaying, seemingly unable to
focus his eyes or think.
“Well?” snapped Hart. “What happened? Are they coming to welcome us?”
“No.” Martin had to lean dizzily against the ship.
“Why not?”
“It’s not important,” said Martin. “Give me a cigarette, please,
Captain.” His fingers groped blindly at the rising pack, for he was
looking at the golden city and blinking. He lighted one and smoked
quietly for a long time.
“Say something!” cried the captain. “Aren’t they interested in our
rocket?”
Martin said, “What? Oh. The rocket?” He inspected his cigarette. “No,
they’re not interested. Seems we came at an inopportune time.”
“Inopportune time!”
Martin was patient. “Captain, listen. Something big happened yesterday
in that city. It’s so big, so important that we’re second-rate—second
fiddle. I’ve got to sit down.” He lost his balance and sat heavily,
gasping for air.
The captain chewed his cigar angrily. "What happened?” Martin lifted his
head, smoke from the burning cigarette in his fingers, blowing in the
wind. “Sir, yesterday, in that city, a remarkable man appeared—good,
intelligent, compassionate, and infinitely wise!”
The captain glared at his lieutenant. “What’s that to do with us?”
“It’s hard to explain. But he was a man for whom they’d waited a long
time—a million years maybe. And yesterday he walked into their city.
That’s why today, sir, our rocket landing means nothing.”
The captain sat down violently. “Who was it? Not Ashley? He didn’t
arrive in his rocket before us and steal my glory, did he?” He seized
Martin’s arm. His face was pale and dismayed.
“Not Ashley, sir.”
“Then it was Burton! I knew it. Burton stole in ahead of us and ruined
my landing! You can’t trust anyone any more.”
“Not Burton, either, sir,” said Martin quietly.
The captain was incredulous. “There were only three rockets. We were in
the lead. This man who got here ahead of us? What was his name!”
“He didn’t have a name. He doesn’t need one. It would be different on
every planet, sir.”
The captain stared at his lieutenant with hard, cynical eyes. “Well,
what did he do that was so wonderful that nobody even looks at our
ship?”
“For one thing,” said Martin steadily, “he healed the sick and comforted
the poor. He fought hypocrisy and dirty politics and sat among the
people, talking, through the day.”
“Is that so wonderful?”
“Yes,  Captain.”
“I don’t get this.” The captain confronted Martin, peered into his face
and eyes. “You been drinking, eh?” He was suspicious. He backed away. “I
don’t understand.”
Martin looked at the city. “Captain, if you don’t understand, there’s no
way of telling you.”
The captain followed his gaze. The city was quiet and beautiful and a
great peace lay over it. The captain stepped forward, taking his cigar
from his lips. He squinted first at Martin, then at the golden spires of
the buildings.
“You don’t mean—you  can’t  mean— That man you’re talking about couldn’t
be——”
Martin nodded. “That’s what I mean, sir.
The captain stood silently, not moving. He drew himself up.
“I don’t believe it,” he said at last.
At high noon Captain Hart walked briskly into the city, accompanied by
Lieutenant Martin and an assistant who was carrying some electrical
equipment. Every once in a while the captain laughed loudly, put his
hands on his hips and shook his head.
The mayor of the town confronted him. Martin set up a tripod, screwed a
box onto it, and switched on the batteries.
“Are you the mayor?” The captain jabbed a finger out.
“I am,” said the mayor.
The delicate apparatus stood between them, controlled and adjusted by
Martin and the assistant. Instantaneous translations from any language
were made by the box. The words sounded crisply on the mild air of the
city.
“About this occurrence yesterday,” said the captain. “It occurred?”
“It did.”
“You have witnesses?”
“We have.”
“May we talk to them?”
“Talk to any of us,” said the mayor. “We are all witnesses.”
In an aside to Martin the captain said, “Mass hallucination.” To the
mayor, “What did this man—this stranger—look like?”
“That would be hard to say,” said the mayor, smiling a little.
“Why would it?”
“Opinions might differ slightly.”
“I’d like your opinion, sir, anyway,” said the captain. “Record this,”
he snapped to Martin over his shoulder. The lieutenant pressed the
button of a hand recorder.
“Well,” said the mayor of the city, “he was a very gentle and kind man.
He was of a great and knowing intelligence.”
“Yes—yes, I know, I know.” The captain waved his fingers.
“Generalizations. I want something specific. What did he look like?”
“I don’t believe that is important,” replied the mayor.
“It’s very important,” said the captain sternly. “I want a description
of this fellow. If I can’t get it from you, I’ll get it from others.” To
Martin, “I’m sure it must have been Burton, pulling one of his practical
jokes.”
Martin would not look him in the face. Martin was coldly silent.
The captain snapped his fingers. “There was something or other—a
healing?”
“Many healings,” said the mayor.
“May I see one?”
“You may,” said the mayor. “My son.” He nodded at a small boy who
stepped forward. “He was afflicted with a withered arm. Now, look upon
it.”
At this the captain laughed tolerantly. “Yes, yes. This isn’t even
circumstantial evidence, you know. I didn’t see the boy’s withered arm.
I see only his arm whole and well. That’s no proof. What proof have you
that the boy’s arm was withered yesterday and today is well?”
“My word is my proof,” said the mayor simply.
“My dear man!” cried the captain. “You don’t expect me to go on hearsay,
do you? Oh no!”
“I’m sorry,” said the mayor, looking upon the captain with what appeared
to be curiosity and pity.
“Do you have any pictures of the boy before today?” asked the captain.
After a moment a large oil portrait was carried forth, showing the son
with a withered arm.
“My dear fellow!” The captain waved it away. “Anybody can paint a
picture. Paintings lie. I want a photograph of the boy.”
There was no photograph. Photography was not a known art in their
society.
“Well,” sighed the captain, face twitching, “let me talk to a few other
citizens. We’re getting nowhere.” He pointed at a woman. “You.” She
hesitated. “Yes, you; come here,” ordered the captain. “Tell me about
this  wonderful  man you saw yesterday.”
The woman looked steadily at the captain. “He walked among us and was
very fine and good.”
“What color were his eyes?”
“The color of the sun, the color of the sea, the color of a flower, the
color of the mountains, the color of the night.”
“That’ll do.” The captain threw up his hands. “See, Martin? Absolutely
nothing. Some charlatan wanders through whispering sweet nothings in
their ears and——”
“Please, stop it,” said Martin.
The captain stepped back. “What?”
“You heard what I said,” said Martin. “I like these people. I believe
what they say. You’re entitled to your opinion, but keep it to yourself,
sir.”
“You can’t talk to me this way,” shouted the captain.
“I’ve had enough of your highhandedness,” replied Martin. “Leave these
people alone. They’ve got something good and decent, and you come and
foul up the nest and sneer at it. Well, I’ve talked to them too. I’ve
gone through the city and seen their faces, and they’ve got something
you’ll never have—a little simple faith, and they’ll move mountains with
it. You, you’re boiled because someone stole your act, got here ahead
and made you unimportant!”
“I’ll give you five seconds to finish,” remarked the captain. “I
understand. You’ve been under a strain, Martin. Months of traveling in
space, nostalgia, loneliness. And now, with this thing happening, I
sympathize, Martin. I overlook your petty insubordination.”
“I don’t overlook your petty tyranny,” replied Martin. “I’m stepping
out. I’m staying here.”
“You can’t do that!”
“Can’t I? Try and stop me. This is what I came looking for. I didn’t
know it, but this is it. This is for me. Take your filth somewhere else
and foul up other nests with your doubt and your—scientific method!” He
looked swiftly about. “These people have had an experience, and you
can’t seem to get it through your head that it’s really happened and we
were lucky enough to almost arrive in time to be in on it.
“People on Earth have talked about this man for twenty centuries after
he walked through the old world. We’ve all wanted to see him and hear
him, and never had the chance. And now, today, we just missed seeing him
by a few hours.”
Captain Hart looked at Martin’s cheeks. “You’re crying like a baby. Stop
it.”
“I don’t care.”
“Well, I do. In front of these natives we’re to keep up a front. You’re
overwrought. As I said, I forgive you.”
“I don’t want your forgiveness."
“You idiot. Can’t you see this is one of Burton’s tricks, to fool these
people, to bilk them, to establish his oil and mineral concerns under a
religious guise! You fool, Martin. You absolute fool! You should know
Earthmen by now. They’ll do anything—blaspheme, lie, cheat, steal, kill,
to get their ends. Anything is fine if it works; the true pragmatist,
that’s Burton. You know him!”
The captain scoffed heavily. “Come off it, Martin, admit it; this is the
sort of scaly thing Burton might carry off, polish up these citizens and
pluck them when they’re ripe.”
“No,” said Martin, thinking of it.
The captain put his hand up. “That’s Burton. That’s him. That’s his
dirt, that’s his criminal way. I have to admire the old dragon. Flaming
in here in a blaze and a halo and a soft word and a loving touch, with a
medicated salve here and a healing ray there. That’s Burton all right!”
“No.” Martin’s voice was dazed. He covered his eyes. “No, I won’t
believe it.”
“You don’t want to believe.” Captain Hart kept at it. “Admit it now.
Admit it! It’s just the thing Burton would do. Stop daydreaming, Martin.
Wake up! It’s morning. This is a real world and we’re real, dirty
people—Burton the dirtiest of us all!”
Martin turned away.
“There, there, Martin,” said Hart, mechanically patting the man’s back.
“I understand. Quite a shock for you. I know. A rotten shame, and all
that. That Burton is a rascal. You go take it easy. Let me handle this.”
Martin walked off slowly toward the rocket.
Captain Hart watched him go. Then, taking a deep breath, he turned to
the woman he had been questioning. “Well. Tell me some more about this
man. As you were saying, madam?”
Later the officers of the rocket ship ate supper on card tables outside.
The captain correlated his data to a silent Martin who sat red-eyed and
brooding over his meal.
“Interviewed three dozen people, all of them full of the same milk and
hogwash,” said the captain. “It’s Burton’s work all right, I’m positive.
He’ll be spilling back in here tomorrow or next week to consolidate his
miracles and beat us out in our contracts. I think I’ll stick on and
spoil it for him.”
Martin glanced up sullenly. “I’ll kill him,” he said.
“Now, now, Martin! There, there, boy.”
“I’ll kill him—so help me, I will.”
‘We’ll put an anchor on his wagon. You have to admit he’s clever.
Unethical but clever.”
“He’s dirty.”
“You must promise not to do anything violent.” Captain Hart checked his
figures. “According to this, there were thirty miracles of healing
performed, a blind man restored to vision, a leper cured. Oh, Burton’s
efficient, give him that.”
A gong sounded. A moment later a man ran up. “Captain, sir. A report!
Burton’s ship is coming down. Also the Ashley ship, sir!”
“See!” Captain Hart beat the table. “Here come the jackals to the
harvest! They can’t wait to feed. Wait till I confront them. I’ll make
them cut me in on this feast—I will!”
Martin looked sick. He stared at the captain.
“Business, my dear boy, business,” said the captain.
Everybody looked up. Two rockets swung down out of the sky.
When the rockets landed they almost crashed.
“What’s wrong with those fools?” cried the captain, jumping up. The men
ran across the meadowlands to the steaming ships.
The captain arrived. The airlock door popped open on Burton’s ship.
A man fell out into their arms.
“What’s wrong?” cried Captain Hart.
The man lay on the ground. They bent over him and he was burned, badly
burned. His body was covered with wounds and scars and tissue that was
inflamed and smoking. He looked up out of puffed eyes and his thick
tongue moved in his split lips.
“What happened?” demanded the captain, kneeling down, shaking the man’s
arm.
“Sir, sir,” whispered the dying man. “Forty-eight hours ago, back in
Space Sector Seventy-nine DFS, off Planet One in this system, our ship,
and Ashley’s ship, ran into a cosmic storm, sir.” Liquid ran gray from
the man’s nostrils. Blood trickled from his mouth. “Wiped out. All crew.
Burton dead. Ashley died an hour ago. Only three survivals.”
“Listen to me!” shouted Hart bending over the bleeding man. “You didn’t
come to this planet before this very hour?”
Silence.
“Answer me!” cried Hart.
The dying man said, “No. Storm. Burton dead two days ago. This first
landing on any world in six months.”
“Are you sure?” shouted Hart, shaking violently, gripping the man in his
hands. “Are you sure?”
“Sure, sure,” mouthed the dying man.
“Burton died two days ago? You’re positive?”
“Yes, yes,” whispered the man. His head fell forward. The man was dead.
The captain knelt beside the silent body. The captain’s face twitched,
the muscles jerking involuntarily. The other members of the crew stood
back of him looking down. Martin waited. The captain asked to be helped
to his feet, finally, and this was done. They stood looking at the city.
“That means——”
“That means?” said Martin.
“We’re the only ones who’ve been here,” whispered Captain Hart. “And
that man——”
“What about that man, Captain?” asked Martin.
The captain’s face twitched senselessly. He looked very old indeed, and
gray. His eyes were glazed. He moved forward in the dry grass.
“Come along, Martin. Come along. Hold me up; for my sake, hold me. I’m
afraid I’ll fall. And hurry. We can’t waste time——”
They moved, stumbling, toward the city, in the long dry grass, in the
blowing wind.
Several hours later they were sitting in the mayor’s auditorium. A
thousand people had come and talked and gone. The captain had remained
seated, his face haggard, listening, listening. There was so much light
in the faces of those who came and testified and talked he could not
bear to see them. And all the while his hands traveled, on his knees,
together; on his belt, jerking and quivering.
When it was over, Captain Hart turned to the mayor and with strange eyes
said:
“But you must know where he went?”
“He didn’t say where he was going,” replied the mayor.
“To one of the other nearby worlds?” demanded the captain.
“I don’t know.”
“You must know.”
“Do you see him?” asked the mayor, indicating the crowd.
The captain looked. “No.”
‘Then he is probably gone,” said the mayor.
“Probably, probably!” cried the captain weakly. “I’ve made a horrible
mistake, and I want to see him now. Why, it just came to me, this is a
most unusual thing in history. To be in on something like this. Why, the
chances are one in billions we’d arrived at one certain planet among
millions of planets the day after  he  came! You must know where he’s
gone!”
“Each finds him in his own way,” replied the mayor gently.
“You’re hiding him.” The captain’s face grew slowly ugly.
Some of the old hardness returned in stages. He began to stand up.
“No,” said the mayor.
“You know where be is then?” The captain’s fingers twitched at the
leather holster on his right side.
“I couldn’t tell you where he is, exactly,” said the mayor.
“I advise you to start talking,” and the captain took out a small steel
gun.
“There’s no way,” said the mayor, “to tell you anything.”
“Liar!”
An expression of pity came into the mayor’s face as he looked at Hart.
“You’re very tired,” he said. “You’ve traveled a long way and you belong
to a tired people who’ve been without faith a long time, and you want to
believe so much now that you’re interfering with yourself. You’ll only
make it harder if you kill. You’ll never find him that way.
“Where’d he go? He told you; you know. Come on, tell me!” The captain
waved the gun.
The mayor shook his head.
“Tell me! Tell me!”
The gun cracked once, twice. The mayor fell, his arm wounded.
Martin leaped forward. “Captain!”
The gun flashed at Martin. “Don’t interfere.”
On the floor, holding his wounded arm, the mayor looked up. “Put down
your gun. You’re hurting yourself. You’ve never believed, and now that
you think you believe, you hurt people because of it.”
“I don’t need you,” said Hart, standing over him. “If I missed him by
one day here, I’ll go on to another world. And another and another. I’ll
miss him by half a day on the next planet, maybe, and a quarter of a day
on the third planet, and two hours on the next, and an hour on the next,
and half an hour on the next, and a minute on the next. But after that,
one day I’ll catch up with him! Do you hear that?” He was shouting now,
leaning wearily over the man on the floor. He staggered with exhaustion.
“Come along, Martin.” He let the gun hang in his hand.
“No,” said Martin. “I’m staying here.”
“You’re a fool. Stay if you like. But I’m going on, with the others, as
far as I can go.”
The mayor looked up at Martin. “I’ll be all right. Leave me. Others will
tend my wounds.”
“I’ll be back,” said Martin. “I’ll walk as far as the rocket.” They
walked with vicious speed through the city. One could see with what
effort the captain struggled to show all the old iron, to keep himself
going. When he reached the rocket he slapped the side of it with a
trembling hand. He holstered his gun. He looked at Martin.
“Well, Martin?”
Martin looked at him. “Well, Captain?”
The captain’s eyes were on the sky. “Sure you won’t—come with—with me,
eh?”
“No, sir.”
“It’ll be a great adventure, by God. I know I’ll find him.”
“You are set on it now, aren’t you, sir?” asked Martin.
The captain’s face quivered and his eyes closed. “Yes.”
“There’s one thing I’d like to know.”
“What?”
“Sir, when you find him—if  you find him,” asked Martin, “what will you
ask of him?”
“Why—” The captain faltered, opening his eyes. His hands clenched and
unclenched. He puzzled a moment and then broke into a strange smile.
“Why, I’ll ask him for a little—peace and quiet.” He touched the rocket.
“It’s been a long time, a long, long time since—since I relaxed.”
“Did you ever just try, Captain?”
“I don’t understand,” said Hart.
“Never mind. So long, Captain.”
“Good-by, Mr. Martin.”
The crew stood by the port. Out of their number only three were going on
with Hart. Seven others were remaining behind, they said, with Martin.
Captain Hart surveyed them and uttered his verdict: “Fools!” He, last of
all, climbed into the airlock, gave a brisk salute, laughed sharply. The
door slammed.
The rocket lifted into the sky on a pillar of fire.
Martin watched it go far away and vanish.
At the meadow’s edge the mayor, supported by several men, beckoned.
“He’s gone,” said Martin, walking up.
“Yes, poor man, he’s gone,” said the mayor. “And he’ll go on, planet
after planet, seeking and seeking, and always and always he will be an
hour late, or a half hour late, or ten minutes late, or a minute late.
And finally he will miss out by only a few seconds. And when he has
visited three hundred worlds and is seventy or eighty years old he will
miss out by only a fraction of a second, and then a smaller fraction of
a second. And he will go on and on, thinking to find that very thing
which he left behind here, on this planet, in this city—”
Martin looked steadily at the mayor.
The mayor put out his hand. “Was there ever any doubt of it?” He
beckoned to the others and turned. “Come along now. We mustn’t keep him
waiting."
They walked into the city.
      The Long Rain</p>

THE rain continued. It was a hard rain, a perpetual rain, a sweating and
steaming rain; it was a mizzle, a downpour, a fountain, a whipping at
the eyes, an undertow at the ankles; it was a rain to drown all rains
and the memory of rains. It came by the pound and the ton, it hacked at
the jungle and cut the trees like scissors and shaved the grass and
tunneled the soil and molted the bushes. It shrank men’s hands into the
hands of wrinkled apes; it rained a solid glassy rain, and it never
stopped.
“How much farther, Lieutenant?”
“I don’t know. A mile, ten miles, a thousand.”
“Aren’t you sure?”
“How can I be sure?”
“I don’t like this rain. If we only knew how far it is to the Sun Dome,
I’d feel better.”
“Another hour or two from here.”
“You really think so, Lieutenant?”
“Of course.”
“Or are you lying to keep us happy?”
“I’m lying to keep you happy. Shut up!”
The two men sat together in the rain. Behind them sat two other men who
were wet and tired and slumped like clay that was melting.
The lieutenant looked up. He had a face that once had been brown and now
the rain had washed it pale, and the rain had washed the color from his
eyes and they were white, as were his teeth, and as was his hair. He was
all white. Even his uniform was beginning to turn white, and perhaps a
little green with fungus.
The lieutenant felt the rain on his cheeks. “How many million years
since the rain stopped raining here on Venus?”
“Don’t be crazy,” said one of the two other men. “It never stops raining
on Venus. It just goes on and on. I’ve lived here for ten years and I
never saw a minute, or even a second, when it wasn’t pouring.”
“It’s like living under water,” said the lieutenant, and rose up,
shrugging his guns into place. “Well, we’d better get going. We’ll find
that Sun Dome yet.”
“Or we won’t find it,” said the cynic.
“It’s an hour or so.
“Now you’re lying to me, Lieutenant.”
“No, now I’m lying to myself. This is one of those times when you’ve got
to lie. I can’t take much more of this.”
They walked down the jungle trail, now and then looking at their
compasses. There was no direction anywhere, only what the compass said.
There was a gray sky and rain falling and jungle and a path, and, far
back behind them somewhere, a rocket in which they had ridden and
fallen. A rocket in which lay two of their friends, dead and dripping
rain.
They walked in single file, not speaking. They came to a river which lay
wide and flat and brown, flowing down to the great Single Sea. The
surface of it was stippled in a billion places by the rain.
“All right, Simmons.”
The lieutenant nodded and Simmons took a small packet from his back
which, with a pressure of hidden chemical, inflated into a large boat.
The lieutenant directed the cutting of wood and the quick making of
paddles and they set out into the river, paddling swiftly across the
smooth surface in the rain.
The lieutenant felt the cold rain on his cheeks and on his neck and on
his moving arms. The cold was beginning to seep into his lungs. He felt
the rain on his ears, on his eyes, on his legs.
“I didn’t sleep last night,” he said.
“Who could? Who has? When? How many nights  have  we slept? Thirty
nights, thirty days! Who can sleep with rain slamming their head,
banging away. . . . I’d give anything for a hat. Anything at all, just
so it wouldn’t hit my head any more. I get headaches. My head is sore;
it hurts all the time.”
“I’m sorry I came to China,” said one of the others.
“First time I ever heard Venus called China.”
“Sure, China. Chinese water cure. Remember the old torture? Rope you
against a wall. Drop one drop of water on your head every half-hour. You
go crazy waiting for the next one. Well, that’s Venus, but on a big
scale. We’re not made for water. You can’t sleep, you can’t breathe
right, and you’re crazy from just being soggy. If we’d been ready for a
crash, we’d have brought waterproofed uniforms and hats. It’s this
beating rain on your head gets you, most of all. It’s so heavy. It’s
like BB shot. I don’t know how long I can take it.”
“Boy, me for the Sun Dome! The man who thought  them  up, thought of
something.”
They crossed the river, and in crossing they thought of the Sun Dome,
somewhere ahead of them, shining in the jungle rain. A yellow house,
round and bright as the sun. A house fifteen feet high by one hundred
feet in diameter, in which was warmth and quiet and hot food and freedom
from rain. And in the center of the Sun Dome, of course, was a sun. A
small floating free globe of yellow fire, drifting in space at the top
of the building where you could look at it from where you sat, smoking
or reading a book or drinking your hot chocolate crowned with
marshmallow dollops. There it would be, the yellow sun, just the size of
the Earth sun, and it was warm and continuous, and the rain world of
Venus would be forgotten as long as they stayed in that house and idled
their time.
The lieutenant turned and looked back at the three men using their oars
and gritting their teeth. They were as white as mushrooms, as white as
lie was. Venus bleached everything away in a few months. Even the jungle
was an immense cartoon nightmare, for how could the jungle be green with
no sun, with always rain falling and always dusk? The white, white
jungle with the pale cheese-colored leaves, and the earth carved of wet
Camembert, and the tree boles like immense toadstools—everything black
and white. And how often could you see the soil itself? Wasn’t it mostly
a creek, a stream, a puddle, a pool, a lake, a river, and then, at last
the sea?
“Here we are!”
They leaped out on the farthest shore, splashing and sending up showers.
The boat was deflated and stored in a cigarette packet. Then, standing
on the rainy shore, they tried to light up a few smokes for themselves,
and it was five minutes or so before, shuddering, they worked the
inverted lighter and, cupping their hands, managed a few drags upon
cigarettes that all too quickly were limp and beaten away from their
lips by a sudden slap of rain.
They walked on.
“Wait just a moment,” said the lieutenant. “I thought I saw something
ahead.”
“The Sun Dome?”
“I’m not sure. The rain closed in again.
Simmons began to run. “The Sun Dome!”
“Come back, Simmons!”
“The Sun Dome!”
Simmons vanished in the rain. The others ran after him.
They found him in a little clearing, and they stopped and looked at him
and what he had discovered.
The rocket ship.
It was lying where they had left it. Somehow they had circled back and
were where they had started. In the ruin of the ship green fungus was
growing up out of the mouths of the two dead men. As they watched, the
fungus took flower, the petals broke away in the rain, and the fungus
died.
“How did we do it?”
“An electrical storm must be nearby. Threw our compasses off. That
explains it.”
“You’re right.”
“What’ll we do now?”
“Start out again.”
“Good lord, we’re not any closer to anywhere!”
“Let’s try to keep calm about it, Simmons.”
“Calm, calm! This rain’s driving me wild!”
“We’ve enough food for another two days if we’re careful.”
The rain danced on their skin, on their wet uniforms; the rain streamed
from their noses and ears, from their fingers and knees. They looked
like stone fountains frozen in the jungle, issuing forth water from
every pore.
And, as they stood, from a distance they heard a roar.
And the monster came out of the rain.
The monster was supported upon a thousand electric blue legs. It walked
swiftly and terribly. It struck down a leg with a driving blow.
Everywhere a leg struck a tree fell and burned. Great whiffs of ozone
filled the rainy air, and smoke blew away and was broken up by the rain.
The monster was a half mile wide and a mile high and it felt of the
ground like a great blind thing. Sometimes, for a moment, it had no legs
at all. And then, in an instant, a thousand whips would fall out of its
belly, white-blue whips, to sting the jungle.
“There’s the electrical storm,” said one of the men. “There’s the thing
ruined our compasses. And it’s coming this way.”
“Lie down, everyone,” said the lieutenant.
“Run!” cried Simmons.
“Don’t be a fool. Lie down. It hits the highest points. We may get
through unhurt. Lie down about fifty feet from the rocket. It may very
well spend its force there and leave us be. Get down!”
The men flopped.
“Is it coming?” they asked each other, after a moment.
“Coming.”
“Is it nearer?”
“Two hundred yards off.”
“Nearer?”
“Here she is!”
The monster came and stood over them. It dropped down ten blue bolts of
lightning which struck the rocket. The rocket flashed like a beaten gong
and gave off a metal ringing. The monster let down fifteen more bolts
which danced about in a ridiculous pantomime, feeling of the jungle and
the watery soil.
“No, no!” One of the men jumped up.
“Get down, yon fool!” said the lieutenant.
“No!”
The lightning struck the rocket another dozen times. The lieutenant
turned his head on his arm and saw the blue blazing flashes. He saw
trees split and crumple into ruin. He saw the monstrous dark cloud turn
like a black disk overhead and hurl down a hundred other poles of
electricity.
The man who had leaped up was now running, like someone in a great hall
of pillars. He ran and dodged between the pillars and then at last a
dozen of the pillars slammed down and there was the sound a fly makes
when landing upon the grill wires of an exterminator. The lieutenant
remembered this from his childhood on a farm. And there was a smell of a
man burned to a cinder.
The lieutenant lowered his head. “Don’t look up,” he told the others. He
was afraid that he too might run at any moment.
The storm above them flashed down another series of bolts and then moved
on away. Once again there was only the rain, which rapidly cleared the
air of the charred smell, and in a moment the three remaining men were
sitting and waiting for the beat of their hearts to subside into quiet
once more.
They walked over to the body, thinking that perhaps they could still
save the man’s life. They couldn’t believe that there wasn’t some way to
help the man. It was the natural act of men who have not accepted death
until they have touched it and turned it over and made plans to bury it
or leave it there for the jungle to bury in an hour of quick growth.
The body was twisted steel, wrapped in burned leather. It looked like a
wax dummy that had been thrown into an incinerator and pulled out after
the wax had sunk to the charcoal skeleton. Only the teeth were white,
and they shone like a strange white bracelet dropped half through a
clenched black fist.
“He shouldn’t have jumped up.” They said it almost at the same time.
Even as they stood over the body it began to vanish, for the vegetation
was edging in upon it, little vines and ivy and creepers, and even
flowers for the dead.
At a distance the storm walked off on blue bolts of lightning and was
gone.
They crossed a river and a creek and a stream and a dozen other rivers
and creeks and streams. Before their eyes rivers appeared, rushing, new
rivers, while old rivers changed their courses—rivers the color of
mercury, rivers the color of silver and milk.
They came to the sea.
The Single Sea. There was only one continent on Venus. This land was
three thousand miles long by a thousand miles wide, and about this
island was the Single Sea, which covered the entire raining planet. The
Single Sea, which lay upon the pallid shore with little motion . . .
“This way.” The lieutenant nodded south. “I’m sure there are two Sun
Domes down that way.
“While they were at it, why didn’t they build a hundred more?”
“There’re a hundred and twenty of them now, aren’t there?”
“One hundred and twenty-six, as of last month. They tried to push a bill
through Congress back on Earth a year ago to provide for a couple dozen
more, but oh no, you know how that is. They’d rather a few men went
crazy with the rain.”
They started south.
The lieutenant and Simmons and the third man, Pickard, walked in the
rain, in the rain that fell heavily and lightly, heavily and lightly; in
the rain that poured and hammered and did not stop falling upon the land
and the sea and the walking people.
Simmons saw it first. “There it is!”
“There’s what?”
“The Sun Dome!”
The lieutenant blinked the water from his eyes and raised his hands to
ward off the stinging blows of the rain.
At a distance there was a yellow glow on the edge of the jungle, by the
sea. It was, indeed, the Sun Dome.
The men smiled at each other.
“Looks like you were right, Lieutenant.”
“Luck.”
“Brother, that puts muscle in me, just seeing it. Come on! Last one
there’s a son-of-a-bitch!” Simmons began to trot. The others
automatically fell in with this, gasping, tired, but keeping pace.
“A big pot of coffee for me,” panted Simmons, smiling. “And a pan of
cinnamon buns, by God! And just lie there and let the old sun hit you.
The guy that invented the Sun Domes, he should have got a medal!”
They ran faster. The yellow glow grew brighter.
“Guess a lot of men went crazy before they figured out the cure. Think
it’d be obvious! Right off.”  Simmons panted the words in cadence to his
running. “Rain, rain! Years ago. Found a friend. Of mine. Out in the
jungle. Wandering around. In the rain. Saying over and over, ‘Don’t know
enough, to come in, outta the rain. Don’t know enough, to come in, outta
the rain. Don’t know enough—’ On and on. Like that. Poor crazy bastard.”
“Save your breath!”
They ran.
They all laughed. They reached the door of the Sun Dome, laughing.
Simmons yanked the door wide. “Hey!” he yelled. “Bring on the coffee and
buns!”
There was no reply.
They stepped through the door.
The Sun Dome was empty and dark. There was no synthetic yellow sun
floating in a high gaseous whisper at the center of the blue ceiling.
There was no food waiting. It was cold as a vault. And through a
thousand holes which had been newly punctured in the ceiling water
streamed, the rain fell down, soaking into the thick rugs and the heavy
modern furniture and splashing on the glass tables. The jungle was
growing up like a moss in the room, on top of the bookcases and the
divans. The rain slashed through the holes and fell upon the three men’s
faces.
Pickard began to laugh quietly.
“Shut up, Pickard!”
“Ye gods, look what’s here for us—no food, no sun, nothing. The
Venusians—they did it! Of course!”
Simmons nodded, with the rain funneling down on his face. The water ran
in his silvered hair and on his white eyebrows. “Every once in a while
the Venusians come up out of the sea and attack a Sun Dome. They know if
they ruin the Sun Domes they can ruin us.”
“But aren’t the Sun Domes protected with guns?”
“Sure.” Simmons stepped aside to a place that was relatively dry. “But
it’s been five years since the Venusians tried anything. Defense
relaxes. They caught this Dome unaware.”
“Where are the bodies?”
“The Venusians took them all down into the sea. I hear they have a
delightful way of drowning you. It takes about eight hours to drown the
way they work it. Really delightful.”
“I bet there isn’t any food here at all.” Pickard laughed.
The lieutenant frowned at him, nodded at him so Simmons could see.
Simmons shook his head and went back to a room at one side of the oval
chamber. The kitchen was strewn with soggy loaves of bread, and meat
that had grown a faint green fur. Rain came through a hundred holes in
the kitchen roof.
“Brilliant.” The lieutenant glanced up at the holes. “I don’t suppose we
can plug up all those holes and get snug here.”
“Without food, sir?” Simmons snorted. “I notice the sun machine’s torn
apart. Our best bet is to make our way to the next Sun Dome. How far is
that from here?”
“Not far. As I recall, they built two rather close together here.
Perhaps if we waited here, a rescue mission from the other might——”
“It’s probably been here and gone already, some days ago. They’ll send a
crew to repair this place in about six months, when they get the money
from Congress. I don’t think we’d better wait.”
“All right then, we’ll eat what’s left of our rations and get on to the
next Dome.”
Pickard said, “If only the rain wouldn’t hit my head, just for a few
minutes. If I could only remember what it’s like not to be bothered.” He
put his hands on his skull and held it tight. “I remember when I was in
school a bully used to sit in back of me and pinch me and pinch me and
pinch me every five minutes, all day long. He did that for weeks and
months. My arms were sore and black and blue all the time. And I thought
I’d go crazy from being pinched. One day I must have gone a little mad
from being hurt and hurt, and I turned around and took a metal trisquare
I used in mechanical drawing and I almost killed that bastard. I almost
cut his lousy head off. I almost took his eye out before they dragged me
out of the room, and I kept yelling, ‘Why don’t he leave me alone? why
don’t he leave me alone?’ Brother!” His hands clenched the bone of his
head, shaking, tightening, his eyes shut. “But what do I do  now?  Who
do I hit, who do I tell to lay off, stop bothering me, this damn rain,
like the pinching, always on you, that’s all you hear, that’s all you
feel!”
“We’ll be at the other Sun Dome by four this afternoon.”
“Sun Dome? Look at this one! What if all the Sun Domes on Venus are
gone? What then? What if there are holes in all the ceilings, and the
rain coming in!”
“We’ll have to chance it.”
“I’m tired of chancing it. All I want is a roof and some quiet. I want
to be alone.”
“That’s only eight hours off, if you hold on.”
“Don’t worry, I’ll hold on all right.” And Pickard laughed, not looking
at them.
“Let’s eat,” said Simmons, watching him.
They set off down the coast, southward again. After four hours they had
to cut inland to go around a river that was a mile wide and so swift it
was not navigable by boat. They had to walk inland six miles to a place
where the river boiled out of the earth, suddenly, like a mortal wound.
In the rain, they walked on solid ground and returned to the sea.
“I’ve got to sleep,” said Pickard at last. He slumped. “Haven’t slept in
four weeks. Tried, but couldn’t. Sleep here.”
The sky was getting darker. The night of Venus was setting in and it was
so completely black that it was dangerous to move. Simmons and the
lieutenant fell to their knees also, and the lieutenant said, “All
right, we’ll see what we can do. We’ve tried it before, but I don’t
know. Sleep doesn’t seem one of the things you can get in this weather.”
They lay out full, propping their heads up so the water wouldn’t come to
their mouths, and they closed their eyes.
The lieutenant twitched.
He did not sleep.
There were things that crawled on his skin. Things grew upon him in
layers. Drops fell and touched other drops and they became streams that
trickled over his body, and while these moved down his flesh, the small
growths of the forest took root in his clothing. He felt the ivy cling
and make a second garment over him; he felt the small flowers bud and
open and petal away, and still the rain pattered on his body and on his
head. In the luminous night—for the vegetation glowed in the darkness—he
could see the other two men outlined, like logs that had fallen and
taken upon themselves velvet coverings of grass and flowers. The rain
hit his face. He covered his face with his hands. The rain hit his neck.
He turned over on his stomach in the mud, on the rubbery plants, and the
rain hit his back and hit his legs.
Suddenly he leaped up and began to brush the water from himself. A
thousand hands were touching him and he no longer wanted to be touched.
He no longer could stand being touched. He floundered and struck
something else and knew that it was Simmons, standing up in the rain,
sneezing moisture, coughing and choking. And then Pickard was up,
shouting, running about.
“Wait a minute, Pickard!”
“Stop it, stop it!” Pickard screamed. He fired off his gun six times at
the night sky. In the flashes of powdery illumination they could see
armies of raindrops, suspended as in a vast motionless amber, for an
instant, hesitating as if shocked by the explosion, fifteen billion
droplets, fifteen billion tears, fifteen billion ornaments, jewels
standing out against a white velvet viewing board. And then, with the
light gone, the drops which had waited to have their pictures taken,
which had suspended their downward rush, fell upon them, stinging, in an
insect cloud of coldness and pain.
“Stop it! Stop it!”
“Pickard!”
But Pickard was only standing now, alone. When the lieutenant switched
on a small hand lamp and played it over Pickard’s wet face, the eyes of
the man were dilated, and his mouth was open, his face turned up, so the
water hit and splashed on his tongue, and hit and drowned the wide eyes,
and bubbled in a whispering froth on the nostrils.
“Pickard!”
The man would not reply. He simply stood there for a long while with the
bubbles of rain breaking out in his whitened hair and manacles of rain
jewels dripping from his wrists and his neck.
“Pickard! We’re leaving. We’re going on. Follow us.”
The rain dripped from Pickard’s ears.
“Do you hear me, Pickard!”
It was like shouting down a well.
“Pickard!”
“Leave him alone,” said Simmons.
“We can’t go on without him.”
“What’ll we do, carry him?” Simmons spat. “He’s no good to us or
himself. You know what he’ll do? He’ll just stand here and drown.”
“What?”
“You ought to know that by now. Don’t you know the story? He’ll just
stand here with his head up and let the rain come in his nostrils and
his mouth. He’ll breathe the water.”
“That’s how they found General Mendt that time. Sitting on a rock with
his head back, breathing the rain. His lungs were full of water.”
The lieutenant turned the light back to the unblinking face. Pickard’s
nostrils gave off a tiny whispering wet sound.
“Pickard!” The lieutenant slapped the face.
“He can’t even feel you,” said Simmons. “A few days in this rain and you
don’t have any face or any legs or hands.”
The lieutenant looked at his own hand in horror. He could no longer feel
it.
“But we can’t leave Pickard here.”
“I’ll show you what we can do.” Simmons fired his gun.
Pickard fell into the raining earth.
Simmons said, “Don’t move, Lieutenant. I’ve got my gun ready for you
too. Think it over; he would only have stood or sat there and drowned.
It’s quicker this way.”
The lieutenant blinked at the body. “But you killed him.”
“Yes, because he’d have killed us by being a burden. You saw his face.
Insane.”
After a moment the lieutenant nodded. “All right.”
They walked off into the rain.
It was dark and their hand lamps threw a beam that pierced the rain for
only a few feet. After a half hour they had to stop and sit through the
rest of the night, aching with hunger, waiting for the dawn to come;
when it did come it was gray and continually raining as before, and they
began to walk again.
“We’ve miscalculated,” said Simmons.
“No. Another hour.”
“Speak louder. I can’t hear you.” Simmons stopped and smiled. “By
Christ,” he said, and touched his ears. “My ears. They’ve gone out on
me. All the rain pouring finally numbed me right down to the bone.”
“Can’t you hear anything?” said the lieutenant.
“What?” Simmons’s eyes were puzzled.
“Nothing. Come on.”
“I think I’ll wait here. You go on ahead.”
“You can’t do that.”
“I can’t hear you. You go on. I’m tired. I don’t think the Sun Dome is
down this way. And, if it is, it’s probably got holes in the roof, like
the last one. I think I’ll just sit here.”
“Get up from there!”
“So long, Lieutenant.”
“You can’t give up now.”
“I’ve got a gun here that says I’m staying. I just don’t give a damn any
more. I’m not crazy yet, but I’m the next thing to it. I don’t want to
go out that way. As soon as you get out of sight I’m going to use this
gun on myself.”
“Simmons!”
“You said my name. I can read that much off your lips.”
“Simmons.”
“Look, it’s a matter of time. Either I die now or in a few hours.
Wait’ll you get to that next Dome, if you ever get there, and find rain
coming in through the roof. Won’t that be nice?”
The lieutenant waited and then splashed off in the rain. He turned and
called back once, but Simmons was only sitting there with the gun in his
hands, waiting for him to get out of sight. He shook his head and waved
the lieutenant on.
The lieutenant didn’t even hear the sound of the gun.
He began to eat the flowers as he walked. They stayed down for a time,
and weren’t poisonous; neither were they particularly sustaining, and he
vomited them up, sickly, a minute or so later.
Once he took some leaves and tried to make himself a hat, but he had
tried that before; the rain melted the leaves from his head. Once
picked, the vegetation rotted quickly and fell away into gray masses in
his fingers.
“Another five minutes,” he told himself. “Another five minutes and then
I’ll walk into the sea and keep walking. We weren’t made for this; no
Earthman was or ever will be able to take it. Your nerves, your nerves.
He floundered his way through a sea of slush and foliage and came to a
small hill.
At a distance there was a faint yellow smudge in the cold veils of
water.
The next Sun Dome.
Through the trees, a long round yellow building, far away. For a moment
he only stood, swaying, looking at it.
He began to run and then he slowed down, for he was afraid. He didn’t
call out. What if it’s the same one? What if it’s the dead Sun Dome,
with no sun in it? he thought.
He slipped and fell. Lie here, he thought; it’s the wrong one. Lie here.
It’s no use. Drink all you want.
But he managed to climb to his feet again and crossed several creeks,
and the yellow light grew very bright, and he began to run again, his
feet crashing into mirrors and glass, his arms flailing at diamonds and
precious stones.
He stood before the yellow door. The printed letters over it said THE
SUN DOME. He put his numb hand up to feel it. Then he twisted the
doorknob and stumbled in.
He stood for a moment looking about. Behind him the rain whirled at the
door. Ahead of him, upon a low table, stood a silver pot of hot
chocolate, steaming, and a cup, full, with a marshmallow in it. And
beside that, on another tray, stood thick sandwiches of rich chicken
meat and fresh-cut tomatoes and green onions. And on a rod just before
his eyes was a great thick green Turkish towel, and a bin in which to
throw wet clothes, and, to his right, a small cubicle in which heat rays
might dry you instantly. And upon a chair, a fresh change of uniform,
waiting for anyone—himself, or any lost one—to make use of it. And
farther over, coffee in steaming copper urns, and a phonograph from
which music was playing quietly, and books bound in red and brown
leather. And near the books a cot, a soft deep cot upon which one might
lie, exposed and bare, to drink in the rays of the one great bright
thing which dominated the long room.
He put his hands to his eyes. He saw other men moving toward him, but
said nothing to them. He waited, and opened his eyes, and looked. The
water from his uniform pooled at his feet and he felt it drying from his
hair and his face and his chest and his arms and his legs.
He was looking at the sun.
It hung in the center of the room, large and yellow and warm. It made
not a sound, and there was no sound in the room. The door was shut and
the rain only a memory to his tingling body. The sun hung high in the
blue sky of the room, warm, hot, yellow, and very fine.
He walked forward, tearing off his clothes as he went.
      The Rocket Man</p>

THE electrical fireflies were hovering above Mother’s dark hair to light
her path. She stood in her bedroom door looking out at me as I passed in
the silent hall. “You  will  help me keep him here this time, won’t
you?” she asked.
“I guess so,” I said.
“Please.” The fireflies cast moving bits of light on her white face.
“This time he mustn’t go away again.”
“All right,” I said, after standing there a moment. “But it won’t do any
good; it’s no use.”
She went away, and the fireflies, on their electric circuits, fluttered
after her like an errant constellation, showing her how to walk in
darkness. I heard her say, faintly, “We’ve got to try, anyway.”
Other fireflies followed me to my room. When the weight of my body cut a
circuit in the bed, the fireflies winked out. It was midnight, and my
mother and I waited, our rooms separated by darkness, in bed. The bed
began to rock me and sing to me. I touched a switch; the singing and
rocking stopped. I didn’t want to sleep. I didn’t want to sleep at all.
This night was no different from a thousand others in our time. We would
wake nights and feel the cool air turn hot, feel the fire in the wind,
or see the walls burned a bright color for an instant, and then we knew
his rocket was over our house—his rocket, and the oak trees swaying from
the concussion. And I would lie there, eyes wide, panting, and mother in
her room. Her voice would come to me over the interroom radio:
“Did you feel it?”
And I would answer, “That was him, all right.”
That was my father’s ship passing over our town, a small town where
space rockets never came, and we would lie awake for the next two hours,
thinking, “Now Dad’s landed in Springfield, now he’s on the tarmac, now
he’s signing the papers, now he’s in the helicopter, now he’s over the
river, now the hills, now he’s settling the helicopter in at the little
airport at Green Village here. . . . And the night would be half over
when, in our separate cool beds, Mother and I would be listening,
listening. “Now he’s walking down Bell Street. He always walks . . .
never takes a cab . . . now across the park, now turning the corner of
Oakhurst and  now  . . .
I lifted my head from my pillow. Far down the street, coming closer and
closer, smartly, quickly, briskly—footsteps. Now turning in at our
house, up the porch steps. And we were both smiling in the cool
darkness, Mom and I, when we heard the front door open in recognition,
speak a quiet word of welcome, and shut downstairs. . . .
Three hours later I turned the brass knob to their room quietly, holding
my breath, balancing in a darkness as big as the space between the
planets, my hand out to reach the small black case at the foot of my
parents’ sleeping bed. Taking it, I ran silently to my room, thinking,
He won’t tell me, he doesn’t want me to  know.
And from the opened case spilled his black uniform, like a black nebula,
stars glittering here or there, distantly, in the material. I kneaded
the dark stuff in my warm hands; I smelled the planet Mars, an iron
smell, and the planet Venus, a green ivy smell, and the planet Mercury,
a scent of sulphur and fire; and I could smell the milky moon and the
hardness of stars. I pushed the uniform into a centrifuge machine I’d
built in my ninth-grade shop that year, set it whirling. Soon a fine
powder precipitated into a retort. This I slid under a microscope. And
while my parents slept unaware, and while our house was asleep, all the
automatic bakers and servers and robot cleaners in an electric slumber,
I stared down upon brilliant motes of meteor dust, comet tail, and loam
from far Jupiter glistening like worlds themselves which drew me down
the tube a billion miles into space, at terrific accelerations.
At dawn, exhausted with my journey and fearful of discovery, I returned
the boxed uniform to their sleeping room.
Then I slept, only to waken at the sound of the horn of the dry-cleaning
car which stopped in the yard below. They took the black uniform box
with them. It’s good I didn’t wait, I thought. For the uniform would be
back in an hour, clean of all its destiny and travel.
I slept again, with the little vial of magical dust in my pajama pocket,
over my beating heart.
When I came downstairs, there was Dad at the breakfast table, biting
into his toast. “Sleep good, Doug?” he said, as if he had been here all
the time, and hadn’t been gone for three months.
“All right,” I said.
“Toast?”
He pressed a button and the breakfast table made me four pieces, golden
brown.
I remember my father that afternoon, digging and digging in the garden,
like an animal after something, it seemed. There he was with his long
dark arms moving swiftly, planting, tamping, fixing, cutting, pruning,
his dark face always down to the soil, his eyes always down to what he
was doing, never up to the sky, never looking at me, or Mother, even,
unless we knelt with him to feel the earth soak up through the overalls
at our knees, to put our hands into the black dirt and not look at the
bright, crazy sky. Then he would glance to either side, to Mother or me,
and give us a gentle wink, and go on, bent down, face down, the sky
staring at his back.
That night we sat on the mechanical porch swing which swung us and blew
a wind upon us and sang to us. It was summer and moonlight and we had
lemonade to drink, and we held the cold glasses in our hands, and Dad
read the stereo-newspapers inserted into the special hat you put on your
head and which turned the microscopic page in front of the magnifying
lens if you blinked three times in succession. Dad smoked cigarettes and
told me about how it was when he was a boy in the year 1997. After a
while he said, as he had always said, “Why aren’t you out playing
kick-the-can, Doug?”
I didn’t say anything, but Mom said, “He does, on nights when you’re not
here.”
Dad looked at me and then, for the first time that day, at the sky.
Mother always watched him when he glanced at the stars. The first day
and night when he got home he wouldn’t look at the sky much. I thought
about him gardening and gardening so furiously, his face almost driven
into the earth. But the second night he looked at the stars a little
more. Mother wasn’t afraid of the sky in the day so much, but it was the
night stars that she wanted to turn off, and sometimes I could almost
see her reaching for a switch in her mind, but never finding it. And by
the third night maybe Dad’d be out here on the porch until ‘way after we
were all ready for bed, and then I’d hear Mom call him in, almost like
she called me from the street at times. And then I would hear Dad
fitting the electric-eye door lock in place, with a sigh. And the next
morning at breakfast I’d glance down and see his little black case near
his feet as he buttered his toast and Mother slept late.
“Well, be seeing you, Doug,” he’d say, and we’d shake hands.
“In about three months?”
“Right.”
And he’d walk away down the street, not taking a helicopter or beetle or
bus, just walking with his uniform hidden in his small underarm case; he
didn’t want anyone to think he was vain about being a Rocket Man.
Mother would come out to eat breakfast, one piece of dry toast, about an
hour later.
But now it was tonight, the first night, the good night, and he wasn’t
looking at the stars much at all.
“Let’s go to the television carnival,” I said.
“Fine,” said Dad.
Mother smiled at me.
And we rushed off to town in a helicopter and took Dad through a
thousand exhibits, to keep his face and head down with us and not
looking anywhere else. And as we laughed at the funny things and looked
serious at the serious ones, I thought, My father goes to Saturn and
Neptune and Pluto, but he never brings me presents. Other boys whose
fathers go into space bring back bits of ore from Callisto and hunks of
black meteor or blue sand. But I have to get my own collection, trading
from other boys, the Martian rocks and Mercurian sands which filled my
room, but about which Dad would never comment.
On occasion, I remembered, he brought something for Mother. He planted
some Martian sunflowers once in our yard, but after he was gone a month
and the sunflowers grew large, Mom ran out one day and cut them all
down.
Without thinking, as we paused at one of the three-dimensional exhibits,
I asked Dad the question I always asked:
“What’s it like, out in space?”
Mother shot me a frightened glance. It was too late.
Dad stood there for a full half minute trying to find an answer, then he
shrugged.
“It’s the best thing in a lifetime of best things.” Then he caught
himself. “Oh, it’s really nothing at all. Routine. You wouldn’t like
it.” He looked at me, apprehensively.
“But you always go back.”
“Habit.”
“Where’re you going next?”
“I haven’t decided yet. I’ll think it over.”
He always thought it over. In those days rocket pilots were rare and he
could pick and choose, work when he liked. On the third night of his
homecoming you could see him picking and choosing among the stars.
“Come on,” said Mother, “let’s go home.”
It was still early when we got home. I wanted Dad to put on his uniform.
I shouldn’t have asked—it always made Mother unhappy—but I could not
help myself. I kept at him, though he had always refused. I had never
seen him in it, and at last he said, “Oh, all right.”
We waited in the parlor while he went upstairs in the air flue. Mother
looked at me dully, as if she couldn’t believe that her own son could do
this to her. I glanced away. “I’m sorry,” I said.
“You’re not helping at all,” she said. “At all.”
There was a whisper in the air flue a moment later.
“Here I am,” said Dad quietly.
We looked at him in his uniform.
It was glossy black with silver buttons and silver rims to the heels of
the black boots, and it looked as if someone had cut the arms and legs
and body from a dark nebula, with little faint stars glowing through it.
It fit as close as a glove fits to a slender long hand, and it smelled
like cool air and metal and space. It smelled of fire and time.
Father stood, smiling awkwardly, in the center of the room.
“Turn around,” said Mother.
Her eyes were remote, looking at him.
When he was gone, she never talked of him. She never said anything about
anything but the weather or the condition of my neck and the need of a
washcloth for it, or the fact that she didn’t sleep nights. Once she
said the light was too strong at night.
“But there’s no moon this week,” I said.
“There’s starlight,” she said.
I went to the store and bought her some darker, greener shades. As I lay
in bed at night, I could hear her pull them down tight to the bottom of
the windows. It made a long rustling noise.
Once I tried to mow the lawn.
“No.” Mom stood in the door. “Put the mower away.”
So the grass went three months at a time without cutting. Dad cut it
when he came home.
She wouldn’t let me do anything else either, like repairing the
electrical breakfast maker or the mechanical book reader. She saved
everything up, as if for Christmas. And then I would see Dad hammering
or tinkering, and always smiling at his work, and Mother smiling over
him, happy.
No, she never talked of him when he was gone. And as for Dad, he never
did anything to make a contact across the millions of miles. He said
once, “If I called you, I’d want to be with you. I wouldn’t be happy.”
Once Dad said to me, “Your mother treats me, sometimes, as if I weren’t
here—as if I were invisible.”
I had seen her do it. She would look just beyond him, over his shoulder,
at his chin or hands, but never into his eyes. If she did look at his
eyes, her eyes were covered with a film, like an animal going to sleep.
She said yes at the right times, and smiled, but always a half second
later than expected.
“I’m not there for her,” said Dad.
But other days she would be there and he would be there for her, and
they would hold hands and walk around the block, or take rides, with
Mom’s hair flying like a girl’s behind her, and she would cut off all
the mechanical devices in the kitchen and bake him incredible cakes and
pies and cookies, looking deep into his face, her smile a real smile.
But at the end of such days when he was there to her, she would always
cry. And Dad would stand helpless, gazing about the room as if to find
the answer, but never finding it.
Dad turned slowly, in his uniform, for us to see.
“Turn around again,” said Mom.
The next morning Dad came rushing into the house with handfuls of
tickets. Pink rocket tickets for California, blue tickets for Mexico.
“Come on!” he said. “We’ll buy disposable clothes and burn them when
they’re soiled. Look, we take the noon rocket to L.A., the two-o’clock
helicopter to Santa Barbara, the nine-o’clock plane to Ensenada, sleep
overnight!”
And we went to California and up and down the Pacific Coast for a day
and a half, settling at last on the sands of Malibu to cook wieners at
night. Dad was always listening or singing or watching things on all
sides of him, holding onto things as if the world were a centrifuge
going so swiftly that he might be flung off away from us at any instant.
The last afternoon at Malibu Mom was up in the hotel room. Dad lay on
the sand beside me for a long time in the hot sun. “Ah,” he sighed,
“this is it.” His eyes were gently closed; he lay on his back, drinking
the sun. “You miss this,” he said.
He meant “on the rocket,” of course. But he never said “the rocket” or
mentioned the rocket and all the things you couldn’t have on the rocket.
You couldn’t have a salt wind on the rocket or a blue sky or a yellow
sun or Mom’s cooking. You couldn’t talk to your fourteen-year-old boy on
a rocket.
“Let’s hear it,” he said at last.
And I knew that now we would talk, as we had always talked, for three
hours straight. All afternoon we would murmur back and forth in the lazy
sun about my school grades, how high I could jump, how fast I could
swim.
Dad nodded each time I spoke and smiled and slapped my chest lightly in
approval. We talked. We did not talk of rockets or space, but we talked
of Mexico, where we had driven once in an ancient car, and of the
butterflies we had caught in the rain forests of green warm Mexico at
noon, seeing the hundred butterflies sucked to our radiator, dying
there, beating their blue and crimson wings, twitching, beautiful, and
sad. We talked of such Things instead of the things I wanted to talk
about. And he listened to me. That was the thing he did, as if he was
trying to fill himself up with all the sounds he could hear. He listened
to the wind and the falling ocean and my voice, always with a rapt
attention, a concentration that almost excluded physical bodies
themselves and kept only the sounds. He shut his eyes to listen. I would
see him listening to the lawn mower as he cut the grass by hand instead
of using the remote-control device, and I would see him smelling the cut
grass as it sprayed up at him behind the mower in a green fount.
“Doug,” be said, about five in the afternoon, as we were picking up our
towels and heading back along the beach near the surf, “I want you to
promise me something.”
“What?”
“Don’t ever be a Rocket Man.”
I stopped.
“I mean it,” he said. “Because when you’re out there you want to be
here, and when you’re here you want to be out there. Don’t start that.
Don’t let it get hold of you.”
“But—”
“You don’t know what it is. Every time I’m out there I think, If I ever
get back to Earth I’ll stay there; I’ll never go out again. But I go
out, and I guess I’ll always go out.”
“I’ve thought about being a Rocket Man for a long time,” I said,
He didn’t hear me. “I try to stay here. Last Saturday when I got home I
started trying so damned hard to stay here.”
I remembered him in the garden, sweating, and all the traveling and
doing and listening, and I knew that he did this to convince himself
that the sea and the towns and the land and his family were the only
real things and the good things. But I knew where he would be tonight:
looking at the jewelry in Orion from our front porch.
“Promise me you won’t be like me,” he said.
I hesitated awhile. “Okay,” I said.
He shook my hand. “Good boy,” he said.
The dinner was fine that night. Mom had run about the kitchen with
handfuls of cinnamon and dough and pots and pans tinkling, and now a
great turkey fumed on the table, with dressing, cranberry sauce, peas,
and pumpkin pie.
“In the middle of August?” said Dad, amazed.
“You won’t be here for Thanksgiving.”
“So I won’t.”
He sniffed it. He lifted each lid from each tureen and let the flavor
steam over his sunburned face. He said “Ah” to each. He looked at the
room and his hands. He gazed at the pictures on the wall, the chairs,
the table, me, and Mom. He cleared his throat. I saw him make up his
mind. “Lilly?”
“Yes?” Mom looked across her table which she had set like a wonderful
silver trap, a miraculous gravy pit into which, like a struggling beast
of the past caught in a tar pool, her husband might at last be caught
and held, gazing out through a jail of wishbones, safe forever. Her eyes
sparkled.
“Lilly,” said Dad.
Go on, I thought crazily. Say it, quick; say you’ll stay home this time,
for good, and never go away; say it!
Just then a passing helicopter jarred the room and the windowpane shook
with a crystal sound. Dad glanced at the window.
The blue stars of evening were there, and the red planet Mars was rising
in the East.
Dad looked at Mars a full minute. Then he put his hand out blindly
toward me. “May I have some peas,” he said.
“Excuse me,” said Mother. “I’m going to get some bread.”
She rushed out into the kitchen.
“But there’s bread on the table,” I said.
Dad didn’t look at me as he began his meal.
I couldn’t sleep that night. I came downstairs at one in the morning and
the moonlight was like ice on all the housetops, and dew glittered in a
snow field on our grass. I stood in the doorway in my pajamas, feeling
the warm night wind, and then I knew that Dad was sitting in the
mechanical porch swing, gliding gently. I could see his profile tilted
back, and he was watching the stars wheel over the sky. His eyes were
like gray crystal there, the moon in each one.
I went out and sat beside him.
We glided awhile in the swing.
At last I said, “How many ways are there to die in space?”
“A million.”
“Name some.”
“The meteors hit you. The air goes out of your rocket. Or comets take
you along with them. Concussion. Strangulation. Explosion. Centrifugal
force. Too much acceleration. Too little. The heat, the cold, the sun,
the moon, the stars, the planets, the asteroids, the planetoids,
radiation . . .”
“And do they bury you?”
“They never find you.”
“Where do you go?”
“A billion miles away. Traveling graves, they call them. You become a
meteor or a planetoid traveling forever through space.”
I said nothing.
“One thing,” he said later, “it’s quick in space. Death. It’s over like
that. You don’t linger. Most of the time you don’t even know it. You’re
dead and that’s it.”
We went up to bed.
It was morning.
Standing in the doorway, Dad listened to the yellow canary singing in
its golden cage.
“Well, I’ve decided,” he said. “Next time I come home, I’m home to
stay.”
“Dad!” I said.
“Tell your mother that when she gets up,” he said.
“You mean it!”
He nodded gravely. “See you in about three months.”
And there he went off down the street, carrying his uniform in its
secret box, whistling and looking at the tall green trees and picking
chinaberries off the chinaberry bush as he brushed by, tossing them
ahead of him as he walked away into the bright shade of early morning. .
. .
I asked Mother about a few things that morning after Father had been
gone a number of hours. “Dad said that sometimes you don’t act as if you
hear or see him,” I said.
And then she explained everything to me quietly.
“When he went off into space ten years ago, I said to myself, ‘He’s
dead.’ Or as good as dead. So think of him dead. And when he comes back,
three or four times a year, it’s not him at all, it’s only a pleasant
little memory or a dream. And if a memory stops or a dream stops, it
can’t hurt half as much. So most of the time I think of him dead——”
“But other times—”
“Other times I can’t help myself. I bake pies and treat him as if he
were alive, and then it hurts. No, it’s better to think he hasn’t been
here for ten years and I’ll never see him again. It doesn’t hurt as
much.”
“Didn’t he say next time he’d settle down.”
She shook her head slowly. “No, he’s dead. I’m very sure of that.”
“He’ll come alive again, then,” I said.
“Ten years ago,” said Mother, “I thought, What if he dies on Venus? Then
we’ll never be able to see Venus again. What if he dies on Mars? We’ll
never be able to look at Mars again, all red in the sky, without wanting
to go in and lock the door. Or what if he died on Jupiter or Saturn or
Neptune? On those nights when those planets were high in the sky, we
wouldn’t want to have anything to do with the stars.”
“I guess not,” I said.
The message came the next day.
The messenger gave it to me and I read it standing on the porch. The sun
was setting. Mom stood in the screen door behind me, watching me fold
the message and put it in my pocket.
“Mom,” I said.
“Don’t tell me anything I don’t already know,” she said.
She didn’t cry.
Well, it wasn’t Mars, and it wasn’t Venus, and it wasn’t Jupiter or
Saturn that killed him. We wouldn’t have to think of him every time
Jupiter or Saturn or Mars lit up the evening sky.
This was different.
His ship had fallen into the sun.
And the sun was big and fiery and merciless, and it was always in the
sky and you couldn’t get away from it.
So for a long time after my father died my mother slept through the days
and wouldn’t go out. We had breakfast at midnight and lunch at three in
the morning, and dinner at the cold dim hour of 6 A.M. We went to
all-night shows and went to bed at sunrise.
And, for a long while, the only days we ever went out to walk were the
days when it was raining and there was no sun.
      The Fire Balloons</p>

FIRE exploded over summer night lawns. You saw sparkling faces of uncles
and aunts. Skyrockets fell up in the brown shining eyes of cousins on
the porch, and the cold charred sticks thumped down in dry meadows far
away.
The Very Reverend Father Joseph Daniel Peregrine opened his eyes. What a
dream: he and his cousins with their fiery play at his grandfather’s
ancient Ohio home so many years ago!
He lay listening to the great hollow of the church, the other cells
where other Fathers lay. Had they, too, on the eve of the flight of the
rocket Crucifix, lain with memories of the Fourth of July? Yes. This was
like those breathless Independence dawns when you waited for the first
concussion and rushed out on the dewy sidewalks, your hands full of loud
miracles.
So here they were, the Episcopal Fathers, in the breathing dawn before
they pinwheeled off to Mars, leaving their incense through the velvet
cathedral of space.
“Should we go at all?” whispered Father Peregrine. “Shouldn’t we solve
our own sins on Earth? Aren’t we running from our lives here?”
He arose, his fleshy body, with its rich look of strawberries, milk, and
steak, moving heavily.
“Or is it sloth?” he wondered. “Do I dread the journey?”
He stepped into the needle-spray shower.
“But I shall take you to Mars, body.” He addressed himself. “Leaving old
sins here. And on to Mars to find  new  sins?” A delightful thought
almost. Sins no one had ever thought of.
Oh, he himself had written a little book:  The Problem of Sin on Other
Worlds, ignored as somehow not serious enough by his Episcopal brethren.
Only last night, over a final cigar, he and Father Stone had talked of
it.
“On Mars sin might appear as virtue. We must guard against virtuous acts
there that, later, might be found to be sins!” said Father Peregrine,
beaming. “How exciting! It’s been centuries since so much adventure has
accompanied the prospect of being a missionary!”
“I  will recognize sin,” said Father Stone bluntly, “even on Mars.”
“Oh, we priests pride ourselves on being litmus paper, changing color in
sin’s presence,” retorted Father Peregrine, “but what if Martian
chemistry is such we do not color  at all!  If there are new senses on
Mars, you must admit the possibility of unrecognizable sin.”
“If there is no malice aforethought, there is no sin or punishment for
same—the Lord assures us that,” Father Stone replied.
“On Earth, yes. But perhaps a Martian sin might inform the subconscious
of its evil, telepathically, leaving the conscious mind of man free to
act, seemingly without malice! What  then?”
“What  could  there be in the way of new sins?”
Father Peregrine leaned heavily forward. “Adam  alone  did not sin. Add
Eve and you add temptation. Add a second man and you make adultery
possible. With the addition of sex or people, you add sin. If men were
armless they could not strangle with their hands. You would not have
that particular sin of murder. Add arms, and you add the possibility of
a new violence. Amoebas cannot sin because they reproduce by fission.
They do not covet wives or murder each other. Add sex to amoebas, add
arms and legs, and you would have murder and adultery. Add an arm or leg
or person, or take away each, and you add or subtract possible evil. On
Mars, what if there are five new senses, organs, invisible limbs we
can’t conceive of—then mightn’t there be five  new sins?”
Father Stone gasped. “I think you enjoy this sort of thing!”
“I keep my mind alive, Father; just alive, is all.”
“Your mind’s always juggling, isn’t it?—mirrors, torches, plates.”
“Yes. Because sometimes the Church seems like those posed circus
tableaus where the curtain lifts and men, white, zinc-oxide,
talcum-powder statues, freeze to represent abstract Beauty. Very
wonderful. But I hope there will always be room for me to dart about
among the statues, don’t you, Father Stone?”
Father Stone had moved away. “I think we’d better go to bed. In a few
hours we’ll be jumping up to see your  new  sins, Father Peregrine.”
The rocket stood ready for the firing.
The Fathers walked from their devotions in the chilly morning, many a
fine priest from New York or Chicago or Los Angeles—the Church was
sending its best—walking across town to the frosty field. Walking,
Father Peregrine remembered the Bishop’s words:
“Father Peregrine, you will captain the missionaries, with Father Stone
at your side. Having chosen you for this serious task, I find my reasons
deplorably obscure, Father, but your pamphlet on planetary sin did not
go unread. You are a flexible man. And Mars is like that uncleaned
closet we have neglected for millenniums. Sin has collected there like
bric-a-brac. Mars is twice Earth’s age and has had double the number of
Saturday nights, liquor baths, and eye-poppings at women as naked as
white seals. When we open that closet door, things will fall on us. We
need a quick, flexible man—one whose mind can dodge. Anyone a little too
dogmatic might break in two. I feel you’ll be resilient. Father, the job
is yours.”
The Bishop and the Fathers knelt.
The blessing was said and the rocket given a little shower of holy
water. Arising, the Bishop addressed them:
“I know you will go with God, to prepare the Martians for the reception
of His Truth. I wish you all a  thoughtful  journey.”
They filed past the Bishop, twenty men, robes whispering, to deliver
their hands into his kind hands before passing into the cleansed
projectile.
“I wonder,” said Father Peregrine, at the last moment, “if Mars is hell?
Only waiting for our arrival before it bursts into brimstone and fire.”
“Lord, be with us,” said Father Stone.
The rocket moved.
Coming out of space was like coming out of the most beautiful cathedral
they had ever seen. Touching Mars was like touching the ordinary
pavement outside the church five minutes after having  really  known
your love for God.
The Fathers stepped gingerly from the steaming rocket and knelt upon
Martian sand while Father Peregrine gave thanks.
“Lord, we thank Thee for the journey through Thy rooms. And, Lord, we
have reached a new land, so we must have new eyes. We shall hear new
sounds and must needs have new ears. And there will he new sins, for
which we ask the gift of better and firmer and purer hearts. Amen.”
They arose.
And here was Mars like a sea under which they trudged in the guise of
submarine biologists, seeking life. Here the territory of hidden sin.
Oh, how carefully they must all balance, like gray feathers, in this new
element, afraid that walkingitself  might be sinful; or breathing, or
simple fasting!
And here was the mayor of First Town come to meet them with outstretched
hand. “What can I do for you, Father Peregrine?”
“We’d like to know about the Martians. For only if we know about them
can we plan our church intelligently. Are they ten feet tall? We will
build large doors. Are their skins blue or red or green? We must know
when we put human figures in the stained glass so we may use the right
skin color. Are they heavy? We will build sturdy seats for them.”
“Father,” said the mayor, “I don’t think you should worry about the
Martians. There are two races. One of them is pretty well dead. A few
are in hiding. And the second race—well, they’re not quite human.”
“Oh?” Father Peregrine’s heart quickened.
“They’re round luminous globes of light, Father, living in those hills.
Man or beast, who can say? But they act intelligently, I hear.” The
mayor shrugged. “Of course, they’re not men, so I don’t think you’ll
care—
“On the contrary,” said Father Peregrine swiftly. “Intelligent, you
say?”
“There’s a story. A prospector broke his leg in those hills and would
have died there. The blue spheres of light came at him. When he woke, he
was down on a highway and didn’t know how he got there.”
“Drunk,” said Father Stone.
“That’s the story,” said the mayor. “Father Peregrine, with most of the
Martians dead, and only these blue spheres, I frankly think you’d be
better off in First City. Mars is opening up. It’s a frontier now, like
in the old days on Earth, out West, and in Alaska. Men are pouring up
here. There’re a couple thousand black Irish mechanics and miners and
day laborers in First Town who need saving, because there’re too many
wicked women came with them, and too much ten-century-old Martian
wine——”
Father Peregrine was gazing into the soft blue hills.
Father Stone cleared his throat. “Well, Father?”
Father Peregrine did not hear. “Spheres of blue  fire?”
“Yes, Father.”
“Ah,” Father Peregrine sighed.
“Blue balloons.” Father Stone shook his head. “A circus!”
Father Peregrine felt his wrists pounding. He saw the little frontier
town with raw, fresh-built sin, and he saw the hills, old with the
oldest and yet perhaps an even newer (to him) sin.
“Mayor, could your black Irish laborers cook one more day in hellfire?”
“I’d turn and baste them for you, Father.”
Father Peregrine nodded to the hills. “Then that’s where we’ll go.”
There was a murmur from everyone.
“It would be so simple,” explained Father Peregrine, “to go into town. I
prefer to think that if the Lord walked here and people said, ‘Here is
the beaten path,’ He would reply, ‘Show me the weeds. I will  make  a
path.’”
“But——”
“Father Stone, think how it would weigh upon us if we passed sinners by
and did not extend our hands.”
“But globes of fire!”
“I imagine man looked funny to other animals when we first appeared. Yet
he has a soul, for all his homeliness. Until we prove otherwise, let us
assume that these fiery spheres have souls.”
“All right,” agreed the mayor, “but you’ll be back to town.”
“We’ll see. First, some breakfast. Then you and I, Father Stone, will
walk alone into the hills. I don’t want to frighten those fiery Martians
with machines or crowds. Shall we have breakfast?”
The Fathers ate in silence.
At nightfall Father Peregrine and Father Stone were high in the hills.
They stopped and sat upon a rock to enjoy a moment of relaxation and
waiting. The Martians had not as yet appeared and they both felt vaguely
disappointed.
“I wonder——” Father Peregrine mopped his face. “Do you think if we
called ‘Hello!’ they might answer?”
“Father Peregrine, won’t you ever be serious?”
“Not until the good Lord is. Oh, don’t look so terribly shocked, please.
The Lord is not serious. In fact, it is a little hard to know just what
else He is except loving. And love has to do with humor, doesn’t it? For
you cannot love someone unless you put up with him, can you? And you
cannot put up with someone constantly unless you can laugh at him. Isn’t
that true? And certainly we are ridiculous little animals wallowing in
the fudge bowl, and God must love us all the more because we appeal to
His humor.”
“I  never thought of God as humorous,” said Father stone.
“The Creator of the platypus, the camel, the ostrich, and man? Oh, come
now!” Father Peregrine laughed.
But at this instant, from among the twilight hills, like a series of
blue lamps lit to guide their way, came the Martians.
Father Stone saw them first. “Look!”
Father Peregrine turned and the laughter stopped in his mouth.
The round blue globes of fire hovered among the twinkling stars,
distantly trembling.
“Monsters!” Father Stone leaped up. But Father Peregrine caught him.
“Wait!”
“We should’ve gone to town!”
“No, listen, look!” pleaded Father Peregrine.
“I’m afraid!”
“Don’t be. This is God’s work!”
“The devil’s!”
“No, now, quiet!” Father Peregrine gentled him and they crouched with
the soft blue light on their upturned faces as the fiery orbs drew near.
And again, Independence Night, thought Father Peregrine, tremoring. He
felt like a child back in those July Fourth evenings, the sky blowing
apart, breaking into powdery stars and burning sound, the concussions
jingling house windows like the ice on a thousand thin ponds. The aunts,
uncles, cousins crying, as to some celestial physician. The summer sky
colors. And the Fire Balloons, lit by an indulgent grandfather, steadied
in his massively tender hands. Oh, the memory of those lovely Fire
Balloons, softly lighted, warmly billowed bits of tissue, like insect
wings, lying like folded wasps in boxes and, last of all, after the day
of riot and fury, at long last from their boxes, delicately unfolded,
blue, red, white, patriotic—the Fire Balloons! He saw the dim faces of
dear relatives long dead and mantled with moss as Grandfather lit the
tiny candle and let the warm air breathe up to form the balloon plumply
luminous in his hands, a shining vision which they held, reluctant to
let it go; for, once released, it was yet another year gone from life,
another Fourth, another bit of Beauty vanished. And then up, up, still
up through the warm summer night constellations, the Fire Balloons had
drifted, while red-white-and-blue eyes followed them, wordless, from
family porches. Away into deep Illinois country, over night rivers and
sleeping mansions the Fire Balloons dwindled, forever gone.
Father Peregrine felt tears in his eyes. Above him the Martians, not one
but a  thousand  whispering Fire Balloons, it seemed, hovered. Any
moment he might find his long-dead and blessed grandfather at his elbow,
staring up at Beauty.
But it was Father Stone.
“Let’s go, please, Father!”
“I must speak to them.” Father Peregrine rustled forward, not knowing
what to say, for what had he ever said to the Fire Balloons of time past
except with his mind:  you are beautiful, you are beautiful,  and that
was not enough now. He could only lift his heavy arms and call upward,
as he had often wished to call after the enchanted Fire Balloons,
“Hello!”
But the fiery spheres only burned like images in a dark minor. They
seemed fixed, gaseous, miraculous, forever.
“We come with God,” said Father Peregrine to the sky.
“Silly, silly, silly.” Father Stone chewed the back of his hand. “In the
name of God, Father Peregrine, stop!”
But now the phosphorescent spheres blew away into the hills. In a moment
they were gone.
Father Peregrine called again, and the echo of his last cry shook the
hills above. Turning, he saw an avalanche shake out dust, pause, and
then, with a thunder of stone wheels, crash down the mountain upon them.
“Look what you’ve done!” cried Father Stone
Father Peregrine was almost fascinated, then horrified. He turned,
knowing they could run only a few feet before the rocks crushed them
into ruins. He had time to whisper,  Oh, Lord!  and the rocks fell!
“Father!”
They were separated like chaff from wheat. There was a blue shimmering
of globes, a shift of cold stars, a roar, and then they stood upon a
ledge two hundred feet away watching the spot where their bodies should
have been buried under tons of stone.
The blue light evaporated.
The two Fathers clutched each other. “What happened?”
“The blue fires lifted us!”
“We ran,  that  was it!”
“No, the globes saved us.”
“They couldn’t!”
“They  did.”
The sky was empty. There was a feel as if a great bell had just stopped
tolling. Reverberations lingered in their teeth and marrows.
“Let’s get away from here. You’ll have us killed.”
“I haven’t feared death for a good many years, Father Stone.”
“We’ve proved nothing. Those blue lights ran off at the first cry. It’s
useless.”
“No.” Father Peregrine was suffused with a stubborn wonder. “Somehow,
they saved us. That proves they have souls.”
“It proves only that they  might  have saved us. Everything was
confused. We might have escaped, ourselves.”
“They are not animals, Father Stone. Animals do not save lives,
especially of strangers. There is mercy and compassion here. Perhaps,
tomorrow, we may prove more.
“Prove what? How?” Father Stone was immensely tired now; the outrage to
his mind and body showed on his stiff face. “Follow them in helicopters,
reading chapter and verse? They’re not human. They haven’t eyes or ears
or bodies like ours.”
“But I feel something about them,” replied Father Peregrine. “I know a
great revelation is at hand. They saved us. They  think. They had a
choice; let us live or die. That proves free will!”
Father Stone set to work building a fire, glaring at the sticks in his
hands, choking on the gray smoke. “I myself will open a convent for
nursling geese, a monastery for sainted swine, and I shall build a
miniature apse in a microscope so that paramecium can attend services
and tell their beads with their flagella.”
“Oh, Father Stone.”
“I’m sorry.” Father Stone blinked redly across the fire. “But this is
like blessing a crocodile before he chews you up. You’re risking the
entire missionary expedition. We belong in First Town, washing liquor
from men’s throats and perfume off their hands!”
“Can’t you recognize the human in the inhuman?”
“I’d much rather recognize the inhuman in the human.”
“But if I prove these things sin, know sin, know a moral life, have free
will and intellect, Father Stone?”
“That will take much convincing.”
The night grew rapidly cold and they peered into the fire to find their
wildest thoughts, while eating biscuits and berries, and soon they were
bundled for sleep under the chiming stars. And just before turning over
one last time Father Stone, who had been thinking for many minutes to
find something to bother Father Peregrine about, stared into the soft
pink charcoal bed and said, “No Adam and Eve on Mars. No original sin.
Maybe the Martians live in a state of God’s grace. Then we can go back
down to town and start work on the Earthmen.”
Father Peregrine reminded himself to say a little prayer for Father
Stone, who got so mad and who was now being vindictive, God help him.
“Yes, Father Stone, but the Martians killed some of our settlers. That’s
sinful. There must have been an Original Sin and a Martian Adam and Eve.
We’ll find them. Men are men, unfortunately, no matter what their shape,
and inclined to sin.”
But Father Stone was pretending sleep.
Father Peregrine did not shut his eyes.
Of course they couldn’t let these Martians go to hell, could they? With
a compromise to their consciences, could they go back to the new
colonial towns, those towns so full of sinful gullets and women with
scintilla eyes and white oyster bodies rollicking in beds with lonely
laborers? Wasn’t that the place for the Fathers? Wasn’t this trek into
the hills merely a personal whim? Was he really thinking of God’s
Church, or was he quenching the thirst of a spongelike curiosity? Those
blue round globes of St. Anthony’s fire—how they burned in his mind!
What a challenge, to find the man behind the mask, the human behind the
inhuman. Wouldn’t he be proud if he could say, even to his secret self,
that he had converted a rolling huge pool table full of fiery spheres!
What a sin of pride! Worth doing penance for! But then one did many
prideful things out of Love, and he loved the Lord so much and was so
happy at it that he wanted everyone else to be happy too.
The last thing he saw before sleep was the return of the blue fires,
like a flight of burning angels silently singing him to his worried
rest.
The blue round dreams were still there in the sky when Father Peregrine
awoke in the early morning.
Father Stone slept like a stiff bundle, quietly. Father Peregrine
watched the Martians floating and watching him. They were human—he  knew
 it. But he must prove it or face a dry-mouthed, dry-eyed Bishop telling
him kindly to step aside.
But how to prove humanity if they hid in the high vaults of the sky? How
to bring them nearer and provide answers to the many questions?
“They saved us from the avalanche.”
Father Peregrine arose, moved off among the rocks, and began to climb
the nearest hill until he came to a place where a cliff dropped sheerly
to a floor two hundred feet below. He was choking from his vigorous
climb in the frosty air. He stood, getting his breath.
“If I fell from here, it would surely kill me.”
He let a pebble drop. Moments later it clicked on the rocks below.
“The Lord would never forgive me.”
He tossed another pebble.
“It wouldn’t be suicide, would it, if I did it out of Love . . . ?”
He lifted his gaze to the blue spheres. “But first, another try.” He
called to them: “Hello, hello!”
The echoes tumbled upon each other, but the blue fires did not blink or
move.
He talked to them for five minutes. When he stopped, he peered down and
saw Father Stone, still indignantly asleep, below in the little camp.
“I must prove everything.” Father Peregrine stepped to the cliff rim. “I
am an old man. I am not afraid. Surely the Lord will understand that I
am doing this for Him?”
He drew a deep breath. All his life swam through his eyes and he
thought, In a moment shall I die? I am afraid that I love living much
too much. But I love other things more.
And, thinking thus, he stepped off the cliff.
He fell.
“Fool!” he cried. He tumbled end over end. “You were wrong!” The rocks
rushed up at him and he saw himself dashed on them and sent to glory.
“Why did I do this thing?” But he knew the answer, and an instant later
was calm as he fell. The wind roared around him and the rocks hurtled to
meet him.
And then there was a shift of stars, a glimmering of blue light, and he
felt himself surrounded by blueness and suspended. A moment later he was
deposited, with a gentle bump, upon the rocks, where he sat a full
moment alive, and touching himself, and looking up at those blue lights
that had withdrawn instantly.
“You saved me!” he whispered. “You wouldn’t let me die. You knew it was
wrong.”
He rushed over to Father Stone, who still lay quietly asleep. “Father,
Father, wake up!” He shook him and brought him round. “Father, they
saved me!”
“Who saved you?” Father Stone blinked and sat up.
Father Peregrine related his experience.
“A dream, a nightmare; go back to sleep,” said Father Stone irritably.
“You and your circus balloons.”
“But I was awake!”
“Now, now, Father, calm yourself. There now.
“You don’t believe me? Have you a gun? Yes, there, let me have it.”
“What are you going to do?” Father Stone handed over the small pistol
they had brought along for protection against snakes or other similar
and unpredictable animals.
Father Peregrine seized the pistol. “I’ll prove it!”
He pointed the pistol at his own hand and fired.
“Stop!”
There was a shimmer of light and before their eyes the bullet stood upon
the air, poised an inch from his open palm. It hung for a moment,
surrounded by a blue phosphorescence. Then it fell, hissing, into the
dust.
Father Peregrine fired the gun three times—at his hand, at his leg, at
his body. The three bullets hovered, glittering, and, like dead insects,
fell at their feet.
“You see?” said Father Peregrine, letting his arm fall, and allowing the
pistol to drop after the bullets. “They know. They understand. They are
not animals. They think and judge and live in a moral climate. What
animal would save me from myself like this? There is no animal would do
that. Only another man, Father. Now, do you believe?”
Father Stone was watching the sky and the blue lights, and now,
silently, he dropped to one knee and picked up the warm bullets and
cupped them in his hand. He closed his hand tight.
The sun was rising behind them.
“I think we had better go down to the others and tell them of this and
bring them back up here,” said Father Peregrine.
By the time the sun was up, they were well on their way back to the
rocket.
Father Peregrine drew the round circle in the center of the blackboard.
“This is Christ, the son of the Father.”
He pretended not to hear the other Fathers’ sharp intake of breath.
“This is Christ in all his Glory,” he continued.
“It looks like a geometry problem,” observed Father Stone.
“A fortunate comparison, for we deal with symbols here. Christ is no
less Christ, you must admit, in being represented by a circle or a
square. For centuries the cross has symbolized his love and agony. So
this circle will be the Martian Christ. This is how we shall bring Him
to Mars.”
The Fathers stirred fretfully and looked at each other.
“You, Brother Mathias, will create, in glass, a replica of this circle,
a globe, filled with bright fire. It will stand upon the altar.”
“A cheap magic trick,” muttered Father Stone
Father Peregrine went on patiently: “On the contrary. We are giving them
God in an understandable image. If Christ had come to us on Earth as an
octopus, would we have accepted him readily?” He spread his hands. “Was
it then a cheap magic trick of the Lord’s to bring us Christ through
Jesus, in man’s shape? After we bless the church we build here and
sanctify its altar and this symbol, do you think Christ would refuse to
inhabit the shape before us? You know in your hearts He would not
refuse.”
“But the body of a soulless animal!” said Brother Mathias. “We’ve
already gone over that, many times since we returned this morning,
Brother Mathias. These creatures saved us from the avalanche. They
realized that self-destruction was sinful, and prevented it, time after
time. Therefore we must build a church in the hills, live with them, to
find their own special ways of sinning, the alien ways, and help them to
discover God.”
The Fathers did not seem pleased at the prospect.
“Is it because they are so odd to the eye?” wondered Father Peregrine.
“But what is a shape? Only a cup for the blazing soul that God provides
us all. If tomorrow I found that sea lions suddenly possessed free will,
intellect, knew when not to sin, knew what life was and tempered justice
with mercy and life with love, then I would build an undersea cathedral.
And if the sparrows should, miraculously, with God’s will, gain
everlasting souls tomorrow, I would freight a church with helium and
take after them, for all souls, in any shape, if they have free will and
are aware of their sins, will burn in hell unless given their rightful
communions. I would not let a Martian sphere burn in hell, either, for
it is a sphere only in mine eyes. When I close my eyes it stands before
me, an intelligence, a love, a soul—and I must not deny it.”
“But that glass globe you wish placed on the altar,” protested Father
Stone.
“Consider the Chinese,” replied Father Peregrine imperturbably. “What
sort of Christ do Christian Chinese worship? An oriental Christ,
naturally. You’ve all seen oriental Nativity scenes. How is Christ
dressed? In Eastern robes. Where does He walk? In Chinese settings of
bamboo and misty mountain and crooked tree. His eyelids taper, his
cheekbones rise. Each country, each race adds something to Our Lord. I
am reminded of the Virgin of Guadalupe, to whom all Mexico pays its
love. Her skin? Have you noticed the paintings of her? A dark skin, like
that of her worshipers. Is this blasphemy? Not at all. It is not logical
that men should accept a God, no matter how real, of another color. I
often wonder why our missionaries do well in Africa, with a snow-white
Christ. Perhaps because white is a sacred color, in albino, or any other
form, to the African tribes. Given time, mightn’t Christ darken there
too? The form does not matter. Content is everything. We cannot expect
these Martians to accept an alien form. We shall give them Christ in
their own image.”
“There’s a flaw in your reasoning, Father,” said Father Stone. “Won’t
the Martians suspect us of hypocrisy? They will realize that we don’t
worship a round, globular Christ, but a man with limbs and a head. How
do we explain the difference?”
“By showing there is none. Christ will fill any vessel that is offered.
Bodies or globes, he is there, and each will worship the same thing in a
different guise. What is more, we must  believe  in this globe we give
the Martians. We must believe in a shape which is meaningless to us as
to form. This spheroid  will  be Christ. And we must remember that we
ourselves, and the shape of our Earth Christ, would be meaningless,
ridiculous, a squander of material to these Martians.”
Father Peregrine laid aside his chalk. “Now let us go into the hills and
build our church.”
The Fathers began to pack their equipment.
The church was not a church but an area cleared of rocks, a plateau on
one of the low mountains, its soil smoothed and brushed, and an altar
established whereon Brother Mathias placed the fiery globe he had
constructed.
At the end of six days of work the “church” was ready.
“What shall we do with this?” Father Stone tapped an iron bell they had
brought along. “What does a bell mean to  them?”
“I imagine I brought it for our own comfort,” admitted Father Peregrine.
“We need a few familiarities. This church seems so little like a church.
And we feel somewhat absurd here—even I; for it is something new, this
business of converting the creatures of another world. I feel like a
ridiculous play actor at times. And then I pray to God to lend me
strength.”
“Many of the Fathers are unhappy. Some of them joke about all this,
Father Peregrine.”
“I know. We’ll put this bell in a small tower, for their comfort,
anyway.”
“What about the organ?”
“We’ll play it at the first service, tomorrow.”
“But, the Martians——”
“I know. But again, I suppose, for our own comfort, our own music. Later
we may discover theirs.”
They arose very early on Sunday morning and moved through the coldness
like pale phantoms, rime tinkling on their habits; covered with chimes
they were, shaking down showers of silver water.
“I wonder if it  is  Sunday here on Mars?” mused Father Peregrine, but
seeing Father Stone wince, he hastened on, “It might be Tuesday or
Thursday—who knows? But no matter. My idle fancy. It’s Sunday to us.
Come.”
The Fathers walked into the flat wide area of the “church” and knelt,
shivering and blue-lipped.
Father Peregrine said a little prayer and put his cold fingers to the
organ keys. The music went up like a flight of pretty birds. He touched
the keys like a man moving his hands among the weeds of a wild garden,
startling up great soarings of beauty into the hills.
The music calmed the air. It smelled the fresh smell of morning. The
music drifted into the mountains and shook down mineral powders in a
dusty rain.
The Fathers waited.
“Well, Father Peregrine.” Father Stone eyed the empty sky where the sun
was rising, furnace-red. “I don’t see our friends.”
“Let me try again.” Father Peregrine was perspiring.
He built an architecture of Each, stone by exquisite stone, raising a
music cathedral so vast that its furthest chancels were in Nineveh, its
furthest dome at St. Peter’s left hand. The music stayed and did not
crash in ruin when it was over, but partook of a series of white clouds
and was carried away among other lands.
The sky was still empty.
“They’ll come!” But Father Peregrine felt the panic in his chest, very
small, growing. “Let us pray. Let us ask them to come. They read minds;
they  know.”
The Fathers lowered themselves yet again, in rustlings and whispers.
They prayed.
And to the East, out of the icy mountains of seven o’clock on Sunday
morning or perhaps Thursday morning or maybe Monday morning on Mars,
came the soft fiery globes.
They hovered and sank and filled the area around the shivering priests.
“Thank you; oh, thank you, Lord.” Father Peregrine shut his eyes tight
and played the music, and when it was done he turned and gazed upon his
wondrous congregation.
And a voice touched his mind, and the voice said:
“We have come for a little while.”
“You may stay,” said Father Peregrine.
“For a little while only,” said the voice quietly. “We have come to tell
you certain things. We should have spoken sooner. But we had hoped that
you might go on your way if left alone.”
Father Peregrine started to speak, but the voice hushed him.
“We are the Old Ones,” the voice said, and it entered him like a blue
gaseous flare and burned in the chambers of his head. “We are the old
Martians, who left our marble cities and went into the hills, forsaking
the material life we had lived. So very long ago we became these things
that we now are. Once we were men, with bodies and legs and arms such as
yours. The legend has it that one of us, a good man, discovered a way to
free man’s soul and intellect, to free him of bodily ills and
melancholies, of deaths and transfigurations, of ill humors and
senilities, and so we took on the look of lightning and blue fire and
have lived in the winds and skies and hills forever after that, neither
prideful nor arrogant, neither rich nor poor, passionate nor cold. We
have lived apart from those we left behind, those other men of this
world, and how we came to be has been forgotten, the process lost; but
we shall never die, nor do harm. We have put away the sins of the body
and live in God’s grace. We covet no other property; we have no
property. We do not steal, nor kill, nor lust, nor hate. We live in
happiness. We cannot reproduce; we no not eat or drink or make war. All
the sensualities and childishnesses and sins of the body were stripped
away when our bodies were put aside. We have left sin behind, Father
Peregrine, and it is burned like the leaves in the autumn, and it is
gone like the soiled snow of an evil winter, and it is gone like the
sexual flowers of a red-and-yellow spring, and it is gone like the
panting nights of hottest summer, and our season is temperate and our
clime is rich in thought.”
Father Peregrine was standing now, for the voice touched him at such a
pitch that it almost shook him from his senses. It was an ecstasy and a
fire washing through him.
“We wish to tell you that we appreciate your building this place for us,
but we have no need of it, for each of us is a temple unto himself and
needs no place wherein to cleanse himself. Forgive us for not coming to
you sooner, but we are separate and apart and have talked to no one for
ten thousand years, nor have we interfered in any way with the life of
this planet. It has come into your mind now that we are the lilies of
the field; we toil not, neither do we spin. You are right. And so we
suggest that you take the parts of this temple into your own new cities
and there cleanse others. For, rest assured, we are happy and at peace.
The Fathers were on their knees in the vast blue light, and Father
Peregrine was down, too, and they were weeping, and it did not matter
that their time had been wasted; it did not matter to them at all.
The blue spheres murmured and began to rise once more, on a breath of
cool air.
“May I”—cried Father Peregrine, not daring to ask, eyes closed—”may I
come again, someday, that I may learn from you?”
The blue fires blazed. The air trembled.
Yes. Someday he might come again. Someday.
And then the Fire Balloons blew away and were gone, and he was like a
child, on his knees, tears streaming from his eyes, crying to himself,
“Come back, come back!” And at any moment Grandfather might lift him and
carry him upstairs to his bedroom in a long-gone Ohio town. . . .
They filed down out of the hills at sunset. Looking back, Father
Peregrine saw the blue fires burning. No, he thought, we couldn’t build
a church for the likes of you. You’re Beauty itself. What church could
compete with the fireworks of the pure soul?
Father Stone moved in silence beside him. And at last he spoke:
“The way I see it is there’s a Truth on every planet. All parts of the
Big Truth. On a certain day they’ll all fit together like the pieces of
a jigsaw. This has been a shaking experience. I’ll never doubt again,
Father Peregrine. For this Truth here is as true as Earth’s Truth, and
they lie side by side. And we’ll go on to other worlds, adding the sum
of the parts of the Truth until one day the whole Total will stand
before us like the light of a new day.”
“That’s a lot, coming from you, Father Stone.”
“I’m sorry now, in a way, we’re going down to the town to handle our own
kind. Those blue lights now. When they settled about us, and that 
voice  . . .” Father Stone shivered.
Father Peregrine reached out to take the other’s arm. They walked
together.
“And you know,” said Father Stone finally, fixing his eyes on Brother
Mathias, who strode ahead with the glass sphere tenderly carried in his
arms, that glass sphere with the blue phosphorous light glowing forever
inside it, “you know, Father Peregrine, that globe there——”
“Yes?”
“It’s Him. It is Him, after all.”
Father Peregrine smiled, and they walked down out of the hills toward
the new town.
      The Last Night of the World</p>

“WHAT would you do if you knew that this was the last night of the
world?”
“What would I do? You mean seriously?”
“Yes, seriously.”
“I don’t know. I hadn’t thought.”
He poured some coffee. In the background the two girls were playing
blocks on the parlor rug in the light of the green hurricane lamps.
There was an easy, clean aroma of the brewed coffee in the evening air.
“Well, better start thinking about it,” he said.
“You don’t mean it!”
He nodded.
“A war?”
He shook his head.
“Not the hydrogen or atom bomb?”
“No.”
“Or germ warfare?”
“None of those at all,” he said, stirring his coffee slowly. “But just,
let’s say, the closing of a book.”
“I don’t think I understand.”
“No, nor do I, really; it’s just a feeling. Sometimes it frightens me,
sometimes I’m not frightened at all but at peace.” He glanced in at the
girls and their yellow hair shining in the lamplight. “I didn’t say
anything to you. It first happened about four nights ago.”
“What?”
“A dream I had. I dreamed that it was all going to be over, and a voice
said it was; not any kind of voice I can remember, but a voice anyway,
and it said things would stop here on Earth. I didn’t think too much
about it the next day, but then I went to the office and caught Stan
Willis looking out the window in the middle of the afternoon, and I said
a penny for your thoughts, Stan, and he said, I had a dream last night,
and before he even told me the dream I knew what it was. I could have
told him, but he told me and I listened to him.”
“It was the same dream?”
“The same. I told Stan I had dreamed it too. He didn’t seem surprised.
He relaxed, in fact. Then we started walking through the office, for the
hell of it. It wasn’t planned. We didn’t say, ‘Let’s walk around.’ We
just walked on our own, and everywhere we saw people looking at their
desks or their hands or out windows. I talked to a few. So did Stan.”
“And they all had dreamed?”
“All of them. The same dream, with no difference.”
“Do you believe in it?”
“Yes. I’ve never been more certain.”
“And when will it stop? The world, I mean.”
“Sometime during the night for us, and then as the night goes on around
the world, that’ll go too. It’ll take twenty-four hours for it all to
go.”
They sat awhile not touching their coffee. Then they lifted it slowly
and drank, looking at each other.
“Do we deserve this?” she said.
“It’s not a matter of deserving; it’s just that things didn’t work out.
I notice you didn’t even argue about this. Why not?”
“I guess I’ve a reason,” she said.
“The same one everyone at the office had?”
She nodded slowly. “I didn’t want to say anything. It happened last
night. And the women on the block talked about it, among themselves,
today. They dreamed. I thought it was only a coincidence.” She picked up
the evening paper. “There’s nothing in the paper about it.”
“Everyone knows, so there’s no need.”
He sat back in his chair, watching her. “Are you afraid?”
“No. I always thought I would be, but I’m not.”
“Where’s that spirit called self-preservation they talk so much about?”
“I don’t know. You don’t get too excited when you feel things are
logical. This is logical. Nothing else but this could have happened from
the way we’ve lived.”
“We haven’t been too bad, have we?”
“No, nor enormously good. I suppose that’s the trouble—we haven’t been
very much of anything except us, while a big part of the world was busy
being lots of quite awful things.”
The girls were laughing in the parlor.
“I always thought people would be screaming in the streets at a time
like this.”
“I guess not. You don’t scream about the real thing.”
“Do you know, I won’t miss anything but you and the girls. I never liked
cities or my work or anything except you three. I won’t miss a thing
except perhaps the change in the weather, and a glass of ice water when
it’s hot, and I might miss sleeping. How can we sit here and talk this
way?”
“Because there’s nothing else to do.”
“That’s it, of course; for if there were, we’d be doing it. I suppose
this is the first time in the history of the world that everyone has
known just what they were going to do during the night.”
“I wonder what everyone else will do now, this evening, for the next few
hours.”
“Go to a show, listen to the radio, watch television, play cards, put
the children to bed, go to bed themselves, like always.”
“In a way that’s something to be proud of—like always.”
They sat a moment and then he poured himself another coffee. “Why do you
suppose it’s tonight?”
“Because.”
“Why not some other night in the last century, or five centuries ago, or
ten?”
“Maybe it’s because it was never October 19, 1969, ever before in
history, and now it is and that’s it; because this date means more than
any other date ever meant; because it’s the year when things are as they
are all over the world and that’s why it’s the end.”
“There are bombers on their schedules both ways across the ocean tonight
that’ll never see land.”
“That’s part of the reason why.”
“Well,” he said, getting up, “what shall it be? Wash the dishes?”
They washed the dishes and stacked them away with special neatness. At
eight-thirty the girls were put to bed and kissed good night and the
little lights by their beds turned on and the door left open just a
trifle.
“I wonder,” said the husband, coming from the bedroom and glancing back,
standing there with his pipe for a moment.
“What?”
“If the door will be shut all the way, or if it’ll be left just a little
ajar so some light comes in.”
“I wonder if the children know.”
“No, of course not.”
They sat and read the papers and talked and listened to some radio music
and then sat together by the fireplace watching the charcoal embers as
the clock struck ten-thirty and eleven and eleven-thirty. They thought
of all the other people in the world who had spent their evening, each
in his own special way.
“Well,” he said at last.
He kissed his wife for a long time.
“We’ve been good for each other, anyway.”
“Do you want to cry?” he asked.
“I don’t think so.”
They moved through the house and turned out the lights and went into the
bedroom and stood in the night cool darkness undressing and pushing back
the covers. “The sheets are so clean and nice.”
“I’m tired.”
“We’re  all  tired.”
They got into bed and lay back.
“Just a moment,” she said.
He heard her get out of bed and go into the kitchen. A moment later, she
returned. “I left the water running in the sink,” she said.
Something about this was so very funny that he had to laugh. She laughed
with him, knowing what it was that she had done that was funny. They
stopped laughing at last and lay in their cool night bed, their hands
clasped, their heads together.
“Good night,” he said, after a moment.
“Good night,” she said.
      The Exiles</p>

THEIR EYES were fire and the breath flamed out the witches’ mouths as
they bent to probe the caldron with greasy stick and bony finger.
“When shall we three meet again
    In thunder, lightning, or in rain?”</p>

They danced drunkenly on the shore of an empty sea, fouling the air with
their three tongues, and burning it with their cats’ eyes malevolently
aglitter:
“Round about the cauldron go;
    In the poison’d entrails throw.</p><empty-line /><p>

    Double, double, toil and trouble;</p><empty-line /><p>

    Fire burn, and cauldron bubble!”</p>

They paused and cast a glance about. “Where’s the crystal? Where the
needles?”
“Here!”
“Good!”
“Is the yellow wax thickened?”
“Yes!”
“Pour it in the iron mold!”
“Is the wax figure done?” They shaped it like molasses adrip on their
green hands.
“Shove the needle through the heart!”
“The crystal, the crystal; fetch it from the tarot bag. Dust it off;
have a look!”
They bent to the crystal, their faces white.
“See, see, see . . .”
A rocket ship moved through space from the planet Earth to the planet
Mars. On the rocket ship men were dying.
The captain raised his head, tiredly. “We’ll have to use the morphine.”
“But, Captain—”
“You see yourself this man’s condition.” The captain lifted the wool
blanket and the man restrained beneath the wet sheet moved and groaned.
The air was full of sulphurous thunder.
“I saw it—I saw it.” The man opened his eyes and stared at the port
where there were only black spaces, reeling stars, Earth far removed,
and the planet Mars rising large and red. “I saw it—a bat, a huge thing,
a bat with a man’s face, spread over the front port. Fluttering and
fluttering, fluttering and fluttering.”
“Pulse?” asked the captain.
The orderly measured it. “One hundred and thirty.”
“He can’t go on with that. Use the morphine. Come along, Smith.”
They moved away. Suddenly the floor plates were laced with bone and
white skulls that screamed. The captain did not dare look down, and over
the screaming he said, “Is this where Perse is?” turning in at a hatch.
A white-smocked surgeon stepped away from a body. “I just don’t
understand it.”
“How did Perse die?”
“We don’t know, Captain. It wasn’t his heart, his brain, or shock. He
just—died.”
The captain felt the doctor’s wrist, which changed to a hissing snake
and bit him. The captain did not flinch. “Take care of yourself. You’ve
a pulse too.”
The doctor nodded. “Perse complained of pains—needles, he said—in his
wrists and legs. Said he felt like wax, melting. He fell. I helped him
up. He cried like a child. Said he had a silver needle in his heart. He
died. Here he is. We can repeat the autopsy for you. Everything’s
physically normal.”
“That’s impossible! He died of  something!”
The captain walked to a port. He smelled of menthol and iodine and green
soap on his polished and manicured hands. His white teeth were
dentifriced, and his ears scoured to a pinkness, as were his cheeks. His
uniform was the color of new salt, and his boots were black mirrors
shining below him. His crisp crew-cut hair smelled of sharp alcohol.
Even his breath was sharp and new and clean. There was no spot to him.
He was a fresh instrument, honed and ready, still hot from the surgeon’s
oven.
The men with him were from the same mold. One expected huge brass keys
spiraling slowly from their backs. They were expensive, talented,
well-oiled toys, obedient and quick.
The captain watched the planet Mars grow very large in space. “We’ll be
landing in an hour on that damned place. Smith, did you see any bats, or
have other nightmares?”
“Yes, sir. The month before our rocket took off from New York, sir.
White rats biting my neck, drinking my blood. I didn’t tell. I was
afraid you wouldn’t let me come on this trip.”
“Never mind,” sighed the captain. “I had dreams too. In all of my fifty
years I never had a dream until that week before we took off from Earth.
And then every night I dreamed I was a white wolf. Caught on a snowy
hill. Shot with a silver bullet. Buried with a stake in my heart.” He
moved his head toward Mars. “Do you think, Smith,  they  know we’re
coming?”
“We don’t know if there  are  Martian people, sir.”
“Don’t we? They began frightening us off eight weeks ago, before we
started. They’ve killed Perse and Reynolds now. Yesterday they made
Crenville go blind. How? I don’t know. Bats, needles, dreams, men dying
for no reason. I’d call it witchcraft in another day. But this is the
year 2120, Smith. We’re rational men. This all can’t be happening. But
it is! Whoever they are, with their needles and their bats, they’ll try
to finish us all.” He swung about. “Smith, fetch those books from my
file. I want them when we land.”
Two hundred books were piled on the rocket deck.
“Thank you, Smith. Have you glanced at them? Think I’m insane? Perhaps.
It’s a crazy hunch. At that last moment I ordered these books from the
Historical Museum. Because of my dreams. Twenty nights I was stabbed,
butchered, a screaming bat pinned to a surgical mat, a thing rotting
underground in a black box; bad, wicked dreams. Our whole crew dreamed
of witch-things and were-things, vampires and phantoms, things they 
couldn’t  know anything about. Why? Because books on such ghastly
subjects were destroyed a century ago. By law. Forbidden for anyone to
own the grisly volumes. These books you see here are the  last  copies,
kept for historical purposes in the locked museum vaults.”
Smith bent to read the dusty titles:
“Tales of Mystery and Imagination, by Edgar Allan Poe.  Dracula,  by
Brain Stoker.  Frankenstein,  by Mary Shelley.  The Turn of the Screw, 
by Henry James.  The Legend of Sleepy Hollow,  by Washington Irving. 
Rappaccini’s Daughter,  by Nathaniel Hawthorne.  An Occurrence at Owl
Creek Bridge,  by Ambrose Bierce.  Alice in Wonderland,  by Lewis
Carroll.  The Willows,  by Algernon Blackwood.  The Wizard of Oz,  by L.
Frank Baum.  The Weird Shadow Over Innsmouth,  by H. P. Lovecraft. And
more! Books by Walter de la Mare, Wakefield, Harvey, Wells, Asquith,
Huxley—all forbidden authors. All burned in the same year that Halloween
was outlawed and Christmas was banned! But, sir, what good are these to
us on the rocket?”
“I don’t know,” sighed the captain, “yet.”
The three bags lifted the crystal where the captain’s image flickered,
his tiny voice tinkling out of the glass:
“I don’t know,” sighed the captain, “yet.”
The three witches glared redly into one another’s faces.
“We haven’t much time,” said one.
“Better warn  Them  in the City.”
“They’ll want to know about the books. It doesn’t look good. That fool
of a captain!”
“In an hour they’ll land their rocket.”
The three bags shuddered and blinked up at the Emerald City by the edge
of the dry Martian sea. In its highest window a small man held a
blood-red drape aside. He watched the wastelands where the three witches
fed their caldron and shaped the waxes. Farther along, ten thousand
other blue fires and laurel incenses, black tobacco smokes and fir
weeds, cinnamons and bone dusts rose soft as moths through the Martian
night. The man counted the angry, magical fires. Then, as the three
witches stared, he turned. The crimson drape, released, fell, causing
the distant portal to wink, like a yellow eye.
Mr. Edgar Allan Poe stood in the tower window, a faint vapor of spirits
upon his breath. “Hecate’s friends are busy tonight,” he said, seeing
the witches, far below.
A voice behind him said, “I saw Will Shakespeare at the shore, earlier,
whipping them on. All along the sea Shakespeare’s army alone, tonight,
numbers thousands: the three witches, Oberon, Hamlet’s father, Puck—all,
all of them—thousands! Good lord, a regular sea of people.”
“Good William.” Poe turned. He let the crimson drape fall shut. He stood
for a moment to observe the raw stone room, the black-timbered table,
the candle flame, the other man, Mr. Ambrose Bierce, sitting very idly
there, lighting matches and watching them burn down, whistling under his
breath, now and then laughing to himself.
“We’ll have to tell Mr. Dickens now,” said Mr. Poe. “We’ve put it off
too long. It’s a matter of hours. Will you go down to his home with me,
Bierce?”
Bierce glanced up merrily. “I’ve just been thinking—what’ll happen to
us?”
“If we can’t kill the rocket men off, frighten them away, then we’ll
have to leave, of course. We’ll go on to Jupiter, and when they come to
Jupiter, we’ll go on to Saturn, and when they come to Saturn, we’ll go
to Uranus, or Neptune, and then on out to Pluto——”
“Where then?”
Mr. Poe’s face was weary; there were fire coals remaining, fading, in
his eyes, and a sad wildness in the way he talked, and a uselessness of
his hands and the way his hair fell lankly over his amazing white brow.
He was like a satan of some lost dark cause, a general arrived from a
derelict invasion. His silky, soft, black mustache was worn away by his
musing lips. He was so small his brow seemed to float, vast and
phosphorescent, by itself, in the dark room.
“We have the advantages of superior forms of travel,” he said. “We can
always hope for one of their atomic wars, dissolution, the dark ages
come again. The return of superstition. We could go back then to Earth,
all of us, in one night.” Mr. Poe’s black eyes brooded under his round
and luminant brow. He gazed at the ceiling. “So they’re coming to ruin 
this  world too? They won’t leave  anything  undefiled, will they?”
“Does a wolf pack stop until it’s killed its prey and eaten the guts? It
should be quite a war. I shall sit on the side lines and be the
scorekeeper. So many Earthmen boiled in oil, so many Mss. Found in
Bottles burnt, so many Earthmen stabbed with needles, so many Red Deaths
put to flight by a battery of hypodermic syringes—ha!”
Poe swayed angrily, faintly drunk with wine. “What did we do? Be  with 
us, Bierce, in the name of God! Did we have a fair trial before a
company of literary critics? No! Our books were plucked up by neat,
sterile, surgeon’s pliers, and flung into vats, to boil, to be killed of
all their mortuary germs. Damn them all!”
“I find our situation amusing,” said Bierce.
They were interrupted by a hysterical shout from the tower stair.
“Mr. Poe! Mr. Bierce!”
“Yes, yes, we’re coming!” Poe and Bierce descended to find a man gasping
against the stone passage wall.
“Have you heard the news?” he cried immediately, clawing at them like a
man about to fall over a cliff. “In an hour they’ll land! They’re
bringing books with them—old  books, the witches said! What’re you doing
in the tower at a time like this? Why aren’t you acting?”
Poe said: “We’re doing everything we can, Blackwood. You’re new to all
this. Come along, we’re going to Mr. Charles Dickens’ place——”
“—to contemplate our doom, our black doom,” said Mr. Bierce, with a
wink.
They moved down the echoing throats of the castle, level after dim green
level, down into mustiness and decay and spiders and dreamlike webbing.
“Don’t worry,” said Poe, his brow like a huge white lamp before them,
descending, sinking. “All along the dead sea tonight I’ve called the
others. Your friends and mine, Blackwood—Bierce. They’re all there. The
animals and the old women and the tall men with the sharp white teeth.
The traps are waiting; the pits, yes, and the pendulums. The Red Death.”
Here he laughed quietly. “Yes, even the Red Death. I never thought—no, I
never thought the time would come when a thing like the Red Death would
actually be. But  they  asked for it, and they shall have it!”
“But are we strong enough?” wondered Blackwood.
“How strong is strong? They won’t be prepared for us, at least. They
haven’t the imagination. Those clean young rocket men with their
antiseptic bloomers and fish-bowl helmets, with their new religion.
About their necks, on gold chains, scalpels. Upon their heads, a diadem
of microscopes. In their holy fingers, steaming incense urns which in
reality are only germicidal ovens for steaming out superstition. The
names of Poe, Bierce, Hawthorne, Blackwood—blasphemy to their clean
lips.”
Outside the castle they advanced through a watery space, a tarn that was
not a tarn, which misted before them like the stuff of nightmares. The
air filled with wing sounds and a whirring, a motion of winds and
blacknesses. Voices changed, figures swayed at campfires. Mr. Poe
watched the needles knitting, knitting, knitting, in the firelight;
knitting pain and misery, knitting wickedness into wax marionettes, clay
puppets. The caldron smells of wild garlic and cayenne and saffron
hissed up to fill the night with evil pungency.
“Get on with it!” said Poe. “I’ll be back!”
All down the empty seashore black figures spindled and waned, grew up
and blew into black smoke on the sky. Bells rang in mountain towers and
licorice ravens spilled out with the bronze sounds and spun away to
ashes.
Over a lonely moor and into a small valley Poe and Bierce hurried, and
found themselves quite suddenly on a cobbled street, in cold, bleak,
biting weather, with people stomping up and down stony courtyards to
warm their feet; foggy withal, and candles flaring in the windows of
offices and shops where hung the Yuletide turkeys. At a distance some
boys, all bundled up, snorting their pale breaths on the wintry air,
were trilling, “God Rest Ye Merry, Gentlemen,” while the immense tones
of a great clock continuously sounded midnight. Children dashed by from
the baker’s with dinners all asteam in their grubby fists, on trays and
under silver bowls.
At a sign which read SCROOGE, MARLEY AND DICKENS, Poe gave the
Marley-faced knocker a rap, and from within, as the door popped open a
few inches, a sudden gust of music almost swept them into a dance. And
there, beyond the shoulder of the man who was sticking a him goatee and
mustaches at them, was Mr. Fezziwig clapping his hands, and Mrs.
Fezziwig, one vast substantial smile, dancing and colliding with other
merrymakers, while the fiddle chirped and laughter ran about a table
like chandelier crystals given a sudden push of wind. The large table
was heaped with brawn and turkey and holly and geese; with mince pies,
suckling pigs, wreaths of sausages, oranges and apples; and there was
Bob Cratchit and Little Dorrit and Tiny Tim and Mr. Fagin himself, and a
man who looked as if he might be an undigested bit of beef, a blot of
mustard, a crumb of cheese, a fragment of an underdone potato—who else
but Mr. Marley, chains and all, while the wine poured and the brown
turkeys did their excellent best to steam!
“What do you want?” demanded Mr. Charles Dickens.
“We’ve come to plead with you again, Charles; we need your help,” said
Poe.
“Help? Do you think I would help you fight against those good men coming
in the rocket? I don’t belong here, anyway. My books were burned by
mistake. I’m no supernaturalist, no writer of horrors and terrors like
you, Poe; you, Bierce, or the others. I’ll have nothing to do with you
terrible people!”
“You are a persuasive talker,” reasoned Poe. “You could go to meet the
rocket men, lull them, lull their suspicions and then—then we would take
care of them.”
Mr. Dickens eyed the folds of the black cape which hid Poe’s hands. From
it, smiling, Poe drew forth a black cat. “For one of our visitors.”
“And for the others?”
Poe smiled again, well pleased. “The Premature Burial?”
“You are a grim man, Mr. Poe.”
“I am a frightened and an angry man. I am a god, Mr. Dickens, even as
you are a god, even as we all are gods, and our inventions—our people,
if you wish—have not only been threatened, but banished and burned, torn
up and censored, ruined and done away with. The worlds we created are
falling into ruin. Even gods must fight!”
“So?” Mr. Dickens tilted his head, impatient to return to the party, the
music, the food. “Perhaps you can explain why we are here? How did we
come here?”
“War begets war. Destruction begets destruction. On Earth, a century
ago, in the year 2020 they outlawed our books. Oh, what a horrible
thing—to destroy our literary creations that way! It summoned us out
of—what? Death? The Beyond? I don’t like abstract things. I don’t know.
I only know that our worlds and our creations called us and we tried to
save them, and the only saving thing we could do was wait out the
century here on Mars, hoping Earth might overweight itself with these
scientists and their doubtings; but now they’re coming to clean us out
of here, us and our dark things, and all the alchemists, witches,
vampires, and were-things that, one by one, retreated across space as
science made inroads through every country on Earth and finally left no
alternative at all but exodus. You must help us. You have a good
speaking manner. We need you.”
“I repeat, I am not of you, I don’t approve of you and the others,”
cried Dickens angrily. “I was no player with witches and vampires and
midnight things.”
“What of  A Christmas Carol?”
“Ridiculous! One story. Oh, I wrote a few others about ghosts, perhaps,
but what of that? My basic works had none of that nonsense!”
“Mistaken or not, they grouped you with us. They destroyed your
books—your worlds too. You must hate them, Mr. Dickens!”
“I admit they are stupid and rude, but that is all. Good day!”
“Let Mr. Marley come, at least!”
“No!”
The door slammed. As Poe turned away, down the street, skimming over the
frosty ground, the coachman playing a lively air on a bugle, came a
great coach, out of which, cherry-red, laughing and singing, piled the
Pickwickians, banging on the door, shouting Merry Christmas good and
loud, when the door was opened by the fat boy.
Mr. Poe hurried along the midnight shore of the dry sea. By fires and
smoke he hesitated, to shout orders, to check the bubbling caldrons, the
poisons and the chalked pentagrams. “Good!” he said, and ran on. “Fine!”
he shouted, and ran again. People joined him and ran with him. Here were
Mr. Coppard and Mr. Machen running with him now. And there were hating
serpents and angry demons and fiery bronze dragons and spitting vipers
and trembling witches like the barbs and nettles and thorns and all the
vile flotsam and jetsam of the retreating sea of imagination, left on
the melancholy shore, whining and frothing and spitting.
Mr. Machen stopped. He sat like a child on the cold sand. He began to
sob. They tried to soothe him, but he would not listen. “I just
thought,” he said. “What happens to us on the day when the  last  copies
of our books are destroyed?”
The air whirled.
“Don’t speak of it!”
“We must,” wailed Mr. Machen. “Now, now, as the rocket comes down, you,
Mr. Poe; you, Coppard; you, Bierce—all of you grow faint. Like wood
smoke. Blowing away. Your faces melt—”
“Death!  Real  death for all of us.”
“We exist only through Earth’s sufferance. If a final edict tonight
destroyed our last few works we’d be like lights put out.”
Coppard brooded gently. “I wonder who I am. In what Earth mind tonight
do I exist? In some African hut? Some hermit, reading my tales? Is he
the lonely candle in the wind of time and science? The flickering orb
sustaining me here in rebellious exile? Is it him? Or some boy in a
discarded attic, finding me, only just in time! Oh, last night I felt
ill, ill, ill to the marrows of me, for there is a body of the soul as
well as a body of the body, and this soul body ached in all of its
glowing parts, and last night I felt myself a candle, guttering. When
suddenly I sprang up, given new light! As some child, sneezing with
dust, in some yellow garret on Earth once more found a worn,
time-specked copy of me! And so I’m given a short respite!”
A door banged wide in a little hut by the shore. A thin short man, with
flesh hanging from him in folds, stepped out and, paying no attention to
the others, sat down and stared into his clenched fists.
“There’s the one I’m sorry for,” whispered Blackwood. “Look at him,
dying away. He was once more real than we, who were men. They took him,
a skeleton thought, and clothed him in centuries of pink flesh and snow
beard and red velvet suit and black boot; made him reindeers, tinsel,
holly. And after centuries of manufacturing him they drowned him in a
vat of Lysol, you might say.”
The men were silent.
“What must it be on Earth?” wondered Poe. “Without Christmas? No hot
chestnuts, no tree, no ornaments or drums or candles—nothing; nothing
but the snow and wind and the lonely, factual people. . . .”
They all looked at the thin little old man with the scraggly beard and
faded red velvet suit.
“Have you heard his story?”
“I can imagine it. The glitter-eyed psychiatrist, the clever
sociologist, the resentful, froth-mouthed educationalist, the antiseptic
parents——”
“A regrettable situation,” said fierce, smiling, “for the Yuletide
merchants who, toward the last there, as I recall, were beginning to put
up holly and sing Noel the day before Halloween. With any luck at all
this year they might have started on Labor Day!”
Bierce did not continue. He fell forward with a sigh. As he lay upon the
ground he had time to say only, “How interesting.” And then, as they all
watched, horrified, his body burned into blue dust and charred bone, the
ashes of which fled through the air in black tatters.
“Bierce, Berce!”
“Gone!”
“His last book gone. Someone on Earth just now burned it.”
“God rest him. Nothing of him left now. For what are we but books, and
when those are gone, nothing’s to be seen.”
A rushing sound filled the sky.
They cried out, terrified, and looked up. In the sky, dazzling it with
sizzling fire clouds, was the rocket! Around the men on the seashore
lanterns bobbed; there was a squealing and a bubbling and an odor of
cooked spells. Candle-eyed pumpkins lifted into the cold clear air. Thin
fingers clenched into fists and a witch screamed from her withered
mouth:
“Ship, ship, break, fall!
    Ship, ship, burn all!</p><empty-line /><p>

    Crack, flake, shake, melt!</p><empty-line /><p>

    Mummy dust, cat pelt!”</p>

“Time to go,” murmured Blackwood. “On to Jupiter, on to Saturn or
Pluto.”
“Run away?” shouted Poe in the wind. “Never!”
“I’m a tired old man!”
Poe gazed into the old man’s face and believed him. He climbed atop a
huge boulder and faced the ten thousand gray shadows and green lights
and yellow eyes on the hissing wind.
“The powders!” he shouted.
A thick hot smell of bitter almond, civet, cumin, wormseed and orris!
The rocket came down—steadily down, with the shriek of a damned spirit!
Poe raged at it! He flung his fists up and the orchestra of heat and
smell and hatred answered in symphony! Like stripped tree fragments,
bats flew upward! Burning hearts, flung like missiles, burst in bloody
fireworks on the singed air. Down, down, relentlessly down, like a
pendulum the rocket came. And Poe howled, furiously, and shrank back
with every sweep and sweep of the rocket cutting and ravening the air!
All the dead sea seemed a pit in which, trapped, they waited the sinking
of the dread machinery, the glistening ax; they were people under the
avalanche!
“The snakes!” screamed Poe.
And luminous serpentines of undulant green hurtled toward the rocket.
But it came down, a sweep, a fire, a motion, and it lay panting out
exhaustions of red plumage on the sand, a mile away.
“At it!” shrieked Poe. “The plan’s changed! Only one chance! Run! At it!
At it! Drown them with our bodies! Kill them!”
And as if he had commanded a violent sea to change its course, to suck
itself free from primeval beds, the whirls and savage gouts of fire
spread and ran like wind and rain and stark lightning over the sea
sands, down empty river deltas, shadowing and screaming, whistling and
whining, sputtering and coalescing toward the rocket which,
extinguished, lay like a clean metal torch in the farthest hollow. As if
a great charred caldron of sparkling lava had been overturned, the
boiling people and snapping animals churned down the dry fathoms.
“Kill them!” screamed Poe, running.
The rocket men leaped out of their ship, guns ready. They stalked about,
sniffing the air like hounds. They saw nothing. They relaxed.
The captain stepped forth last. He gave sharp commands. Wood was
gathered, kindled, and a fire leapt up in an instant. The captain
beckoned his men into a half circle about him.
“A new world,” he said, forcing himself to speak deliberately, though he
glanced nervously, now and again, over his shoulder at the empty sea.
“The old world left behind. A new start. What more symbolic than that we
here dedicate ourselves all the more firmly to science and progress.” He
nodded crisply to his lieutenant. “The books.”
Firelight limned the faded gilt titles:  The Willows, The Outsider,
Behold, The Dreamer, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, The Land of Oz,
Pellucidar, The Land That Time Forgot A Midsummer Night’s Dream,  and
the monstrous names of Machen and Edgar Allan Poe and Cabell and Dunsany
and Blackwood and Lewis Carroll; the names, the old names, the evil
names.
“A new world. With a gesture, we burn the last of the old.” The captain
ripped pages from the books. Leaf by seared leaf, he fed them into the
fire.
A scream!
Leaping back, the men stared beyond the firelight at the edges of the
encroaching and uninhabited sea.
Another scream! A high and wailing thing, like the death of a dragon and
the thrashing of a bronzed whale left gasping when the waters of a
leviathan’s sea drain down the shingles and evaporate.
It was the sound of air rushing in to fill a vacuum, where, a moment
before, there had been  something!
The captain neatly disposed of the last book by putting it into the
fire.
The air stopped quivering. Silence!
The rocket men leaned and listened. “Captain, did you hear it?”
“No.”
“Like a wave, sir. On the sea bottom! I thought I saw something. Over
there. A black wave. Big. Running at us.”
“You were mistaken.”
“There, sir!”
“What?”
“See it? There! The city! Way over! That green city near the lake! It’s
splitting in half. It’s falling!”
The men squinted and shuffled forward.
Smith stood trembling among them. He put his hand to his head as if to
find a thought there. “I remember. Yes, now I do. A long time back. When
I was a child. A book I read. A story. Oz, I think it was. Yes, Oz.  The
Emerald City of Oz  . . .”
“Oz? Never heard of it.”
“Yes, Oz, that’s what it was. I saw it just now, like in the story. I
saw it fall.”
“Smith!”
“Yes, sir?”
“Report for psychoanalysis tomorrow.”
“Yes, sir!” A brisk salute.
“Be careful.”
The men tiptoed, guns alert, beyond the ship’s aseptic light to gaze at
the long sea and the low hills.
“Why,” whispered Smith, disappointed, “there’s no one here at all, is
there? No one here at all.”
The wind blew sand over his shoes, whining.
      No Particular Night or Morning</p>

HE HAD smoked a packet of cigarettes in two hours.
“How far out in space are we?”
“A billion miles.”
“A billion miles from where?” said Hitchcock
“It all depends,” said Clemens, not smoking at all. “A billion miles
from home, you might say.”
“Then say it.”
“Home. Earth. New York. Chicago. Wherever you were from.”
“I don’t even remember,” said Hitchcock. “I don’t even believe there is
an Earth now, do you?”
“Yes,” said Clemens. “I dreamt about it this morning.”
“There is no morning in space.”
“During the night then.”
“It’s always night,” said Hitchcock quietly. “Which night do you mean?”
“Shut up,” said Clemens irritably. “Let me finish.” Hitchcock lit
another cigarette. His hand did not shake, but it looked as if, inside
the sunburned flesh, it might be tremoring all to itself, a small tremor
in each hand and a large invisible tremor in his body. The two men sat
on the observation corridor floor, looking out at the stars. Clemens’s
eyes flashed, but Hitchcock’s eyes focused on nothing; they were blank
and puzzled.
“I woke up at 0500 hours myself,” said Hitchcock, as if he were talking
to his right hand. “And I heard myself screaming, ‘Where am I? where am
I?’ And the answer was ‘Nowhere!’ And I said, ‘Where’ve I been?’ And I
said, ‘Earth!’ ‘What’s Earth?’ I wondered. ‘Where I was born,’ I said.
But it was nothing and worse than nothing. I don’t believe in anything I
can’t see or hear or touch. I can’t see Earth, so why should I believe
in it? It’s safer this way, not to believe.”
“There’s Earth.” Clemens pointed, smiling. “That point of light there.”
“That’s not Earth; that’s our sun. You can’t see Earth from here.”
“I can see it. I have a good memory.
“It’s not the  same,  you fool,” said Hitchcock suddenly. There was a
touch of anger in his voice. “I mean see it. I’ve always been that way.
When I’m in Boston, New York is dead. When I’m in New York, Boston is
dead. When I don’t see a man for a day, he’s dead. When he comes walking
down the street, my God, it’s a resurrection. I do a dance, almost, I’m
so glad to see him. I used to, anyway. I don’t dance any more. I just
look. And when the man walks off, he’s dead again.”
Clemens laughed. “It’s simply that your mind works on a primitive level.
You can’t hold to things. You’ve got no imagination, Hitchcock old man.
You’ve got to learn to hold on.”
“Why should I hold onto things I can’t use?” said Hitchcock, his eyes
wide, still staring into space. “I’m practical. If Earth isn’t here for
me to walk on, you want me to walk on a memory? That  hurts.  Memories,
as my father once said, are porcupines. To hell with them! Stay away
from them. They make you unhappy. They ruin your work. They make you
cry.”
“I’m walking on Earth right now,” said Clemens, squinting to himself,
blowing smoke.
“You’re kicking porcupines. Later in the day you won’t be able to eat
lunch, and you’ll wonder why,” said Hitchcock in a dead voice. “And
it’ll be because you’ve got a footful of quills aching in you. To hell
with it! If I can’t drink it, pinch it, punch it, or lie on it, then I
say drop it in the sun. I’m dead to Earth. It’s dead to me. There’s no
one in New York weeping for me tonight. Shove New York. There isn’t any
season here; winter and summer are gone. So is spring, and autumn. It
isn’t any particular night or morning; it’s space and space. The only
thing right now is you and me and this rocket ship. And the only thing
I’m positive of is  me.  That’s all of it.”
Clemens ignored this. “I’m putting a nickel in the phone slot right
now,” he said, pantomiming it with a slow smile. “And calling my girl in
Evanston. Hello, Barbara!”
The rocket sailed on through space.
The lunch bell rang at 1305 hours. The men ran by on soft rubber
sneakers and sat at the cushioned tables.
Clemens wasn’t hungry.
“See, what did I tell you!” said Hitchcock. “You and your damned
porcupines! Leave them alone, like I told you. Look at me, shoveling
away food.” He said this with a mechanical, slow, and unhumorous voice.
“Watch me.” He put a big piece of pie in his mouth and felt it with his
tongue. He looked at the pie on his plate as if to see the texture. He
moved it with his fork. He felt the fork handle. He mashed the lemon
filling and watched it jet up between the tines. Then he touched a
bottle of milk all over and poured out half a quart into a glass,
listening to it. He looked at the milk as if to make it whiter. He drank
the milk so swiftly that he couldn’t have tasted it. He had eaten his
entire lunch in a few minutes, cramming it in feverishly, and now he
looked around for more, but it was gone. He gazed out the window of the
rocket, blankly. “Those aren’t real, either,” he said.
“What?” asked Clemens.
“The stars. Who’s ever touched one? I can see them, sure, but what’s the
use of seeing a thing that’s a million or a billion miles away? Anything
that far off isn’t worth bothering with.”
“Why did you come on this trip?” asked Clemens suddenly.
Hitchcock peered into his amazingly empty milk glass and clenched it
tight, then relaxed his hand and clenched it again. “I don’t know.” He
ran his tongue on the glass rim. “I just had to, is all. How do you know
why you do anything in this life?”
“You liked the idea of space travel? Going places?”
“I don’t know. Yes. No. It wasn’t going places. It was being  between.” 
Hitchcock for the first time tried to focus his eyes upon something, but
it was so nebulous and far off that his eyes couldn’t make the
adjustment, though he worked his face and hands. “Mostly it was space.
So much space. I liked the idea of nothing on top, nothing on the
bottom, and a lot of nothing in between, and me in the middle of the
nothing.”
“I never heard it put that way before.”
“I  just put it that way; I hope you listened.”
Hitchcock took out his cigarettes and lit up and began to suck and blow
the smoke, again and again.
Clemens said, “What sort of childhood did you have, Hitchcock?”
“I was never young. Whoever I was then is dead. That’s more of your
quills. I don’t want a hide full, thanks. I’ve always figured it that
you die each day and each day is a box, you see, all numbered and neat;
but never go back and lift the lids, because you’ve died a couple of
thousand times in your life, and that’s a lot of corpses, each dead a
different way, each with a worse expression. Each of those days is a
different you, somebody you don’t know or understand or want to
understand.”
“You’re cutting yourself off, that way.”
“Why should I have anything to do with that younger Hitchcock? He was a
fool, and he was yanked around and taken advantage of and used. His
father was no good, and he was glad when his mother died, because she
was the same. Should I go back and see his face on that day and gloat
over it? He was a fool.”
“We’re all fools,” said Clemens, “all the time. It’s just we’re a
different kind each day. We think, I’m not a fool today. I’ve learned my
lesson. I was a fool yesterday but not this morning. Then tomorrow we
find out that, yes, we were a fool today too. I think the only way we
can grow and get on in this world is to accept the fact we’re not
perfect and live accordingly.”
“I don’t want to remember imperfect things,” said Hitchcock.  “I can’t
shake hands with that younger Hitchcock, can I? Where he? Can you find
him for me? He’s dead, so to hell with him! I won’t shape what I do
tomorrow by some lousy thing I did yesterday.”
“You’ve got it wrong.”
“Let me have it then.” Hitchcock sat, finished with his meal, looking
out the port. The other men glanced at him.
“Do meteors exist?” asked Hitchcock.
“You know damn well they do.”
“In our radar machines—yes, as streaks of light in space. No, I don’t
believe in anything that doesn’t exist and act in my presence.
Sometimes”—he nodded at the men finishing their food—”sometimes I don’t
believe in anyone or anything but me.” He sat up. “Is there an upstairs
to this ship?”
“Yes.”
“I’ve got to see it immediately.”
“Don’t get excited.”
“You wait here; I’ll be right back.” Hitchcock walked out swiftly. The
other men sat nibbling their food slowly. A moment passed. One of the
men raised his head. “How long’s this been going on? I mean Hitchcock.”
“Just today.”
“He acted funny the other day too.”
“Yes, but it’s worse today.”
“Has anyone told the psychiatrist?”
“We thought he’d come out of it. Everyone has a little touch of space
the first time out. I’ve had it. You get wildly philosophical, then
frightened. You break into a sweat, then you doubt your parentage, you
don’t believe in Earth, you get drunk, wake up with a hang-over, and
that’s it.”
“But Hitchcock don’t get drunk,” said someone. “I wish he would.”
“How’d he ever get past the examining board?”
“How’d we all get past? They need men. Space scares the hell out of most
people. So the board lets a lot of borderlines through.”
“That man isn’t a borderline,” said someone. “He’s a
fall-off-a-cliff-and-no-bottom-to-hit.”
They waited for five minutes. Hitchcock didn’t come back. Clemens
finally got up and went out and climbed the circular stair to the flight
deck above. Hitchcock was there, touching the wall tenderly.
“It’s here,” he said.
“Of course it is.”
“I was afraid it might not be.” Hitchcock peered at Clemens. “And you’re
alive.”
“I have been for a long time.”
“No,” said Hitchcock. “Now, just  now,  this  instant,  while you’re
here with me, you’re alive. A moment ago you weren’t anything.”
“I was to me,” said the other.
“That’s not important. You weren’t here with me,” said Hitchcock. “Only
that’s important. Is the crew down below?”
“Yes.”
“Can you prove it?”
“Look, Hitchcock, you’d better see Dr. Edwards. I think you need a
little servicing.”
“No, I’m all right. Who’s the doctor, anyway? Can you prove he’s on this
ship?”
“I can. All I have to do is call him."
“No. I mean, standing here, in this instant, you can’t prove he’s here,
can you?”
“Not without moving, I can’t.”
“You see. You have no mental evidence. That’s what I want, a mental
evidence I can  feel.  I don’t want physical evidence, proof you have to
go out and drag in. I want evidence that you can carry in your mind and
always touch and smell and feel. But there’s no way to do that. In order
to believe in a thing you’ve got to carry it with you. You can’t carry
the Earth, or a man, in your pocket. I want a way to do that, carry
things with me always, so I can believe in them. How clumsy to have to
go to all the trouble of going out and bringing in something terribly
physical to prove something. I hate physical things because they can be
left behind and become impossible to believe in then.”
“Those are the rules of the game.”
“I want to change them. Wouldn’t it be fine if we could  prove  things
with our mind, and know for certain that things are always in their
place. I’d like to know what a place is  like  when I’m  not there.  I’d
like to be  sure.”
“That’s not possible.”
“You know,” said Hitchcock, “I first got the idea of coming out into
space about five years ago. About the time I lost my job. Did you know I
wanted to be a writer? Oh yes, one of those men who always talk about
writing but rarely write. And too much temper. So I lost my good job and
left the editorial business and couldn’t get another job and went on
down hill. Then my wife died. You see, nothing stays where you put
it—you can’t trust material things. I had to put my boy in an aunt’s
trust, and things got worse; then one day I had a story published with
my name on it, but it wasn’t me.”
“I don’t get you.”
Hitchcock’s face was pale and sweating.
“I can only say that I looked at the page with my name under the title.
By Joseph Hitchcock. But it was some other man. There was no way to 
prove—actually  prove, really  prove—that that man was me. The story was
familiar—I knew I had written it—but that name on the paper still was
not me. It was a symbol, a name. It was alien. And then I realized that
even if I did become successful at writing, it would never mean a thing
to me, because I couldn’t identify myself with that name. It would be
soot and ashes. So I didn’t write any more. I was never sure, anyway,
that the stories I had in my desk a few days later were mine, though I
remembered typing them. There was always that gap of proof. That gap
between doing and having done. What is done is dead and is not proof,
for it is not an action. Only actions are important. And pieces of paper
were remains of actions done and over and now unseen. The proof of doing
was over and done. Nothing but memory remained, and I didn’t trust my
memory. Could I actually  prove  I’d written these stories? No. Can  any
 author? I mean  proof.  I mean action as proof. No. Not really. Not
unless someone sits in the room while you type, and then maybe you’re
doing it from memory. And once a thing is accomplished there is no
proof, only memory. So then I began to find gaps between everything. I
doubted I was married or had a child or ever had a job in my life. I
doubted that I had been born in Illinois and had a drunken father and
swinish mother. I couldn’t prove anything. Oh yes, people could say,
‘You are thus and so and such and such,’ but that was nothing.”
“You should get your mind off stuff like that,” said Clemens. “I can’t.
All the gaps and spaces. And that’s how I got to thinking about the
stars. I thought how I’d like to be in a rocket ship, in space, in
nothing, in  nothing,  going on into nothing, with just a thin
something, a thin eggshell of metal holding me, going on away from all
the somethings with gaps in them that couldn’t prove themselves. I knew
then that the only happiness for me was space. When I get to Aldebaran
II I’ll sign up to return on the five-year journey to Earth and so go
back and forth like a shuttlecock all the rest of my life.”
“Have you talked about this to the psychiatrist?”
“So he could try to mortar up the gaps for me, fill in the gulfs with
noise and warm water and words and hands touching me, and all that? No,
thanks.” Hitchcock stopped. “I’m getting worse, aren’t I? I thought so.
This morning when I woke up I thought, I’m getting worse. Or is it
better?” He paused again and cocked an eye at Clemens. “Are you there?
Are you  really  there? Go on, prove it.”
Clemens slapped him on the arm, hard.
“Yes,” said Hitchcock, rubbing his arm, looking at it very thoroughly,
wonderingly, massaging it. “You were there. For a brief fraction of an
instant. But I wonder if you are—now.
“See you later,” said Clemens. He was on his way to find the doctor. He
walked away.
A bell rang. Two bells, three bells rang. The ship rocked as if a hand
had slapped it. There was a sucking sound, the sound of a vacuum cleaner
turned on. Clemens heard the screams and felt the air thin. The air
hissed away about his ears. Suddenly there was nothing in his nose or
lungs. He stumbled and then the hissing stopped.
He heard someone cry, “A meteor.” Another said, “It’s patched!” And this
was true. The ship’s emergency spider, running over the outside of the
hull, had slapped a hot patch on the hole in the metal and welded it
tight.
Someone was talking and talking and then beginning to shout at a
distance. Clemens ran along the corridor through the freshening,
thickening air. As he turned in at a bulkhead he saw the hole in the
steel wall, freshly sealed; he saw the meteor fragments lying about the
room like bits of a toy. He saw the captain and the members of the crew
and a man lying on the floor. It was Hitchcock. His eyes were closed and
he was crying. “It tried to kill me,” he said, over and over. “It tried
to kill me.” They got him on his feet. “It can’t do that,” said
Hitchcock. “That’s not how it should be. Things like that can’t happen,
can they? It came in after  me.  Why did it do that?”
“All right, all right Hitchcock,” said the captain.
The doctor was bandaging a small cut on Hitchcock’s arm. Hitchcock
looked up, his face pale, and saw Clemens there looking at him. “It
tried to  kill  me,” he said.
“I know,” said Clemens.
Seventeen hours passed. The ship moved on in space.
Clemens stepped through a bulkhead and waited. The psychiatrist and the
captain were there. Hitchcock sat on the floor with his legs drawn up to
his chest, arms wrapped tight about them.
“Hitchcock,” said the captain.
No answer.
“Hitchcock, listen to me,” said the psychiatrist.
They turned to Clemens. “You’re his friend?”
“Yes.”
“Do you want to help us?”
“If I can.”
“It was that damned meteor,” said the captain. “This might not have
happened if it hadn’t been for that.”
“It would’ve come anyway, sooner or later,” said the doctor. To Clemens:
“You might talk to him.”
Clemens walked quietly over and crouched by Hitchcock and began to shake
his arm gently, calling in a low voice, “Hey there, Hitchcock.”
No reply.
“Hey, it’s me. Me, Clemens,” said Clemens. “Look, I’m here.” He gave the
arm a little slap. He massaged the rigid neck, gently, and the back of
the bent-down head. He glanced at the psychiatrist, who sighed very
softly. The captain shrugged.
“Shock treatment, Doctor?”
The psychiatrist nodded. “We’ll start within the hour.” Yes, thought
Clemens, shock treatment. Play a dozen jazz records for him, wave a
bottle of fresh green chlorophyll and dandelions under his nose, put
grass under his feet, squirt Chanel on the air, cut his hair, clip his
fingernails, bring him a woman, shout, bang and crash at him, fry him
with electricity, fill the gap and the gulf, but where’s your proof? You
can’t keep proving to him forever. You can’t entertain a baby with
rattles and sirens all night every night for the next thirty years.
Sometime you’ve got to stop. When you do that, he’s lost again. That is,
if he pays any attention to you at all.
“Hitchcock!” he cried, as loud as he could, almost frantically, as if he
himself were falling over a cliff. “It’s me. It’s your pal! Hey!”
Clemens turned and walked away out of the silent room.
Twelve hours later another alarm bell rang.
After all of the running had died down, the captain explained:
“Hitchcock snapped out of it for a minute or so. He was alone. He
climbed into a space suit. He opened an airlock. Then he walked out into
space—alone.”
Clemens blinked through the immense glass port, where there was a blur
of stars and distant blackness. “He’s out there now?”
“Yes. A million miles behind us. We’d never find him. First time I knew
he was outside the ship was when his helmet radio came in on our
control-room beam. I heard him talking to himself.”
“What did he say?”
“Something like ‘No more space ship now. Never was any. No people. No
people in all the universe. Never were any. No planets. No stars.’
That’s what he said. And then he said something about his hands and feet
and legs. ‘No hands,’ he said. ‘I haven’t any hands any more. Never had
any. No feet. Never had any. Can’t prove it. No body. Never had any. No
lips. No face. No head. Nothing. Only space. Only space. Only the gap.’”
The men turned quietly to look from the glass port out into the remote
and cold stars.
Space, thought Clemens. The space that Hitchcock loved so well. Space,
with nothing on top, nothing on the bottom, a lot of empty nothings
between, and Hitchcock falling in the middle of the nothing, on his way
to no particular night and no particular morning. . . .
      The Fox and the Forest</p>

THERE WERE fireworks the very first night, things that you should be
afraid of perhaps, for they might remind you of other more horrible
things, but these were beautiful, rockets that ascended into the ancient
soft air of Mexico and shook the stars apart in blue and white
fragments. Everything was good and sweet, the air was that blend of the
dead and the living, of the rains and the dusts, of the incense from the
church, and the brass smell of the tubas on the bandstand which pulsed
out vast rhythms of “La Paloma.” The church doors were thrown wide and
it seemed as if a giant yellow constellation had fallen from the October
sky and lay breathing fire upon the church walls; a million candles sent
their color and fumes about. Newer and better fireworks scurried like
tight-rope walking comets across the cool-filed square, banged against
adobe café walls, then rushed on hot wires to bash the high church
tower, in which boys’ naked feet alone could be seen kicking and
re-kicking, clanging and tilting and re-tilting the monster bells into
monstrous music. A flaming bull blundered about the plaza chasing
laughing men and screaming children.
“The year is 1938,” said William Travis, standing by his wife on the
edge of the yelling crowd, smiling. “A good year.”
The bull rushed upon them. Ducking, the couple ran, with fire balls
pelting them, past the music and riot, the church, the band, under the
stars, clutching each other, laughing. The bull passed, carried lightly
on the shoulders of a charging Mexican, a framework of bamboo and
sulphurous gunpowder.
“I’ve never enjoyed myself so much in my life.” Susan Travis had stopped
for her breath.
“It’s amazing,” said William.
“It will go on, won’t it?”
“All night.”
“No, I mean our trip.”
He frowned and patted his breast pocket. “I’ve enough traveler’s checks
for a lifetime. Enjoy yourself. Forget it. They’ll never find us.”
“Never?”
“Never.”
Now someone was setting off giant crackers, hurling them from the great
bell-tolling tower of the church in a sputter of smoke, while the crowd
below fell back under the threat and the crackers exploded in wonderful
concussions among their dancing feet and flailing bodies. A wondrous
smell of frying tortillas hung all about, and in the cafés men sat at
tables looking out, mugs of beer in their brown hands.
The bull was dead. The fire was out of the bamboo tubes and he was
expended. The laborer lifted the framework from his shoulders. Little
boys clustered to touch the magnificent papier-mâché head, the real
horns.
“Let’s examine the bull,” said William.
As they walked past the café entrance Susan saw the man looking out at
them, a white man in a salt-white suit, with a blue tie and blue shirt,
and a thin, sunburned face. His hair was blond and straight and his eyes
were blue, and he watched them as they walked.
She would never have noticed him if it had not been for the bottles at
his immaculate elbow; a fat bottle of crème de menthe, a clear bottle of
vermouth, a flagon of cognac, and seven other bottles of assorted
liqueurs, and, at his finger tips, ten small half-filled glasses from
which, without taking his eyes off the street, he sipped, occasionally
squinting, pressing his thin mouth shut upon the savor. In his free hand
a thin Havana cigar smoked, and on a chair stood twenty cartons of
Turkish cigarettes, six boxes of cigars, and some packaged colognes.
“Bill——” whispered Susan.
“Take it easy,” he said. “He’s nobody.”
“I saw him in the plaza this morning.”
“Don’t look back, keep walking. Examine the papier-mâché bull here.
That’s it, ask questions.”
“Do you think he’s from the Searchers?”
“They couldn’t follow us!”
“They might!”
“What a nice bull,” said William to the man who owned it.
“He couldn’t have followed us back through two hundred years, could he?”
“Watch yourself, for God’s sake,” said William.
She swayed. He crushed her elbow tightly, steering her away.
“Don’t faint.” He smiled, to make it look good. “You’ll be all right.
Let’s go right in that café, drink in front of him, so if he is what we
think he is, he won’t suspect.”
“No, I couldn’t.”
“We’ve got to. Come on now. And so I said to David, that’s ridiculous!”
This last in a loud voice as they went up the café steps.
We are here, thought Susan. Who are we? Where are we going? What do we
fear? Start at the beginning, she told herself, holding to her sanity,
as she felt the adobe floor underfoot.
My name is Ann Kristen; my husband’s name is Roger. We were born in the
year 2155 A.D. And we lived in a world that was evil. A world that was
like a great black ship pulling away from the shore of sanity and
civilization, roaring its black horn in the night, taking two billion
people with it, whether they wanted to go or not, to death, to fall over
the edge of the earth and the sea into radioactive flame and madness.
They walked into the café. The man was staring at them.
A phone rang.
The phone startled Susan. She remembered a phone ringing two hundred
years in the future, on that blue April morning in 2155, and herself
answering it:
“Ann, this is Rene! Have you heard? I mean about Travel in Time,
Incorporated? Trips to Rome in 21 B.C., trips to Napoleon’s Waterloo—any
time, any place!”
“Rene, you’re joking.”
“No. Clinton Smith left this morning for Philadelphia in 1776. Travel in
Time, Inc., arranges everything. Costs money. But,  think—to actually
see the burning of Rome, Kubla Khan, Moses and the Red Sea! You’ve
probably got an ad in your tube mail now.
She had opened the suction mail tube and there was the metal foil
advertisement:
ROME AND THE BORGIAS!
    THE WRIGHT BROTHERS AT KITTY HAWK!</p><empty-line /><p>

    Travel in Time, Inc., can costume you, put you in a crowd during the assassination of Lincoln or Caesar! We guarantee to teach you any language you need to move freely in any civilization, in any year, without friction. Latin, Greek, ancient American colloquial. Take your vacation in  Time  as well as Place!</p>

Rene’s voice was buzzing on the phone. “Tom and I leave for 1492
tomorrow. They’re arranging for Tom to sail with Columbus. Isn’t it
amazing!”
“Yes,” murmured Ann, stunned. “What does the Government say about this
Time Machine company?”
“Oh, the police have an eye on it. Afraid people might evade the draft,
run off and hide in the Past. Everyone has to leave a security bond
behind, his house and belongings, to guarantee return. After all, the
war’s on.”
“Yes, the war,” murmured Ann. “The war.”
Standing there, holding the phone, she had thought, Here is the chance
my husband and I have talked and prayed over for so many years. We don’t
like this world of 2155. We want to run away from his work at the bomb
factory, I from my position with disease-culture units. Perhaps there is
a chance for us to escape, to run for centuries into a wild country of
years where they will never find and bring us back to burn our books,
censor our thoughts, scald our minds with fear, march us, scream at us
with radios . . .
They were in Mexico in the year 1938.
She looked at the stained café wall.
Good workers for the Future State were allowed vacations into the Past
to escape fatigue. And so she and her husband had moved back into 1938,
a room in New York City, and enjoyed the theaters and the Statue of
Liberty which still stood green in the harbor. And on the third day they
had changed their clothes, their names, and had flown off to hide in
Mexico!
“It must be him,” whispered Susan, looking at the stranger seated at the
table. “Those cigarettes, the cigars, the liquor. They give him away.
Remember  our  first night in the Past?”
A month ago, their first night in New York, before their flight,
drinking all the strange drinks, savoring and buying odd foods,
perfumes, cigarettes of ten dozen rare brands, for they were rare in the
Future, where war was everything. So they had made fools of themselves,
rushing in and out of stores, salons, tobacconists, going up to their
room to get wonderfully ill.
And now here was this stranger doing likewise, doing a thing that only a
man from the Future would do who had been starved for liquors and
cigarettes for many years.
Susan and William sat and ordered a drink.
The stranger was examining their clothes, their hair, their jewelry—the
way they walked and sat.
“Sit easily,” said William under his breath. “Look as if you’ve worn
this clothing style all your life.”
“We should never have tried to escape.”
“My God!” said William, “he’s coming over. Let me do the talking.”
The stranger bowed before them. There was the faintest tap of heels
knocking together. Susan stiffened. That military sound!—unmistakable as
that certain ugly rap on your door at midnight.
“Mr. Roger Kristen,” said the stranger, “you did not pull up your pant
legs when you sat down.”
William froze. He looked at his hands lying on either leg, innocently.
Susan’s heart was beating swiftly.
“You’ve got the wrong person,” said William quickly. “My name’s not
Krisler.”
“Kristen,”  corrected the stranger.
“I’m William Travis,” said William. “And I don’t see what my pant legs
have to do with you!”
“Sorry.” The stranger pulled up a chair. “Let us say I thought I knew
you because you did  not  pull your trousers up. Everyone does. If they
don’t, the trousers bag quickly. I am a long way from home, Mr.—Travis,
and in need of company. My name is Simms.”
“Mr. Simms, we appreciate your loneliness, but we’re tired. We’re
leaving for Acapulco tomorrow.”
“A charming spot. I was just there, looking for some friends of mine.
They are somewhere. I shall find them yet. Oh, is the lady a bit sick?”
“Good night, Mr. Simms.”
They started out the door, William holding Susan’s arm firmly. They did
not look back when Mr. Simms called, “Oh, just one other thing.” He
paused and then slowly spoke the words:
“2155 AD.”
Susan shut her eyes and felt the earth falter under her. She kept going,
into the fiery plaza, seeing nothing.
They locked the door of their hotel room. And then she was crying and
they were standing in the dark, and the room tilted under them. Far away
firecrackers exploded, and there was laughter in the plaza.
“What a damned, loud nerve,” said William. “Him sitting there, looking
us up and down like animals, smoking his damn cigarettes, drinking his
drinks. I should have killed him then!” His voice was nearly hysterical.
“He even had the nerve to use his real name to us. The Chief of the
Searchers. And the thing about my pant legs. My God, I should have
pulled them up when I sat. It’s an automatic gesture of this day and
age. When I didn’t do it, it set me off from the others; it made  him 
think, Here’s a man who never wore pants, a man used to breech uniforms
and future styles. I could kill myself for giving us away!”
“No, no, it was my walk—these high heels—that did it. Our haircuts—so
new, so fresh. Everything about us odd and uneasy.”
He turned on the light. “He’s still testing us. He’s not positive of
us—not completely. We can’t run out on him, then. We can’t make him
certain. We’ll go to Acapulco leisurely.”
“Maybe he  is  sure of us, but is just playing.”
“I wouldn’t put it past him. He’s got all the time in the world. He can
daily here if he wants, and bring us back to the Future sixty seconds
after we left it. He might keep us wondering for days, laughing at us.”
Susan sat on the bed, wiping the tears from her face, smelling the old
smell of charcoal and incense.
“They won’t make a scene, will they?”
“They won’t dare. They’ll have to get us alone to put us in that Time
Machine and send us back.”
“There’s a solution then,” she said. “We’ll never be alone; we’ll always
be in crowds. We’ll make a million friends, visit markets, sleep in the
Official Palaces in each town, pay the Chief of Police to guard us until
we find a way to kill Simms and escape, disguise ourselves in new
clothes, perhaps as Mexicans.”
Footsteps sounded outside their locked door.
They turned out the light and undressed in silence. The footsteps went
away. A door closed.
Susan stood by the window looking down at the plaza in the darkness. “So
that building there is a church?”
“Yes.”
“I’ve often wondered what a church looked like. It’s been so long since
anyone saw one. Can we visit it tomorrow?”
“Of course. Come to bed.”
They lay in the dark room.
Half an hour later their phone rang. She lifted the receiver.
“Hello?”
“The rabbits may hide in the forest,” said a voice, “but a fox can
always find them.”
She replaced the receiver and lay back straight and cold in the bed.
Outside, in the year 1938, a man played three tunes upon a guitar, one
following another.
During the night she put her hand out and almost touched the year 2155.
She felt her fingers slide over cool spaces of time, as over a
corrugated surface, and she heard the insistent thump of marching feet,
a million bands playing a million military tunes, and she saw the fifty
thousand rows of disease cultures in their aseptic glass tubes, her hand
reaching out to them at her work in that huge factory in the Future; the
tubes of leprosy, bubonic, typhoid, tuberculosis, and then the great
explosion. She saw her hand burned to a wrinkled plum, felt it recoil
from a concussion so immense that the world was lifted and let fall and
all the buildings broke and people hemorrhaged and lay silent. Great
volcanoes, machines, winds, avalanches slid down to silence and she
awoke, sobbing, in the bed, in Mexico, many years away. . . .
In the early morning, drugged with the single hour’s sleep they had
finally been able to obtain, they awoke to the sound of loud automobiles
in the street. Susan peered down from the iron balcony at a small crowd
of eight people only now emerging, chattering, yelling, from trucks and
cars with red lettering on them. A crowd of Mexicans had followed the
trucks.
“Qué pasa?”  Susan called to a little boy.
The boy replied.
Susan turned back to her husband. “An American motion-picture company,
here on location.”
“Sounds interesting.” William was in the shower. “Let’s watch them. I
don’t think we’d better leave today. We’ll try to lull Simms. Watch the
films being made. They say the primitive film making was something. Get
our minds off ourselves.”
Ourselves, thought Susan. For a moment, in the bright sun, she had
forgotten that somewhere in the hotel, waiting, was a man smoking a
thousand cigarettes, it seemed. She saw the eight loud happy Americans
below and wanted to call to them: “Save me, hide me, help me! Color my
hair, my eyes; clothe me in strange clothes. I need your help. I’m from
the year 2155!”
But the words stayed in her throat. The functionaries of Travel in Time,
Inc., were not foolish. In your brain, before you left on your trip,
they placed a psychological bloc. You could tell no one your true time
or birthplace, nor could you reveal any of the Future to those in the
Past. The Past and the Future must be protected from each other. Only
with this psychological bloc were people allowed to travel unguarded
through the ages. The Future must be protected from any change brought
about by her people traveling in the Past. Even if she wanted to with
all her heart, she could not tell any of those happy people below in the
plaza who she was, or what her predicament had become.
“What about breakfast?” said William.
Breakfast was being served in the immense dining room. Ham and eggs for
everyone. The place was full of tourists. The film people entered, all
eight of them—six men and two women, giggling, shoving chairs about. And
Susan sat near them, feeling the warmth and protection they offered,
even when Mr. Simms came down the lobby stairs, smoking his Turkish
cigarette with great intensity. He nodded at them from a distance, and
Susan nodded back, smiling, because he couldn’t do anything to them
here, in front of eight film people and twenty other tourists.
“Those actors,” said William. “Perhaps I could hire two of them, say it
was a joke, dress them in our clothes, have them drive off in our car
when Simms is in such a spot where he can’t see their faces. If two
people pretending to be us could lure him off for a few hours, we might
make it to Mexico City. It’d take him years to find us there!”
“Hey!”
A fat man, with liquor on his breath, leaned on their table. “American
tourists!” he cried. “I’m so sick of seeing Mexicans, I could kiss you!”
He shook their hands. “Come on, eat with us. Misery loves company. I’m
Misery, this is Miss Gloom, and Mr. and Mrs. Do-We-Hate-Mexico! We all
hate it. But we’re here for some preliminary shots for a damn film. The
rest of the crew arrives tomorrow. My name’s Joe Melton. I’m a director.
And if this ain’t a hell of a country! Funerals in the streets, people
dying. Come on, move over. Join the party; cheer us up!”
Susan and William were both laughing.
“Am I funny?” Mr. Melton asked the immediate world.
“Wonderful!” Susan moved over.
Mr. Simms was glaring across the dining room at them. She made a face at
him.
Mr. Simms advanced among the tables.
“Mr. and Mrs. Travis,” he called. “I thought we were breakfasting
together, alone.”
“Sorry,” said William.
“Sit down, pal,” said Mr. Melton. “Any friend of theirs is a pal of
mine.”
Mr. Simms sat. The film people talked loudly, and while they talked, Mr.
Simms said quietly, “I hope you slept well.”
“Did you?”
“I’m not used to spring mattresses,” replied Mr. Simms wryly. “But there
are compensations. I stayed up half the night trying new cigarettes and
foods. Odd, fascinating. A whole new spectrum of sensation, these
ancient vices.”
“We don’t know what you’re talking about,” said Susan.
“Always the play acting.” Simms laughed. “It’s no use. Nor is this
stratagem of crowds. I’ll get you alone soon enough. I’m immensely
patient.”
“Say,” Mr. Melton broke in, his face flushed, “is this guy giving you
any trouble?”
“It’s all right.”
“Say the word and I’ll give him the bum’s rush.”
Melton turned back to yell at his associates. In the laughter, Mr. Simms
went on: “Let us come to the point. It took me a month of tracing you
through towns and cities to find you, and all of yesterday to be sure of
you. If you come with me quietly, I might be able to get you off with no
punishment, if you agree to go back to work on the hydrogen-plus bomb.”
“Science this guy talks at breakfast!” observed Mr. Melton, half
listening.
Simms went on, imperturbably. “Think it over. You can’t escape. If you
kill me, others will follow you.”
“We don’t know what you’re talking about.”
“Stop it!” cried Simms irritably. “Use your intelligence! You know we
can’t let you get away with this escape. Other people in the year 2155
might get the same idea and do what you’ve done. We need people.”
“To fight your wars,” said William at last.
“Bill!”
“It’s all right, Susan. We’ll talk on his terms now. We can’t escape.”
“Excellent,” said Simms. “Really, you’ve both been incredibly romantic,
running away from your responsibilities.”
“Running away from horror.”
“Nonsense. Only a war.”
“What are you guys talking about?” asked Mr. Melton.
Susan wanted to tell him. But you could only speak in generalities. The
psychological bloc in your mind allowed that. Generalities, such as
Simms and William were now discussing.
“Only  the  war,” said William. “Half the world dead of leprosy bombs!”
“Nevertheless,” Simms pointed out, “the inhabitants of the Future resent
you two hiding on a tropical isle, as it were, while they drop off the
cliff into hell. Death loves death, not life. Dying people love to know
that others die with them. It is a comfort to learn you are not alone in
the kiln, in the grave. I am the guardian of their collective resentment
against you two.”
“Look at the guardian of resentments!” said Mr. Melton to his
companions.
“The longer you keep me waiting, the harder it will go for you. We need
you on the bomb project, Mr. Travis. Return now—no torture. Later, we’ll
force you to work, and after you’ve finished the bomb, we’ll try a
number of complicated new devices on you, sir.”
“I’ve a proposition,” said William. “I’ll come back with you if my wife
stays here alive, safe, away from that war.”
Mr. Simms considered it. “All right. Meet me in the plaza in ten
minutes. Pick me up in your car. Drive me to a deserted country spot.
I’ll have the Travel Machine pick us up there.”
“Bill!” Susan held his arm tightly.
“Don’t argue.” He looked over at her. “It’s settled.” To Simms: “One
thing. Last night you could have gotten in our room and kidnaped us. Why
didn’t you?”
“Shall we say that I was enjoying myself?” replied Mr. Simms languidly,
sucking his new cigar. “I hate giving up this wonderful atmosphere, this
sun, this vacation. I regret leaving behind the wine and the cigarettes.
Oh, how I regret it. The plaza then, in ten minutes. Your wife will be
protected and may stay here as long as she wishes. Say your good-bys.”
Mr. Simms arose and walked out.
“There goes Mr. Big Talk!” yelled Mr. Melton at the departing gentleman.
He turned and looked at Susan. “Hey. Someone’s crying. Breakfast’s no
time for people to cry. Now  is  it?”
At nine-fifteen Susan stood on the balcony of their room, gazing down at
the plaza. Mr. Simms was seated there, his neat legs crossed, on a
delicate bronze bench. Biting the tip from a cigar, he lit it tenderly.
Susan heard the throb of a motor, and far up the street, out of a garage
and down the cobbled hill, slowly, came William in his car.
The car picked up speed. Thirty, now forty, now fifty miles an hour.
Chickens scattered before it.
Mr. Simms took off his white panama hat and mopped his pink forehead,
put his hat back on, and then saw the car.
It was rushing sixty miles an hour, straight on for the plaza.
“William!” screamed Susan.
The car hit the low plaza curb, thundering; it jumped up, sped across
the tiles toward the green bench where Mr. Simms now dropped his cigar,
shrieked, flailed his hands, and was hit by the car. His body flew up
and up in the air, and down and down, crazily, into the street.
On the far side of the plaza, one front wheel broken, the car stopped.
People were running.
Susan went in and closed the balcony doors.
They came down the Official Palace steps together, arm in arm, their
faces pale, at twelve noon.
“Adiós, señor,”  said the mayor behind them.  “Señora.”
They stood in the plaza where the crowd was pointing at the blood.
“Will they want to see you again?” asked Susan.
“No, we went over and over it. It was an accident. I lost control of the
car. I wept for them. God knows I had to get my relief out somewhere. I 
felt  like weeping. I hated to kill him. I’ve never wanted to do
anything like that in my life.”
“They won’t prosecute you?”
“They talked about it, but no. I talked faster. They believe me. It was
an accident. It’s over.”
“Where will we go? Mexico City? Uruapan?”
“The car’s in the repair shop. It’ll be ready at four this afternoon.
Then we’ll get the hell out.”
“Will we be followed? Was Simms working alone?”
“I don’t know. We’ll have a little head start on them, I think.”
The film people were coming out of the hotel as they approached. Mr.
Melton hurried up, scowling. “Hey I heard what happened. Too bad.
Everything okay now? Want to get your minds off it? We’re doing some
preliminary shots up the street. You want to watch, you’re welcome. Come
on, do you good.”
They went.
They stood on the cobbled street while the film camera was being set up.
Susan looked at the road leading down and away, and the highway going to
Acapulco and the sea, past pyramids and ruins and little adobe towns
with yellow walls, blue walls, purple walls and flaming bougainvillea,
and she thought, We shall take the roads, travel in clusters and crowds,
in markets, in lobbies, bribe police to sleep near, keep double locks,
but always the crowds, never alone again, always afraid the next person
who passes may be another Simms. Never knowing if we’ve tricked and lost
the Searchers. And always up ahead, in the Future, they’ll wait for us
to be brought back, waiting with their bombs to burn us and disease to
rot us, and their police to tell us to roll over, turn around, jump
through the hoop! And so we’ll keep running through the forest, and
we’ll never ever stop or sleep well again in our lives.
A crowd gathered to watch the film being made. And Susan watched the
crowd and the streets.
“Seen anyone suspicious?”
“No. What time is it?”
“Three o’clock. The car should be almost ready.”
The test film was finished at three forty-five. They all walked down to
the hotel, talking. William paused at the garage. “The car’ll be ready
at six,” he said, coming out, worried.
“But no later than that?”
“It’ll be ready, don’t worry.
In the hotel lobby they looked around for other men traveling alone, men
who resembled Mr. Simms, men with new haircuts and too much cigarette
smoke and cologne smell about them, but the lobby was empty. Going up
the stairs, Mr. Melton said, “Well, it’s been a long hard day. Who’d
like to put a header on it? You folks? Martini? Beer?”
“Maybe one.”
The whole crowd pushed into Mr. Melton’s room and the drinking began.
“Watch the time,” said William.
Time, thought Susan. If only they had time. All she wanted was to sit in
the plaza all of a long bright day in October, with not a worry or a
thought, with the sun on her face and arms, her eyes closed, smiling at
the warmth, and never move. Just sleep in the Mexican sun, and sleep
warmly and easily and slowly and happily for many, many days. . . .
Mr. Melton opened the champagne.
“To a very beautiful lady, lovely enough for films,” be said, toasting
Susan. “I might even give you a test.”
She laughed.
“I mean it,” said Melton. “You’re very nice. I could make you a movie
star.”
“And take me to Hollywood?” cried Susan.
“Get the hell out of Mexico, sure!”
Susan glanced at William and he lifted an eyebrow and nodded. It would
be a change of scene, clothing, locale, name, perhaps; and they would be
traveling with eight other people, a good shield against any
interference from the Future.
“It sounds wonderful,” said Susan.
She was feeling the champagne now. The afternoon was slipping by; the
party was whirling about her. She felt safe and good and alive and truly
happy for the first time in many years.
“What kind of film would my wife be good for?” asked William, refilling
his glass.
Melton appraised Susan. The party stopped laughing and listened.
“Well, I’d like to do a story of suspense,” said Melton. “A story of a
man and wife, like yourselves.”
“Go on.”
“Sort of a war story, maybe,” said the director, examining the color of
his drink against the sunlight.
Susan and William waited.
“A story about a man and wife who live in a little house on a little
street in the year 2155, maybe,” said Melton. “This is ad lib,
understand. But this man and wife are faced with a terrible war,
super-plus hydrogen bombs, censorship, death in that year, and—here’s
the gimmick—they escape into the Past, followed by a man who they think
is evil, but who is only trying to show them what their duty is.”
William dropped his glass to the floor.
Mr. Melton continued: “And this couple take refuge with a group of film
people whom they learn to trust. Safety in numbers, they say to
themselves.”
Susan felt herself slip down into a chair. Everyone was watching the
director. He took a little sip of wine. “Ah, that’s a fine wine. Well,
this man and woman, it seems, don’t realize how important they are to
the Future. The man, especially, is the keystone to a new bomb metal. So
the Searchers, let’s call them, spare no trouble or expense to find,
capture, and take home the man and wife, once they get them totally
alone, in a hotel room, where no one can see. Strategy. The Searchers
work alone, or in groups of eight. One trick or another will do it.
Don’t you think it would make a wonderful film, Susan? Don’t you, Bill?”
He finished his drink.
Susan sat with her eyes straight ahead of her.
“Have a drink?” said Mr. Melton.
William’s gun was out and fired three times, and one of the men fell,
and the others ran forward. Susan screamed. A hand was clamped to her
mouth. Now the gun was on the floor and William was struggling, held.
Mr. Melton said, “Please,” standing there where he had stood, blood
showing on his fingers. “Let’s not make matters worse.”
Someone pounded on the hall door.
“Let me in!”
“The manager,” said Mr. Melton dryly. He jerked his head. “Everyone,
let’s move!”
“Let me in! I’ll call the police!”
Susan and William looked at each other quickly, and then at the door.
“The manager wishes to come in,” said Mr. Melton. Quick!”
A camera was carried forward. From it shot a blue light which
encompassed the room instantly. It widened out and the people of the
party vanished, one by one.
“Quickly!”
Outside the window, in the instant before she vanished, Susan saw the
green land and the purple and yellow and blue and crimson walls and the
cobbles flowing down like a river, a man upon a burro riding into the
warm hills, a boy drinking Orange Crush, she could feel the sweet liquid
in her throat a man standing under a cool plaza tree with a guitar, she
could feel her hand upon the strings, and, far away, the sea, the blue
and tender sea, she could feel it roll her over and take her in.
And then she was gone. Her husband was gone.
The door burst wide open. The manager and his staff rushed in.
The room was empty.
“But they were just here! I saw them come in, and now—gone!” cried the
manager. “The windows are covered with iron grating. They couldn’t get
out that way!”
In the late afternoon the priest was summoned and they opened the room
again and aired it out, and had him sprinkle holy water through each
corner and give it his blessing.
“What shall we do with these?” asked the charwoman.
She pointed to the closet, where there were 67 bottles of chartreuse,
cognac,  crème de cacao,  absinthe, vermouth, tequila, 106 cartons of
Turkish cigarettes, and 198 yellow boxes of fifty-cent pure
Havana-filler cigars. . . .
      The Visitor</p>

SAUL WILLIAMS awoke to the still morning. He looked wearily out of his
tent and thought about how far away Earth was. Millions of miles, he
thought. But then what could you do about it? Your lungs were full of
the “blood rust.” You coughed all the time.
Saul arose this particular morning at seven o’clock. He was a tall man,
lean, thinned by his illness. It was a quiet morning on Mars, with the
dead sea bottom-flat and silent—no wind on it. The sun was clear and
cool in the empty sky. He washed his face and ate breakfast.
After that he wanted very much to be back on Earth. During the day he
tried every way that it was possible to be in New York City. Sometimes,
if he sat right and held his hands a certain way, he did it. He could
almost smell New York. Most of the time, though, it was impossible.
Later in the morning Saul tried to die. He lay on the sand and told his
heart to stop. It continued beating. He imagined himself leaping from a
cliff or cutting his wrists, but laughed to himself—he knew he lacked
the nerve for either act.
Maybe if I squeeze tight and think about it enough, I’ll just sleep and
never wake, he thought. He tried it. An hour later he awoke with a mouth
full of blood. He got up and spat it out and felt very sorry for
himself. This blood rust—it filled your mouth and your nose; it ran from
your ears, your fingernails; and it took a year to kill you. The only
cure was shoving you in a rocket and shooting you out to exile on Mars.
There was no known cure on Earth, and remaining there would contaminate
and kill others. So here he was, bleeding all the time, and lonely.
Saul’s eyes narrowed. In the distance, by an ancient city ruin, he saw
another man lying on a filthy blanket.
When Saul walked up, the man on the blanket stirred weakly.
“Hello, Saul,” he said.
“Another morning,” said Saul. “Christ, I’m lonely!”
“It is an affliction of the rusted ones,” said the man on the blanket,
not moving, very pale and as if he might vanish if you touched him.
“I wish to God,” said Saul, looking down at the man, “that you could at
least talk. Why is it that intellectuals never get the blood rust and
come up here?”
“It is a conspiracy against you, Saul,” said the man, shutting his eyes,
too weary to keep them open. “Once I had the strength to be an
intellectual. Now, it is a job to think.”
“If only we could talk,” said Saul Williams.
The other man merely shrugged indifferently.
“Come tomorrow. Perhaps I’ll have enough strength to talk about
Aristotle then. I’ll try. Really I will.” The man sank down under the
worn tree. He opened one eye. “Remember, once we did talk on Aristotle,
six months ago, on that good day I had.”
“I remember,” said Saul, not listening. He looked at the dead sea. “I
wish I were as sick as you, then maybe I wouldn’t worry about being an
intellectual. Then maybe I’d get some peace.”
“You’ll get just as bad as I am now in about six months,” said the dying
man. “Then you won’t care about anything but sleep and more sleep. Sleep
will be like a woman to you. You’ll always go back to her, because she’s
fresh and good and faithful and she always treats you kindly and the
same. You only wake up so you can think about going hack to sleep. It’s
a nice thought.” The man’s voice was a bare whisper. Now it stopped and
a light breathing took over.
Saul walked off.
Along the shores of the dead sea, like so many emptied bottles flung up
by some long-gone wave, were the huddled bodies of sleeping men. Saul
could see them all down the curve of the empty sea. One, two, three—all
of them sleeping alone, most of them worse off than he, each with his
little cache of food, each grown into himself, because social converse
was weakening and sleep was good.
At first there had been a few nights around mutual campfires. And they
had all talked about Earth. That was the only thing they talked about.
Earth and the way the waters ran in town creeks and what homemade
strawberry pie tasted like and how New York looked in the early morning
coming over on the Jersey ferry in the salt wind.
I want Earth, thought Saul. I want it so bad it hurts. I want something
I can never have again. And they all want it and it hurts them not to
have it. More than food or a woman or anything, I just want Earth. This
sickness puts women away forever; they’re not things to be wanted. But
Earth, yes. That’s a thing for the mind and not the weak body.
The bright metal flashed on the sky.
Saul looked up.
The bright metal flashed again.
A minute later the rocket landed on the sea bottom. A valve opened, a
man stepped out, carrying his luggage with him. Two other men, in
protective germicide suits, accompanied him, bringing out vast cases of
food, setting up a tent for him.
Another minute and the rocket returned to the sky. The exile stood
alone.
Saul began to run. He hadn’t run in weeks, and it was very tiring, but
he ran and yelled.
“Hello, hello!”
The young man looked Saul up and down when he arrived.
“Hello. So this is Mars. My name’s Leonard Mark.”
“I’m Saul Williams.”
They shook hands. Leonard Mark was very young—only eighteen; very blond,
pink-faced, blue-eyed and fresh in spite of his illness.
“How are things in New York?” said Saul.
“Like this,” said Leonard Mark. And he looked at Saul. New York grew up
out of the desert, made of stone and filled with March winds. Neons
exploded in electric color. Yellow taxis glided in a still night.
Bridges rose and tugs chanted in the midnight harbors. Curtains rose on
spangled musicals.
Saul put his hands to his head, violently.
“Hold on, hold on!” he cried. “What’s happening to me? What’s wrong with
me? I’m going crazy!”
Leaves sprouted from trees in Central Park, green and new. On the
pathway Saul strolled along, smelling the air.
“Stop it, stop it, you fool!” Saul shouted at himself. He pressed his
forehead with his hands. “This can’t be!”
“It is,” said Leonard Mark.
The New York towers faded. Mars returned. Saul stood on the empty sea
bottom, staring limply at the young newcomer.
“You,” he said, putting his hand out to Leonard Mark.  “You  did it. You
did it with your mind.”
“Yes,” said Leonard Mark.
Silently they stood facing each other. Finally, trembling, Saul seized
the other exile’s hand and wrung it again and again, saying, “Oh, but
I’m glad you’re here. You can’t know how glad I am!”
They drank their rich brown coffee from the tin cups.
It was high noon. They had been talking all through the warm morning
time.
“And this ability of yours?” said Saul over his cup, looking steadily at
the young Leonard Mark.
“It’s just something I was born with,” said Mark, looking into his
drink. “My mother was in the blowup of London back in ’57.  I was born
ten months later. I don’t know what you’d call my ability. Telepathy and
thought transference, I suppose. I used to have an act. I traveled all
around the world. Leonard Mark, the mental marvel, they said on the
billboards. I was pretty well off. Most people thought I was a
charlatan. You know what people think of theatrical folks. Only I knew I
was really genuine, but I didn’t let anybody know. It was safer not to
let it get around too much. Oh, a few of my close friends knew about my
real ability. I had a lot of talents that will come in handy now that
I’m here on Mars.”
“You sure scared the hell out of me,” said Saul, his cup rigid in his
hand. “When New York came right up out of the ground that way, I thought
I was insane.”
“It’s a form of hypnotism which affects all of the sensual organs at
once—eyes, ears, nose, mouth, skin—all of them. What would you like to
be doing now most of all?”
Saul put down his cup. He tried to hold his hands very steady. He wet
his lips. “I’d like to be in a little creek I used to swim in in Mellin
Town, Illinois, when I was a kid. I’d like to be stark-naked and
swimming.”
“Well,” said Leonard Mark and moved his head ever so little.
Saul fell back on the sand, his eyes shut.
Leonard Mark sat watching him.
Saul lay on the sand. From time to time his hands moved, twitched
excitedly. His mouth spasmed open; sounds issued from his tightening and
relaxing throat.
Saul began to make slow movements of his arms, out and back, out and
back, gasping with his head to one side, his arms going and coming
slowly on the warm air, stirring the yellow sand under him, his body
turning slowly over.
Leonard Mark quietly finished his coffee. While he drank he kept his
eyes on the moving, whispering Saul lying there on the dead sea bottom.
“All right,” said Leonard Mark.
Saul sat up, rubbing his face.
After a moment he told Leonard Mark, “I saw the creek. I ran along the
bank and I took off my clothes,” he said breathlessly, his smile
incredulous. “And I  dived in  and swam around!”
“I’m pleased,” said Leonard Mark.
“Here!” Saul reached into his pocket and drew forth his last bar of
chocolate. “This is for  you.”
“What’s this?” Leonard Mark looked at the gift. “Chocolate? Nonsense,
I’m not doing this for pay. I’m doing it because it makes you happy. Put
that thing back in your pocket before I turn it into a rattlesnake and
it bites you.”
“Thank you, thank you!” Saul put it away. “You don’t know how good that
water was.” He fetched the coffeepot. “More?”
Pouring the coffee, Saul shut his eyes a moment.
I’ve got Socrates here, he thought; Socrates and Plato, and Nietzsche
and Schopenhauer. This man, by his talk, is a genius. By his talent,
he’s incredible! Think of the long, easy days and the cool nights of
talk we’ll have. It won’t be a bad year at all.
Not half.
He spilled the coffee.
“What’s wrong?”
“Nothing.” Saul himself was confused, startled.
We’ll be in Greece, he thought. In Athens. We’ll be in Rome, if we want,
when we study the Roman writers. We’ll stand in the Parthenon and the
Acropolis. It won’t be just talk, but it’ll be a place to be, besides.
This man can do it. He has the power to do it. When we talk the plays of
Racine, he can make a stage and players and all of it for me. By Christ,
this is better than life ever was! How much better to be sick and here
than well on Earth without these abilities! How may people have ever
seen a Greek drama played in a Greek amphitheater in the year 31 B.C.?
And if I ask, quietly and earnestly, will this man take on the aspect of
Schopenhauer and Darwin and Bergson and all the other thoughtful men of
the ages . . . ? Yes, why not? To sit and talk with Nietzsche in person,
with Plato himself . . . !
There was only one thing wrong. Saul felt himself swaying. The other
men. The other sick ones along the bottom of this dead sea.
In the distance men were moving, walking toward them.
They had seen the rocket flash, land, dislodge a passenger. Now they
were coming, slowly, painfully, to greet the new arrival.
Saul was cold. “Look,” he said. “Mark, I think we’d better head for the
mountains.”
“Why?”
“See those men coming? Some of them are insane.”
“Really?”
“Yes.”
“Isolation and all make them that way?”
“Yes, that’s it. We’d better get going.”
“They don’t look very dangerous. They move slowly.”
“You’d be surprised.”
Mark looked at Saul. “You’re trembling. Why’s that?”
“There’s no time to talk,” said Saul, getting up swiftly. “Come on.
Don’t you realize what’ll happen once they discover your talent? They’ll
fight over you. They’ll kill each other—kill you—for the right to own
you.”
“Oh, but I don’t belong to anybody,” said Leonard Mark. He looked at
Saul. “No. Not even you.”
Saul jerked his head. “I didn’t even think of that.”
“Didn’t you now?” Mark laughed.
“We haven’t time to argue,” answered Saul, eyes blinking, cheeks
blazing. “Come on!”
“I don’t want to. I’m going to sit right here until those men show up.
You’re a little too possessive. My life’s my own.”
Saul felt an ugliness in himself. His face began to twist. “You  heard
 what I said.”
“How very quickly you changed from a friend to an enemy, observed Mark.
Saul hit at him. It was a neat quick blow, coming down. Mark ducked
aside, laughing. “No, you don’t!” They were in the center of Times
Square. Cars roared, hooting, upon them. Buildings plunged up, hot, into
the blue air.
“It’s a lie!” cried Saul, staggering under the visual impact. “For God’s
sake, don’t, Mark! The men are coming. You’ll be killed!”
Mark sat there on the pavement, laughing at his joke. “Let them come. I
can fool them all!”
New York distracted Saul. It was meant to distract—meant to keep his
attention with its unholy beauty, after so many months away from it.
Instead of attacking Mark he could only stand, drinking in the alien but
familiar scene.
He shut his eyes. “No.” And fell forward, dragging Mark with him. Horns
screamed in his ears. Brakes hissed and caught violently. He smashed at
Mark’s chin.
Silence.
Mark lay on the sea bottom.
Taking the unconscious man in his arms, Saul began to run, heavily.
New York was gone. There was only the wide soundlessness of the dead
sea. The men were closing in around him. He headed for the hills with
his precious cargo, with New York and green country and fresh springs
and old friends held in his arms. He fell once and struggled up. He did
not stop running.
Night filled the cave. The wind wandered in and out, tugging at the
small fire, scattering ashes.
Mark opened his eyes. He was tied with ropes and leaning against the dry
wall of the cave, facing the fire.
Saul put another stick on the fire, glancing now and again with a
catlike nervousness at the cave enhance.
“You’re a fool.”
Saul started.
“Yes,” said Mark, “you’re a fool. They’ll find us. If they have to hunt
for six months they’ll find us. They saw New York, at a distance, like a
mirage. And us in the center of it. It’s too much to think they won’t be
curious and follow our trail.”
“I’ll move on with you then,” said Saul, staring into the fire.
“And they’ll come after.”
“Shut up!”
Mark smiled. “Is that the way to speak to your wife?”
“You heard me!”
“Oh, a fine marriage this is—your greed and my mental ability. What do
you want to see now? Shall I show you a few more of your childhood
scenes?”
Saul felt the sweat coming out on his brow. He didn’t know if the man
was joking or not. “Yes,” he said.
“All right,” said Mark, “watch!”
Flame gushed out of the rocks. Sulphur choked him. Pits of brimstone
exploded, concussions rocked the cave. Heaving up, Saul coughed and
blundered, burned, withered by hell!
Hell went away. The cave returned.
Mark was laughing.
Saul stood over him. “You,” he said coldly, bending down.
“What else do you expect?” cried Mark. “To be tied up, toted off, made
the intellectual bride of a man insane with loneliness—do you think I
enjoy this?”
“I’ll untie you if you promise not to run away.”
“I couldn’t promise that. I’m a free agent. I don’t belong to anybody.”
Saul got down on his knees. “But you’ve  got  to belong, do you hear?
You’ve  got  to belong. I can’t let you go away!”
“My dear fellow, the more you say things like that, the more remote I
am. If you’d had any sense and done things intelligently, we’d have been
friends. I’d have been glad to do you these little hypnotic favors.
After all, they’re no trouble for me to conjure up. Fun, really. But
you’ve botched it. You wanted me all to yourself. You were afraid the
others would take me away from you. Oh, how mistaken you were. I have
enough power to keep them all happy. You could have shared me, like a
community kitchen. I’d have felt quite like a god among children, being
kind, doing favors, in return for which you might bring me little gifts,
special tidbits of food.”
“I’m sorry, I’m sorry!” Saul cried. “But I know those men too well.”
“Are you any different? Hardly! Go out and see if they’re coming. I
thought I heard a noise.”
Saul ran. In the cave entrance he cupped his hands, peering down into
the night-filled gully. Dim shapes stirred. Was it only the wind blowing
the roving clumps of weeds? He began to tremble—a fine, aching tremble.
“I don’t see anything.” He came back into an empty cave.
He stared at the fireplace. “Mark!”
Mark was gone.
There was nothing but the cave, filled with boulders, stones, pebbles,
the lonely fire flickering, the wind sighing. And Saul standing there,
incredulous and numb.
“Mark! Mark! Come back!”
The man had worked free of his bonds, slowly, carefully, and using the
ruse of imagining he heard other men approaching, had gone—where?
The cave was deep, but ended in a blank wall. And Mark could not have
slipped past him into the night. How then?
Saul stepped around the fire. He drew his knife and approached a large
boulder that stood against the cave wall. Smiling, he pressed the knife
against the boulder. Smiling, he tapped the knife there. Then he drew
his knife back to plunge it into the boulder.
“Stop!” shouted Mark.
The boulder vanished. Mark was there.
Saul suspended his knife. The fire played on his cheeks. His eyes were
quite insane.
“It didn’t work,” he whispered. He reached down and put his hands on
Mark’s throat and closed his fingers. Mark said nothing, but moved
uneasily in the grip, his eyes ironic, telling things to Saul that Saul
knew.
If you kill me, the eyes said, where will all your dreams be?
If you kill me, where will all the streams and brook trout be?
Kill me, kill Plato, kill Aristotle, kill Einstein; yes, kill all of us!
Go ahead, strangle me. I dare you.
Saul’s fingers released the throat.
Shadows moved into the cave mouth.
Both men turned their heads.
The other men were there. Five of them, haggard with travel, panting,
waiting in the outer rim of light.
“Good evening,” called Mark, laughing. “Come in, come in, gentlemen!”
By dawn the arguments and ferocities still continued. Mark sat among the
glaring men, rubbing his wrists, newly released from his bonds. He
created a mahogany-paneled conference hall and a marble table at which
they all sat, ridiculously bearded, evil-smelling, sweating and greedy
men, eyes bent upon their treasure.
“The way to settle it,” said Mark at last “is for each of you to have
certain hours of certain days for appointments with me. I’ll treat you
all equally. I’ll be city property, free to come and go. That’s fair
enough. As for Saul here, he’s on probation. When he’s proved he can be
a civil person once more, I’ll give him a treatment or two. Until that
time, I’ll have nothing more to do with him.”
The other exiles grinned at Saul.
“I’m sorry,” Saul said. “I didn’t know what I was doing. I’m all right
now.”
“We’ll see,” said Mark. “Let’s give ourselves a month, shall we?”
The other men grinned at Saul.
Saul said nothing. He sat staring at the floor of the cave.
“Let’s see now,” said Mark. “On Mondays it’s your day, Smith.”
Smith nodded.
“On Tuesdays I’ll take Peter there, for an hour or so.
Peter nodded.
“On Wednesdays I’ll finish up with Johnson, Holtzman, and Jim, here.”
The last three men looked at each other.
“The rest of the week I’m to be left strictly alone, do you hear?” Mark
told them. “A little should be better than nothing. If you don’t obey, I
won’t perform at all.”
“Maybe we’ll  make  you perform,” said Johnson. He caught the other
men’s eye. “Look, we’re five against his one. We can make him do
anything we want. If we co-operate, we’ve got a great thing here.”
“Don’t be idiots,” Mark warned the other men.
“Let me talk,” said Johnson. “He’s telling us what he’ll do. Why don’t
we tell  him!  Are we bigger than him, or not? And him threatening not
to perform! Well, just let me get a sliver of wood under his toenails
and maybe burn his fingers a bit with a steel file, and we’ll see if he
performs! Why shouldn’t we have performances, I want to know, every
night in the week?”
“Don’t listen to him!” said Mark. “He’s crazy. He can’t be depended on.
You know what he’ll do, don’t you? He’ll get you all off guard, one by
one, and kill you; yes, kill all of you, so that when he’s done, he’ll
be alone—just him and me! That’s his sort.”
The listening men blinked. First at Mark, then at Johnson.
“For that matter,” observed Mark, “none of you can trust the others.
This is a fool’s conference. The minute your back is turned one of the
other men will murder you. I dare say, at the week’s end, you’ll all be
dead or dying.”
A cold wind blew into the mahogany room. It began to dissolve and became
a cave once more. Mark was tired of his joke. The marble table splashed
and rained and evaporated.
The men gazed suspiciously at each other with little bright animal eyes.
What was spoken was true. They saw each other in the days to come,
surprising one another, killing—until that last lucky one remained to
enjoy the intellectual treasure that walked among them.
Saul watched them and felt alone and disquieted. Once you have made a
mistake, how hard to admit your wrongness, to go back, start fresh. They
were  all  wrong. They had been lost a long time. Now they were worse
than lost.
“And to make matters very bad,” said Mark at last, “one of you has a
gun. All the rest of you have only knives. But one of you, I know, has a
gun.
Everybody jumped up. “Search!” said Mark. “Find the one with the gun or
you’re all dead!”
That did it. The men plunged wildly about, not knowing whom to search
first. Their hands grappled, they cried out, and Mark watched them in
contempt.
Johnson fell back, feeling in his jacket. “All right,” he said. “We
might as well have it over now! Here, you, Smith.”
And he shot Smith through the chest. Smith fell. The other men yelled.
They broke apart. Johnson aimed and fired twice more.
“Stop!” cried Mark.
New York soared up around them, out of rock and cave and sky. Sun
glinted on high towers. The elevated thundered; tugs blew in the harbor.
The green lady stared across the bay, a torch in her hand.
“Look, you fools!” said Mark. Central Park broke out constellations of
spring blossoms. The wind blew fresh-cut lawn smells over them in a
wave.
And in the center of New York, bewildered, the men stumbled. Johnson
fired his gun three times more. Saul ran forward. He crashed against
Johnson, bore him down, wrenched the gun away. It fired again.
The men stopped milling.
They stood. Saul lay across Johnson. They ceased struggling.
There was a terrible silence. The men stood watching. New York sank down
into the sea. With a hissing, bubbling, sighing; with a cry of ruined
metal and old time, the great structures leaned, warped, flowed,
collapsed.
Mark stood among the buildings. Then, like a building, a neat red hole
drilled into his chest, wordless, he fell.
Saul lay staring at the men, at the body.
He got up, the gun in his hand.
Johnson did not move—was afraid to move.
They all shut their eyes and opened them again, thinking that by so
doing they might reanimate the man who lay before them.
The cave was cold.
Saul stood up and looked, remotely, at the gun in his hand. He took it
and threw it far out over the valley and did not watch it fall.
They looked down at the body as if they could not believe it. Saul bent
down and took hold of the limp hand. “Leonard!” he said softly.
“Leonard?” He shook the hand. “Leonard!”
Leonard Mark did not move. His eyes were shut; his chest had ceased
going up and down. He was getting cold.
Saul got up. “We’ve killed him,” he said, not looking at the men. His
mouth was filling with a raw liquor now. “The only one we didn’t want to
kill, we killed.” He put his shaking hand to his eyes. The other men
stood waiting.
“Get a spade,” said Saul. “Bury him.” He turned away. “I’ll have nothing
to do with you.”
Somebody walked off to find a spade.
Saul was so weak he couldn’t move. His legs were grown into the earth,
with roots feeding deep of loneliness and fear and the cold of the
night. The fire had almost died out and now there was only the double
moonlight riding over the blue mountains.
There was the sound of someone digging in the earth with a spade.
“We don’t need him anyhow,” said somebody, much too loudly.
The sound of digging went on. Saul walked off slowly and let himself
slide down the side of a dark tree until he reached and was sitting
blankly on the sand, his hands blindly in his lap.
Sleep, he thought. We’ll all go to sleep now. We have that much, anyway.
Go to sleep and try to dream of New York and all the rest.
He closed his eyes wearily, the blood gathering in his nose and his
mouth and in his quivering eyes.
“How did he do it?” he asked in a tired voice. His head fell forward on
his chest. “How did he bring New York up here and make us walk around in
it? Lct’s try. It shouldn’t be too hard. Think! Think of New York,” he
whispered, falling down into sleep. “New York and Central Park and then
Illinois in the spring, apple blossoms and green grass.
It didn’t work. It wasn’t the same. New York was gone and nothing he
could do would bring it back. He would rise every morning and walk on
the dead sea looking for it, and walk forever around Mars, looking for
it, and never find it. And finally lie, too tired to walk, trying to
find New York in his head, but not finding it.
The last thing he heard before he slept was the spade rising and falling
and digging a hole into which, with a tremendous crash of metal and
golden mist and odor and color and sound, New York collapsed, fell, and
was buried.
He cried all night in his sleep.
      The Concrete Mixer</p>

HE LISTENED to the dry-grass rustle of the old witches’ voices beneath
his open window:
“Ettil, the coward! Ettil, the refuser! Ettil, who will not wage the
glorious war of Mars against Earth!”
“Speak on, witches!” he cried.
The voices dropped to a murmur like that of water in the long canals
under the Martian sky.
“Ettil, the father of a son who must grow up in the shadow of this
horrid knowledge!” said the old wrinkled women. They knocked their
sly-eyed heads gently together. “Shame, shame!”
His wife was crying on the other side of the room. Her tears were as
rain, numerous and cool on the tiles. “Oh, Ettil, how can you think this
way?”
Ettil laid aside his metal book which, at his beckoning, had been
singing him a story all morning from its thin golden-wired frame.
“I’ve tried to explain,” he said. “This is a foolish thing, Mars
invading Earth. We’ll be destroyed, utterly.”
Outside, a banging, crashing boom, a surge of brass, a drum, a cry,
marching feet, pennants and songs. Through the stone sheets the army,
fire weapons to shoulder, stamped. Children skipped after. Old women
waved dirty flags.
“I shall remain on Mars and read a book,” said Ettil. A blunt knock on
the door. Tylla answered. Father-in-law stormed in. “What’s this I hear
about my son-in-law? A traitor?”
“Yes, Father.”
“You’re not fighting in the Martian Army?”
“No, Father.”
“Gods!” The old father turned very red. “A plague on your name! You’ll
be shot.”
“Shoot me, then, and have it over.”
“Who ever heard of a Martian not invading? Who!”
“Nobody. It is, I admit, quite incredible.”
“Incredible,” husked the witch voices under the window.
“Father, can’t you reason with him?” demanded Tylla.
“Reason with a dung heap,” cried Father, eyes blazing. He came and stood
over Ettil. “Bands playing, a fine day, women weeping, children jumping,
everything right, men marching bravely, and you sit here! Oh, shame!”
“Shame,” sobbed the faraway voices in the hedge.
“Get the devil out of my house with your inane chatter,” said Ettil,
exploding. “Take your medals and your drums and run!”
He shoved Father-in-law past a screaming wife, only to have the door
thrown wide at this moment, as a military detail entered.
A voice shouted, “Ettil Vrye?”
“Yes!”
“You are under arrest!”
“Good-by, my dear wife. I am off to the wars with these fools!” shouted
Ettil, dragged through the door by the men in bronze mesh.
“Good-by, good-by,” said the town witches, fading away. . . .
The cell was neat and clean. Without a book, Ettil was nervous. He
gripped the bars and watched the rockets shoot up into the night air.
The stars were cold and numerous; they seemed to scatter when every
rocket blasted up among them.
“Fools,” whispered Ettil. “Fools!”
The cell door opened. One man with a kind of vehicle entered, full of
books; books here, there, everywhere in the chambers of the vehicle.
Behind him the Military Assignor loomed.
“Ettil Vrye, we want to know why you had these illegal Earth books in
your house. These copies of  Wonder Stories, Scientific Tales, Fantastic
Stories.  Explain.” The man gripped Ettil’s wrist.
Ettil shook him free. “If you’re going to shoot me, shoot me. That
literature, from Earth, is the very reason why I won’t try to invade
them. It’s the reason why your invasion will fail.”
“How so?” The assignor scowled and turned to the yellowed magazines.
“Pick any copy,” said Ettil. “Any one at all. Nine out of ten stories in
the years 1929, ‘30 to ‘50, Earth calendar, have every Martian invasion
successfully invading Earth.”
“Ah!” The assignor smiled, nodded.
“And then,” said Ettil, “failing.”
“That’s treason! Owning such literature!”
“So be it, if you wish. But let me draw a few conclusions. Invariably,
each invasion is thwarted by a young man, usually lean, usually Irish,
usually alone, named Mick or Rick or Jick or Bannon, who destroys the
Martians.”
“You don’t believe that!”
“No, I don’t believe Earthmen can actually do that—no. But they have a
background, understand, Assignor, of generations of children reading
just such fiction, absorbing it. They have nothing but a literature of
invasions successfully thwarted. Can you say the same for Martian
literature?”
“Well——”
“No.”
“I guess not.”
“You know not. We never wrote stories of such a fantastic nature. Now we
rebel, we attack, and we shall die.”
“I don’t see your reasoning on that. Where does this tie in with the
magazine stories?”
“Morale. A big thing. The Earthmen know they can’t fail. It is in them
like blood beating in their veins. They cannot fail. They will repel
each invasion, no matter how well organized. Their youth of reading just
such fiction as this has given them a faith we cannot equal. We
Martians? We are uncertain; we know that we might fail. Our morale is
low, in spite of the banged drums and tooted horns.”
“I won’t listen to this treason,” cried the assignor. “This fiction will
be burned, as you will be, within the next ten minutes. You have a
choice, Ettil Vrye. Join the Legion of War, or burn.”
“It is a choice of deaths. I choose to burn.”
“Men!”
He was hustled out into the courtyard. There he saw his carefully
hoarded reading matter set to the torch. A special pit was prepared,
with oil five feet deep in it. This, with a great thunder, was set
afire. Into this, in a minute, he would be pushed.
On the far side of the courtyard, in shadow, he noticed the solemn
figure of his son standing alone, his great yellow eyes luminous with
sorrow and fear. He did not put out his hand or speak, but only looked
at his father like some dying animal, a wordless animal seeking rescue.
Ettil looked at the flaming pit. He felt the rough hands seize him,
strip him, push him forward to the hot perimeter of death. Only then did
Ettil swallow and cry out, “Wait!”
The assignor’s face, bright with the orange fire, pushed forward in the
trembling air. “What is it?”
“I will join the Legion of War,” replied Ettil.
“Good! Release him!”
The hands fell away.
As he turned he saw his son standing far across the court, waiting. His
son was not smiling, only waiting. In the sky a bronze rocket leaped
across the stars, ablaze. . . .
“And now we bid good-by to these stalwart warriors,” said the assignor.
The band thumped and the wind blew a fine sweet rain of tears gently
upon the sweating army. The children cavorted. In the chaos Ettil saw
his wife weeping with pride, his son solemn and silent at her side.
They marched into the ship, everybody laughing and brave. They buckled
themselves into their spiderwebs. All through the tense ship the
spiderwebs were filled with lounging, lazy men. They chewed on bits of
food and waited. A great lid slammed shut. A valve hissed.
“Off to Earth and destruction,” whispered Ettil.
“What?” asked someone.
“Off to glorious victory,” said Ettil, grimacing.
The rocket jumped.
Space, thought Ettil. Here we are banging across black inks and pink
lights of space in a brass kettle. Here we are, a celebratory rocket
heaved out to fill the Earthmen’s eyes with fear flames as they look up
to the sky. What is it like, being far, far away from your home, your
wife, your child, here and now?
He tried to analyze his trembling. It was like tying your most secret
inward working organs to Mars and then jumping out a million miles. Your
heart was still on Mars, pumping, glowing. Your brain was still on Mars,
thinking, crenulated, like an abandoned torch. Your stomach was still on
Mars, somnolent, trying to digest the final dinner. Your lungs were
still in the cool blue wine air of Mars, a soft folded bellows screaming
for release, one part of you longing for the rest.
For here you were, a meshless, cogless automaton, a body upon which
officials had performed clinical autopsy and left all of you that
counted back upon the empty seas and strewn over the darkened hills.
Here you were, bottle-empty, fireless, chill, with only your hands to
give death to Earthmen. A pair of hands is all you are now, he thought
in cold remoteness.
Here you lie in the tremendous web. Others are about you, but they are
whole—whole hearts and bodies. But all of you that lives is back there
walking the desolate seas in evening winds. This thing here, this cold
clay thing, is already dead.
“Attack stations, attack stations, attack!”
“Ready, ready, ready!”
“Up!”
“Out of the webs, quick!”
Ettil moved. Somewhere before him his two cold hands moved.
How swift it has all been, he thought. A year ago one Earth rocket
reached Mars. Our scientists, with their incredible telepathic ability,
copied it; our workers, with their incredible plants, reproduced it a
hundredfold. No other Earth ship has reached Mars since then, and yet we
know their language perfectly, all of us. We know their culture, their
logic. And we shall pay the price of our brilliance.
“Guns on the ready!”
“Right!”
“Sights!”
“Reading by miles?”
“Ten thousand!”
“Attack!”
A humming silence. A silence of insects throbbing in the walls of the
rocket. The insect singing of tiny bobbins and levers and whirls of
wheels. Silence of waiting men. Silence of glands emitting the slow
steady pulse of sweat under arm, on brow, under staring pale eyes!
“Wait! Ready!”
Ettil hung onto his sanity with his fingernails, hung hard and long.
Silence, silence, silence. Waiting.
Teeee-e-ee!
“What’s that?”
“Earth radio!”
“Cut them in!”
“They’re trying to reach us, call us. Cut them in!”
Eee-e-e!
“Here they are! Listen!”
“Calling Martian invasion fleet!”
The listening silence, the insect hum pulling back to let the sharp
Earth voice crack in upon the rooms of waiting men.
“This is Earth calling. This is William Sommers, president of the
Association of United American Producers!”
Ettil held tight to his station, bent forward, eyes shut.
“Welcome to Earth.”
“What?” the men in the rocket roared. “What did he say?”
“Yes, welcome to Earth.”
“It’s a trick!”
Ettil shivered, opened his eyes to stare in bewilderment at the unseen
voice from the ceiling source.
“Welcome! Welcome to green, industrial Earth!” declared the friendly
voice. “With open arms we welcome you, to turn a bloody invasion into a
time of friendships that will last through all of Time.”
“A trick!”
“Hush, listen!”
“Many years ago we of Earth renounced war, destroyed our atom bombs.
Now, unprepared as we are, there is nothing for us but to welcome you.
The planet is yours. We ask only mercy from you good and merciful
invaders.”
“It can’t be true!” a voice whispered.
“It must be a trick!”
“Land and be welcomed, all of you,” said Mr. William Sommers of Earth.
“Land anywhere. Earth is yours; we are all brothers!”
Ettil began to laugh. Everyone in the room turned to see him. The other
Martians blinked. “He’s gone mad!”
He did not stop laughing until they hit him.
The tiny fat man in the center of the hot rocket tarmac at Green Town,
California, jerked out a clean white handkerchief and touched it to his
wet brow. He squinted blindly from the fresh plank platform at the fifty
thousand people restrained behind a fence of policemen, arm to arm.
Everybody looked at the sky.
“There they are!”
A gasp.
“No, just sea gulls!”
A disappointed grumble.
“I’m beginning to think it would have been better to have declared war
on them,” whispered the mayor. “Then we could all go home.”
“Sh-h!”  said his wife.
“There!” The crowd roared.
Out of the sun came the Martian rockets.
“Everybody ready?” The mayor glanced nervously about.
“Yes, sir,” said Miss California 1965.
“Yes,” said Miss America 1940, who had come rushing up at the last
minute as a substitute for Miss America 1966, who was ill at home.
“Yes siree,” said Mr. Biggest Grapefruit in San Fernando Valley 1956,
eagerly.
“Ready, band?”
The band poised its brass like so many guns.
“Ready!”
The rockets landed. “Go!”
The band played “California, Here I Come” ten times. From noon until one
o’clock the mayor made a speech, shaking his hands in the direction of
the silent, apprehensive rockets.
At one-fifteen the seals of the rockets opened
The band played “Oh, You Golden State” three times.
Ettil and fifty other Martians leaped out, guns at the ready.
The mayor ran forward with the key to Earth in his hands.
The band played “Santa Claus Is Coming to Town,” and a full chorus of
singers imported from Long Beach sang different words to it, something
about “Martians Are Coming to Town.”
Seeing no weapons about, the Martians relaxed, but kept their guns out.
From one-thirty until two-fifteen the mayor made the same speech over
for the benefit of the Martians.
At two-thirty Miss America of 1940 volunteered to kiss all the Martians
if they lined up.
At two-thirty and ten seconds the band played “How Do You Do,
Everybody,” to cover up the confusion caused by Miss America’s
suggestion.
At two thirty-five Mr. Biggest Grapefruit presented the Martians with a
two-ton truck full of grapefruit.
At two thirty-seven the mayor gave them all free passes to the Elite and
Majestic theaters, combining this gesture with another speech which
lasted until after three.
The band played, and the fifty thousand people sang, “For They Are Jolly
Good Fellows.”
It was over at four o’clock.
Ettil sat down in the shadow of the rocket, two of his fellows with him.
“So this is Earth!”
“I say kill the filthy rats,” said one Martian. “I don’t trust them.
They’re sneaky. What’s their motive for treating us this way?” He held
up a box of something that rustled. “What’s this stuff they gave me? A
sample, they said.” He read the label. BLIX,  the new sudsy soap.
The crowd had drifted about, was mingling with the Martians like a
carnival throng. Everywhere was the buzzing murmur of people fingering
the rockets, asking questions.
Ettil was cold. He was beginning to tremble even more now. “Don’t you
feel it?” he whispered. “The tenseness, the evilness of all this.
Something’s going to happen to us. They have some plan. Something subtle
and horrible. They’re going to do something to us—I know.”
“I say kill every one of them!”
“How can you kill people who call you ‘pal’ and ‘buddy’?” asked another
Martian.
Ettil shook his head. “They’re sincere. And yet I feel as if we were in
a big acid vat melting away, away. I’m frightened.” He put his mind out
to touch among the crowd. “Yes, they’re really friendly,
hail-fellows-well-met (one of their terms). One huge mass of common men,
loving dogs and cats and Martians equally. And yet—and yet——”
The band played “Roll Out the Barrel.” Free beer was being distributed
through the courtesy of Hagenback Beer, Fresno, California.
The sickness came.
The men poured out fountains of slush from their mouths. The sound of
sickness filled the land.
Gagging, Ettil sat beneath a sycamore tree. “A plot, a plot—a horrible
plot,” he groaned, holding his stomach.
“What did you eat?” The assignor stood over him.
“Something that they called popcorn,” groaned Ettil.
“And?”
“And some sort of long meat on a bun, and some yellow liquid in an iced
vat, and some sort of fish and something called pastrami,” sighed Ettil,
eyelids flickering.
The moans of the Martian invaders sounded all about.
“Kill the plotting snakes!” somebody cried weakly.
“Hold on,” said the assignor. “It’s merely hospitality. They overdid it.
Up on your feet now, men. Into the town. We’ve got to place small
garrisons of men about to make sure all is well. Other ships are landing
in other cities. We’ve our job to do here.”
The men gained their feet and stood blinking stupidly about.
“Forward, march!”
One, two, three,  four!  One, two, three,  four!  . . .
The white stores of the little town lay dreaming in shimmering heat.
Heat emanated from everything—poles, concrete, metal, awnings, roofs,
tar paper—everything.
The sound of Martian feet sounded on the asphalt.
“Careful, men!” whispered the assignor. They walked past a beauty shop.
From inside, a furtive giggle. “Look!”
A coppery head bobbed and vanished like a doll in the window. A blue eye
glinted and winked at a keyhole.
“It’s a plot,” whispered Ettil. “A plot, I tell you!”
The odors of perfume were fanned out on the summer air by the whirling
vents of the grottoes where the women hid like undersea creatures, under
electric cones, their hair curled into wild whorls and peaks, their eyes
shrewd and glassy, animal and sly, their mouths painted a neon red. Fans
were whirring, the perfumed wind issuing upon the stillness, moving
among green trees, creeping among the amazed Martians.
“For God’s sake!” screamed Ettil, his nerves suddenly breaking loose.
“Let’s get in our rockets—go home! They’ll get us! Those horrid things
in there. See them? Those evil undersea things, those women in their
cool little caverns of artificial rock!”
“Shut up!”
Look at them in there, he thought, drifting their dresses like cool
green gills over their pillar legs. He shouted.
“Someone shut his mouth!”
“They’ll rush out on us, hurling chocolate boxes and copies of  Kleig
Love  and  Holly Pick-ture,  shrieking with their red greasy mouths!
Inundate us with banality, destroy our sensibilities! Look at them,
being electrocuted by devices, their voices like hums and chants and
murmurs! Do you dare go in there?”
“Why not?” asked the other Martians.
“They’ll fry you, bleach you, change you! Crack you, flake you away
until you’re nothing but a husband, a working man, the one with the
money who pays so they can come sit in there devouring their evil
chocolates! Do you think you could control them?”
“Yes, by the gods!”
From a distance a voice drifted, a high and shrill voice, a woman’s
voice saying, “Ain’t that middle one there cute?”
“Martians ain’t so bad after all. Gee, they’re just men,” said another,
fading.
“Hey, there.  Yoo-hoo!  Martians! Hey!”
Yelling, Ettil ran. . . .
He sat in a park and trembled steadily. He remembered what he had seen.
Looking up at the dark night sky, he felt so far from home, so deserted.
Even now, as he sat among the still trees, in the distance he could see
Martian warriors walking the streets with the Earth women, vanishing
into the phantom darknesses of the little emotion palaces to hear the
ghastly sounds of white things moving on gray screens, with little
frizz-haired women beside them, wads of gelatinous gum working in their
jaws, other wads under the seats, hardening with the fossil imprints of
the women’s tiny cat teeth forever imbedded therein. The cave of
winds—the cinema.
“Hello.”
He jerked his head in terror.
A woman sat on the bench beside him, chewing gum lazily. “Don’t run off;
I don’t bite,” she said.
“Oh,” he said.
“Like to go to the pictures?” she said.
“No.”
“Aw, come on,” she said. “Everybody else is.”
“No,” he said. “Is that all you do in this world?”
“All? Ain’t that enough?” Her blue eyes widened suspiciously. “What you
want me to do—sit home, read a book? Ha, ha! That’s rich.”
Ettil stared at her a moment before asking a question.
“Do you do anything else?” he asked.
“Ride in cars. You got a car? You oughta get you a big new convertible
Podler Six. Gee, they’re fancy! Any man with a Podler Six can go out
with any gal, you bet!” she said, blinking at him. “I bet you got all
kinds of money—you come from Mars and all. I bet if you really wanted
you could get a Podler Six and travel everywhere.”
“To the show maybe?”
“What’s wrong with ‘at?”
“Nothing—nothing.”
“You know what you talk like, mister?” she said. “A Communist! Yes, sir,
that’s the kinda talk nobody stands for, by gosh. Nothing wrong with our
little old system. We was good enough to let you Martians invade, and we
never raised even our bitty finger, did we?”
“That’s what I’ve been trying to understand,” said Ettil. “Why did you
let us?”
“’Cause we’re bighearted, mister; that’s why! Just remember that,
bighearted.” She walked off to look for someone else.
Gathering courage to himself, Ettil began to write a letter to his wife,
moving the pen carefully over the paper on his knee.
“Dear Tylla——”
But again he was interrupted. A small-little-girl-of-an-old-woman, with
a pale round wrinkled little face, shook her tambourine in front of his
nose, forcing him to glance up.
“Brother,” she cried, eyes blazing. “Have you been saved?”
“Am I in danger?” Ettil dropped his pen, jumping.
“Terrible danger!” she wailed, clanking her tambourine, gazing at the
sky. “You need to be saved, brother, in the worst way!”
“I’m inclined to agree,” he said, trembling.
“We saved lots already today. I saved three myself, of you Mars people.
Ain’t that nice?” She grinned at him.
“I guess so.”
She was acutely suspicious. She leaned forward with her secret whisper.
“Brother,” she wanted to know, “you been baptized?”
“I don’t know,” he whispered back.
“You don’t know?” she cried, flinging up hand and tambourine.
“Is it like being shot?” he asked.
“Brother,” she said, “you are in a bad and sinful condition. I blame it
on your ignorant bringing up. I bet those schools on Mars are
terrible—don’t teach you no truth at all. Just a pack of made-up lies.
Brother, you got to be baptized if you want to be happy.”
“Will it make me happy even in this world here?” he said. “Don’t ask for
everything on your platter,” she said. “Be satisfied with a wrinkled
pea, for there’s another world we’re all going to that’s better than
this one.”
“I know that world,” he said.
“It’s peaceful,” she said.
“Yes.”
“There’s quiet,” she said.
“Yes.”
“There’s milk and honey flowing.”
“Why, yes,” he said.
“And everybody’s laughing.”
“I can see it now,” he said.
“A better world,” she said.
“Far better,” he said. “Yes, Mars is a great planet.”
“Mister,” she said, tightening up and almost flinging the tambourine in
his face, “you been joking with me?”
“Why, no.” He was embarrassed and bewildered. “I thought you were
talking about——”
“Not about mean old nasty Mars, I tell you, mister! It’s your type that
is going to boil for years, and suffer and break out in black pimples
and be tortured——”
“I must admit Earth isn’t very nice. You’ve described it beautifully.”
“Mister, you’re funning me again!” she cried angrily.
“No, no—please. I plead ignorance.”
“Well,” she said, “you’re a heathen, and heathens are improper. Here’s a
paper. Come to this address tomorrow night and be baptized and be happy.
We shouts and we stomps and we talk in voices, so if you want to hear
our all-cornet, all-brass band, you come, won’t you now?”
“I’ll try,” he said hesitantly.
Down the street she went, patting her tambourine, singing at the top of
her voice, “Happy Am I, I’m Always Happy.”
Dazed, Ettil returned to his letter.
“Dear Tylla: To think that in my naïveté I imagined that the Earthmen
would have to counterattack with guns and bombs. No, no. I was sadly
wrong. There is no Rick or Mick or Jick or Bannon—those lever fellows
who save worlds. No.
“There are blond robots with pink rubber bodies, real, but somehow
unreal, alive but somehow automatic in all responses, living in caves
all of their lives. Their  derrières  are incredible in girth. Their
eyes are fixed and motionless from an endless time of staring at picture
screens. The only muscles they have occur in their jaws from their
ceaseless chewing of gum.
“And it is not only these, my dear Tylla, but the entire civilization
into which we have been dropped like a shovelful of seeds into a large
concrete mixer. Nothing of us will survive. We will be killed not by the
gun but by the glad-hand. We will be destroyed not by the rocket but by
the automobile . . .”
Somebody screamed. A crash, another crash. Silence.
Ettil leaped up from his letter. Outside, on the street two ears had
crashed. One full of Martians, another with Earthmen. Ettil returned to
his letter:
“Dear, dear Tylla, a few statistics if you will allow. Forty-five
thousand people killed every year on this continent of America; made
into jelly right in the can, as it were, in the automobiles. Red blood
jelly, with white marrow bones like sudden thoughts, ridiculous horror
thoughts, transfixed in the immutable jelly. The cars roll up in tight
neat sardine rolls—all sauce, all silence.
“Blood manure for green buzzing summer flies, all over the highways.
Faces made into Halloween masks by sudden stops. Halloween is one of
their holidays. I think they worship the automobile on that
night—something to do with death, anyway.
“You look out your window and see two people lying atop each other in
friendly fashion who, a moment ago, had never met before, dead. I
foresee our army mashed, diseased, trapped in cinemas by witches and
gum. Sometime in the next day I shall try to escape back to Mars before
it is too late.
“Somewhere on Earth tonight, my Tylla, there is a Man with a Lever,
which, when he pulls it, Will Save the World. The man is now unemployed.
His switch gathers dust. He himself plays pinochle.
“The women of this evil planet are drowning us in a tide of banal
sentimentality, misplaced romance, and one last fling before the makers
of glycerin boil them down for usage. Good night, Tylla. Wish me well,
for I shall probably die trying to escape. My love to our child.”
Weeping silently, he folded the letter and reminded himself to mail it
later at the rocket post.
He left the park. What was there to do? Escape? But how? Return to the
post late tonight, steal one of the rockets alone and go back to Mars?
Would it be possible? He shook his head. He was much too confused.
All that he really knew was that if he stayed here he would soon be the
property of a lot of things that buzzed and snorted and hissed, that
gave off fumes or stenches. In six months he would be the owner of a
large pink, trained ulcer, a blood pressure of algebraic dimensions, a
myopia this side of blindness, and nightmares as deep as oceans and
infested with improbable lengths of dream intestines through which he
must violently force his way each night. No, no.
He looked at the haunted faces of the Earthmen drifting violently along
in their mechanical death boxes. Soon—yes, very soon—they would invent
an auto with six silver handles on it!
“Hey, there!”
An auto horn. A large long hearse of a car, black and ominous pulled to
the curb. A man leaned out.
“You a Martian?”
“Yes.”
“Just the man I gotta see. Hop in quick—the chance of a lifetime. Hop
in. Take you to a real nice joint where we can talk. Come on—don’t stand
there.”
As if hypnotized, Ettil opened the door of the car, got in.
They drove off.
“What’ll it be, E.V.? How about a manhattan? Two manhattans, waiter.
Okay, E.V. This is my treat. This is on me and Big Studios! Don’t even
touch your wallet. Pleased to meet you, E.V. My name’s R. R. Van Plank.
Maybe you hearda me? No? Well, shake anyhow.”
Ettil felt his hand massaged and dropped. They were in a dark hole with
music and waiters drifting about. Two drinks were set down. It had all
happened so swiftly. Now Van Plank, hands crossed on his chest, was
surveying his Martian discovery.
“What I want you for, E.V., is this. It’s the most magnanimous idea I
ever got in my life. I don’t know how it came to me, just in a flash. I
was sitting home tonight and I thought to myself, My God, what a picture
it would make!Invasion of Earth by Mars.  So what I got to do? I got to
find an adviser for the film. So I climbed in my car and found you and
here we are. Drink up! Here’s to your health and our future.  Skoal!”
“But——” said Ettil.
“Now, I know, you’ll want money. Well, we got plenty of that. Besides, I
got a li’l black book full of peaches I can lend you.”
“I don’t like most of your Earth fruit and——”
“You’re a card, mac, really. Well, here’s how I get the picture in my
mind—listen.” He leaned forward excitedly. “We got a flash scene of the
Martians at a big powwow, drummin’ drums, gettin’ stewed on Mars. In the
background are huge silver cities——”
“But that’s not the way Martian cities are——”
“We got to have color, kid. Color. Let your pappy fix this. Anyway,
there are all the Martians doing a dance around a fire——”
“We don’t dance around fires——”
“In  this  film you got a fire and you dance,” declared Van Plank, eyes
shut, proud of his certainty. He nodded, dreaming it over on his tongue.
“Then we got a beautiful Martian woman, tall and blond.”
“Martian women are dark——”
“Look, I don’t see how we’re going to be happy, E.V. By the way, son,
you ought to change your name. What was it again?”
“Ettil.”
“That’s a woman’s name. I’ll give you a better one. Call you Joe. Okay,
Joe. As I was saying, our Martian women are gonna be blond, because,
see, just because. Or else your poppa won’t be happy. You got any
suggestions?”
“I thought that——”
“And another thing we gotta have is a scene, very tearful, where the
Martian woman saves the whole ship of Martian men from dying when a
meteor or something hits the ship. That’ll make a whackeroo of a scene.
You know, I’m glad I found you, Joe. You’re going to have a good deal
with us, I tell you.”
Ettil reached out and held the man’s wrist tight. “Just a minute.
There’s something I want to ask you.”
“Sure, Joe, shoot.”
“Why are you being so nice to us? We invade your planet, and you welcome
us—everybody—like long-lost children. Why?”
“They sure grow ’em green on Mars, don’t they? You’re a naïve-type guy—I
can see from way over here. Mac, look at it this way. We’re all Little
People, ain’t we?” He waved a small tan hand garnished with emeralds.
“We’re all common as dirt, ain’t we? Well, here on Earth, we’re proud of
that. This is the century of the Common Man, Bill, and we’re proud we’re
small. Billy, you’re looking at a planet full of Saroyans. Yes, sir. A
great big fat family of friendly Saroyans—everybody loving everybody. We
understand you Martians, Joe, and we know why you invaded Earth. We know
how lonely you were up on that little cold planet Mars, how you envied
us our cities——”
“Our civilization is much older than yours——”
“Please, Joe, you make me unhappy when you interrupt. Let me finish my
theory and then you talk all you want. As I was saying, you was lonely
up there, and down you came to see our cities and our women and all, and
we welcomed you in, because you’re our brothers, Common Men like all of
us.
“And then, as a kind of side incident, Roscoe, there’s a certain little
small profit to be had from this invasion. I mean for instance this
picture I plan, which will net us, neat, a billion dollars, I bet. Next
week we start putting out a special Martian doll at thirty bucks a
throw. Think of the millions there. I also got a contract to make a
Martian game to sell for five bucks. There’s all sorts of angles.”
“I see,” said Ettil, drawing back.
“And then of course there’s that whole nice new market. Think of all the
depilatories and gum and shoeshine we can sell to you Martians.”
“Wait. Another question.”
“Shoot.”
“What’s your first name? What’s the R.R. stand for?”
“Richard Robert.”
Ettil looked at the ceiling. “Do they sometimes, perhaps, on occasion,
once in a while, by accident, call you—Rick?”
“How’d you guess, mac? Rick, sure.”
Ettil sighed and began to laugh and laugh. He put out his hand. “So
you’re Rick? Rick! So you’re Rick!”
“What’s the joke, laughing boy? Let Poppa in!”
“You wouldn’t understand—a private joke. Ha, ha!” Tears ran down his
cheeks and into his open mouth. He pounded the table again and again.
“So you’re Rick. Oh, how different, how funny. No bulging muscles, no
lean jaw, no gun. Only a wallet full of money and an emerald ring and a
big middle!”
“Hey, watch the language! I may not be no Apollo, but——”
“Shake hands, Rick. I’ve wanted to meet you. You’re the man who’ll
conquer Mars, with cocktail shakers and foot arches and poker chips and
riding crops and leather boots and checkered caps and rum collinses.”
“I’m only a humble businessman,” said Van Plank, eyes slyly down. “I do
my work and take my humble little piece of money pie. But, as I was
saying, Mort, I been thinking of the market on Mars for Uncle Wiggily
games and Dick Tracy comics; all new. A big wide field never even heard
of cartoons, right? Right! So we just toss a great big bunch of stuff on
the Martians’ heads. They’ll fight for it, kid, fight! Who wouldn’t, for
perfumes and Paris dresses and Oshkosh overalls, eh? And nice new
shoes——”
“We don’t wear shoes.”
“What have I got here?” R.R. asked of the ceiling. “A planet full of
Okies? Look, Joe, we’ll take care of that. We’ll shame everyone into
wearing shoes. Then we sell them the polish!”
“Oh.”
He slapped Ettil’s. arm. “Is it a deal? Will you be technical director
on my film? You’ll get two hundred a week to start, a five-hundred top.
What you say?”
“I’m sick,” said Ettil. He had drunk the manhattan and was now turning
blue.
“Say, I’m sorry. I didn’t know it would do that to you. Let’s get some
fresh air.”
In the open air Ettil felt better. He swayed. “So that’s why Earth took
us in?”
“Sure, son. Any time an Earthman can turn an honest dollar, watch him
steam. The customer is always right. No hard feelings. Here’s my card.
Be at the studio in Hollywood tomorrow morning at nine o’clock. They’ll
show you your office. I’ll arrive at eleven and see you then. Be sure
you get there at nine o’clock. It’s a strict rule.”
“Why?”
“Gallagher, you’re a queer oyster, but I love you. Good night. Happy
invasion!”
The car drove off.
Ettil blinked after it, incredulous. Then, rubbing his brow with the
palm of his hand, he walked slowly along the street toward the rocket
port.
“Well, what are you going to do?” he asked himself, aloud. The rockets
lay gleaming in the moonlight silent. From the city came the sounds of
distant revelry. In the medical compound an extreme case of nervous
breakdown was being tended to: a young Martian who, by his screams, had
seen too much, drunk too much, heard too many songs on the little
red-and-yellow boxes in the drinking places, and had been chased around
innumerable tables by a large elephant-like woman. He kept murmuring:
“Can’t breathe . . . crushed, trapped.”
The sobbing faded. Ettil came out of the shadows and moved on across a
wide avenue toward the ships. Far over, he could see the guards lying
about drunkenly. He listened. From the vast city came the faint sounds
of cars and music and sirens. And he imagined other sounds too: the
insidious whir of malt machines stirring malts to fatten the warriors
and make them lazy and forgetful, the narcotic voices of the cinema
caverns lulling and lulling the Martians fast, fast into a slumber
through which, all of their remaining lives, they would sleepwalk.
A year from now, how many Martians dead of cirrhosis of the liver, bad
kidneys, high blood pressure, suicide?
He stood in the middle of the empty avenue. Two blocks away a car was
rushing toward him.
He had a choice: stay here, take the studio job, report for work each
morning as adviser on a picture, and, in time, come to agree with the
producer that, yes indeed, there were massacres on Mars; yes, the women
were tall and blond; yes, there were tribal dances and sacrifices; yes,
yes, yes. Or he could walk over and get into a rocket ship and, alone,
return to Mars.
“But what about next year?” he said.
The Blue Canal Night Club brought to Mars. The Ancient City Gambling
Casino, Built Right Inside. Yes, Right Inside a Real Martian Ancient
City! Neons, racing forms blowing in the old cities, picnic lunches in
the ancestral graveyards—all of it, all of it.
But not quite yet. In a few days he could be home. Tylla would be
waiting with their son, and then for the last few years of gentle life
he might sit with his wife in the blowing weather on the edge of the
canal reading his good, gentle books, sipping a rare and light wine,
talking and living out their short time until the neon bewilderment fell
from the sky.
And then perhaps he and Tylla might move into the blue mountains and
hide for another year or two until the tourists came to snap their
cameras and say how quaint things were.
He knew just what he would say to Tylla. “War is a bad thing, but peace
can be a living horror.”
He stood in the middle of the wide avenue.
Turning, it was with no surprise that he saw a car bearing down upon
him, a car full of screaming children. These boys and girls, none older
than sixteen, were swerving and ricocheting their open-top car down the
avenue. He saw them point at him and yell. He heard the motor roar
louder. The car sped forward at sixty miles an hour.
He began to run.
Yes, yes, he thought tiredly, with the car upon him, how strange, how
sad. It sounds so much like . . . a concrete mixer.
      Marionettes, Inc</p>

THEY walked slowly down the street at about ten in the evening, talking
calmly. They were both about thirty-five, both eminently sober.
“But why so early?” said Smith.
“Because,” said Braling.
“Your first night out in years and you go home at ten o’clock.”
“Nerves, I suppose.”
“What I wonder is how you ever managed it. I’ve been trying to get you
out for ten years for a quiet drink. And now, on the one night, you
insist on turning in early.”
“Mustn’t crowd my luck,” said Braling.
“What did you do, put sleeping powder in your wife’s coffee?”
“No, that would be unethical. You’ll see soon enough.”
They turned a corner. “Honestly, Braling, I hate to say this, but you 
have  been patient with her. You may not admit it to me, but marriage
has been awful for you, hasn’t it?”
“I wouldn’t say that.”
“It’s got around, anyway, here and there, how she got you to marry her.
That time back in 1979 when you were going to Rio——”
“Dear Rio. I never  did  see it after all my plans.”
“And how she tore her clothes and rumpled her hair and threatened to
call the police unless you married her.”
“She always was nervous, Smith, understand.”
“It was more than unfair. You didn’t love her. You told her as much,
didn’t you?”
“I recall that I was quite firm on the subject.”
“But you married her anyhow.”
“I had my business to think of, as well as my mother and father. A thing
like that would have killed them.”
“And it’s been ten years.”
“Yes,” said Braling, his gray eyes steady. “But I think perhaps it might
change now. I think what I’ve waited for has come about. Look here.”
He drew forth a long blue ticket.
“Why, it’s a ticket for Rio on the Thursday rocket!”
“Yes, I’m finally going to make it.”
“But how wonderful! You  do  deserve it! But won’t  she  object? Cause
trouble?”
Braling smiled nervously. “She won’t know I’m gone. I’ll be back in a
month and no one the wiser, except you.
Smith sighed. “I wish I were going with you.”
“Poor Smith,  your  marriage hasn’t exactly been roses, has it?”
“Not exactly, married to a woman who overdoes it. I mean, after all,
when you’ve been married ten years, you don’t expect a woman to sit on
your lap for two hours every evening, call you at work twelve times a
day and talk baby talk. And it seems to me that in the last month she’s
gotten worse. I wonder if perhaps she isn’t just a little
simple-minded?”
“Ah, Smith, always the conservative. Well, here’s my house. Now, would
you like to know my secret? How I made it out this evening?”
“Will you really tell?”
“Look up, there!” said Braling.
They both stared up through the dark air.
In the window above them, on the second floor, a shade was raised. A man
about thirty-five years old, with a touch of gray at either temple, sad
gray eyes, and a small thin mustache looked down at them.
“Why, that’s  you!”  cried Smith.
“Sh-h-h, not so loud!” Braling waved upward. The man in the window
gestured significantly and vanished.
“I must be insane,” said Smith.
“Hold on a moment.” They waited.
The street door of the apartment opened and the tall spare gentleman
with the mustache and the grieved eyes came out to meet them.
“Hello, Braling,” he said.
“Hello, Braling,” said Braling.
They were identical.
Smith stared. “Is this your twin brother? I never knew—”
“No, no,” said Braling quietly. “Bend close. Put your ear to Braling
Two’s chest.”
Smith hesitated and then leaned forward to place his head against the
uncomplaining ribs.
Tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick.
“Oh no! It  can’t  be!”
“It is.”
“Let me listen again.”
Tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick.
Smith staggered back and fluttered his eyelids, appalled. He reached out
and touched the warm hands and the cheeks of the thing.
“Where’d you get him?”
“Isn’t he excellently fashioned?”
“Incredible. Where?”
“Give the man your card, Braling Two.”
Braling Two did a magic trick and produced a white card:
MARIONETTES, INC.
    Duplicate self or friends; new humanoid plastic 1990 models, guaranteed against all physical wear. From $7,600 to our $15,000 de luxe model.</p>

“No,” said Smith.
“Yes,” said Braling.
“Naturally,” said Braling Two.
“How long has this gone on?”
“I’ve had him for a month. I keep him in the cellar in a toolbox. My
wife never goes downstairs, and I have the only lock and key to that
box. Tonight I said I wished to take a walk to buy a cigar. I went down
cellar and took Braling Two out of his box and sent him back up to sit
with my wife while I came on out to see you, Smith.”
“Wonderful! He even  smells  like you: Bond Street and Melachrinos!”
“It may be splitting hairs, but I think it highly ethical. After all,
what my wife wants most of all is  me.  This marionette  is  me to the
hairiest detail. I’ve been home all evening. I shall be home with her
for the next month. In the meantime another gentleman will be in Rio
after ten years of waiting. When I return from Rio, Braling Two here
will go back in his box.”
Smith thought that over a minute or two. “Will he walk around without
sustenance for a month?” he finally asked.
“For six months if necessary. And he’s built to do everything—eat,
sleep, perspire—everything, natural as natural is. You’ll take good care
of my wife, won’t you, Braling Two?”
“Your wife is rather nice,” said Braling Two. “I’ve grown rather fond of
her.”
Smith was beginning to tremble. “How long has Marionettes, Inc., been in
business?”
“Secretly, for two years.”
“Could I—I mean, is there a possibility——” Smith took his friend’s elbow
earnestly. “Can you tell me where I can get one, a robot, a marionette,
for myself? You  will  give me the address, won’t you?”
“Here you are.”
Smith took the card and turned it round and round. “Thank you,” he said.
“You don’t know what this means. Just a little respite. A night or so,
once a month even. My wife loves me so much she can’t bear to have me
gone an hour. I love her dearly, you know, but remember the old poem:
‘Love will fly if held too lightly, love will die if held too tightly.’
I just want her to relax her grip a little bit.”
“You’re lucky, at least, that your wife loves you. Hate’s my problem.
Not so easy.”
“Oh, Nettie loves me madly. It will be my task to make her love me
comfortably.”
“Good luck to you, Smith. Do drop around while I’m in Rio. It will seem
strange, if you suddenly stop calling by, to my wife. You’re to treat
Braling Two, here, just like me.”
“Right! Good-by. And thank you.”
Smith went smiling down the street. Braling and Braling Two turned and
walked into the apartment hall.
On the crosstown bus Smith whistled softly, turning the white card in
his fingers:
Clients must be pledged to secrecy, for while an act is pending in
Congress to legalize Marionettes, Inc., it is still a felony, if caught,
to use one.
“Well,” said Smith.
Clients must have a mold made of their body and a color index check of
their eyes, lips, hair, skin, etc. Clients must expect to wait for two
months until their model is finished.
Not so long, thought Smith. Two months from now my ribs will have a
chance to mend from the crushing they’ve taken. Two months from now my
hand will heal from being so constantly held. Two months from now my
bruised underlip will begin to reshape itself. I don’t mean to sound 
ungrateful  . . .
He flipped the card over.
Marionettes, Inc., is two years old and has a fine record of satisfied
customers behind it. Our motto is “No Strings Attached.” Address: 43
South Wesley Drive.
The bus pulled to his stop; he alighted, and while humming up the stairs
he thought, Nettie and I have fifteen thousand in our joint bank
account. I’ll just slip eight thousand out as a business venture, you
might say. The marionette will probably pay back my money, with
interest, in many ways. Nettie needn’t know. He unlocked the door and in
a minute was in the bedroom. There lay Nettie, pale, huge, and piously
asleep.
“Dear Nettie.” He was almost overwhelmed with remorse at her innocent
face there in the semidarkness. “If you were awake you would smother me
with kisses and coo in my ear. Really, you make me feel like a criminal.
You have been such a good, loving wife. Sometimes it is impossible for
me to believe you married me instead of that Bud Chapman you once liked.
It seems that in the last month you have loved me more wildly than ever
before.”
Tears came to his eyes. Suddenly he wished to kiss her, confess his
love, tear up the card, forget the whole business. But as he moved to do
this, his hand ached and his ribs cracked and groaned. He stopped, with
a pained look in his eyes, and turned away. He moved out into the hall
and through the dark rooms. Humming, he opened the kidney desk in the
library and filched the bankbook. “Just take eight thousand dollars is
all,” he said. “No more than that.” He stopped. “Wait a minute.”
He rechecked the bankbook frantically. “Hold on here!” he cried. “Ten
thousand dollars is missing!” He leaped up. “There’s only five thousand
left! What’s she done? What’s Nettie done with it? More hats, more
clothes, more perfume! Or, wait—I know! She bought that little house on
the Hudson she’s been talking about for months, without so much as a by
your leave!”
He stormed into the bedroom, righteous and indignant. What did she mean,
taking their money like this? He bent over her. “Nettie!” he shouted.
“Nettie, wake up!”
She did not stir. “What’ve you done with my money!” he bellowed.
She stirred fitfully. The light from the street flushed over her
beautiful cheeks.
There was something about her. His heart throbbed violently. His tongue
dried. He shivered. His knees suddenly turned to water. He collapsed.
“Nettie, Nettie!” he cried. “What’ve you done with my money!”
And then, the horrid thought. And then the terror and the loneliness
engulfed him. And then the fever and disillusionment. For, without
desiring to do so, he bent forward and yet forward again until his
fevered ear was resting firmly and irrevocably upon her round pink
bosom. “Nettie!” he cried.
Tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick-tick.
As Smith walked away down the avenue in the night, Braling and Braling
Two turned in at the door to the apartment. “I’m glad he’ll be happy
too,” said Braling.
“Yes,” said Braling Two abstractedly.
“Well, it’s the cellar box for you, B-Two.” Braling guided the other
creature’s elbow down the stairs to the cellar.
“That’s what I want to talk to you about,” said Braling Two, as they
reached the concrete floor and walked across it. “The cellar. I don’t
like it. I don’t like that toolbox.”
“I’ll try and fix up something more comfortable.”
“Marionettes are made to move, not lie still. How would you like to lie
in a box most of the time?”
“Well——”
“You wouldn’t like it at all. I keep running. There’s no way to shut me
off. I’m perfectly alive and I have feelings.”
“It’ll only be a few days now. I’ll be off to Rio and you won’t have to
stay in the box. You can live upstairs.”
Braling Two gestured irritably. “And when you come back from having a
good time, back in the box I go.”
Braling said, “They didn’t tell me at the marionette shop that I’d get a
difficult specimen.”
“There’s a lot they don’t know about us,” said Braling Two. “We’re
pretty new. And we’re sensitive. I hate the idea of you going off and
laughing and lying in the sun in Rio while we’re stuck here in the
cold.”
“But I’ve wanted that trip all my life,” said Braling quietly. He
squinted his eyes and could see the sea and the mountains and the yellow
sand. The sound of the waves was good to his inward mind. The sun was
fine on his bared shoulders. The wine was most excellent.
“I’ll  never get to go to Rio,” said the other man. “Have you thought of
that?”
“No, I——”
“And another thing. Your wife.”
“What about her?” asked Braling, beginning to edge toward the door.
“I’ve grown quite fond of her.”
“I’m glad you’re enjoying your employment.” Braling licked his lips
nervously.
“I’m afraid you don’t understand. I think—I’m in love with her.”
Braling took another step and froze. “You’re  what?”
“And I’ve been thinking,” said Braling Two, “how nice it is in Rio and
how I’ll never get there, and I’ve thought about your wife and—I think
we could be very happy.”
“T-that’s nice.” Braling strolled as casually as he could to the cellar
door. “You won’t mind waiting a moment, will you? I have to make a phone
call.”
“To whom?” Braling Two frowned.
“No one important.”
“To Marionettes, Incorporated? To tell them to come get me?”
“No, no—nothing like that!” He tried to rush out the door. A metal-firm
grip seized his wrists. “Don’t run!”
“Take your hands off!”
“No.”
“Did my wife put you up to this?”
“No.”
“Did she guess? Did she talk to you? Does she know? Is that it?” He
screamed. A hand clapped over his mouth.
“You’ll never know, will you?” Braling Two smiled delicately. “You’ll
never know.”
Braling struggled. “She  must  have guessed; she  must  have affected
you!”
Braling Two said, “I’m going to put you in the box, lock it, and lose
the key. Then I’ll buy another Rio ticket for your wife.”
“Now, now, wait a minute. Hold on. Don’t be rash. Let’s talk this over!”
“Good-by, Braling.”
Braling stiffened. “What do you mean, ‘good-by’?”
Ten minutes later Mrs. Braling awoke. She put her hand to her cheek.
Someone had just kissed it. She shivered and looked up. “Why—you haven’t
done that in years,” she murmured.
“We’ll see what we can do about that,” someone said.
      The City</p>

THE city waited twenty thousand years.
The planet moved through space and the flowers of the fields grew up and
fell away, and still the city waited; and the rivers of the planet rose
and waned and turned to dust. Still the city waited. The winds that had
been young and wild grew old and serene, and the clouds of the sky that
had been ripped and torn were left alone to drift in idle whitenesses.
Still the city waited.
The city waited with its windows and its black obsidian walls and its
sky towers and its unpennanted turrets, with its untrod streets and its
untouched doorknobs, with not a scrap of paper or a fingerprint upon it.
The city waited while the planet arced in space, following its orbit
about a blue-white sun, and the seasons passed from ice to fire and back
to ice and then to green fields and yellow summer meadows.
It was on a summer afternoon in the middle of the twenty thousandth year
that the city ceased waiting.
In the sky a rocket appeared.
The rocket soared over, turned, came back, and landed in the shale
meadow fifty yards from the obsidian wall.
There were booted footsteps in the thin grass and calling voices from
men within the rocket to men without.
“Ready?”
“All right, men. Careful! Into the city. Jensen, you and Hutchinson
patrol ahead. Keep a sharp eye.”
The city opened secret nostrils in its black walls and a steady suction
vent deep in the body of the city drew storms of air back through
channels, through thistle filters and dust collectors, to a fine and
tremblingly delicate series of coils and webs which glowed with silver
light. Again and again the immense suctions occurred; again and again
the odors from the meadow were borne upon warm winds into the city.
“Fire odor, the scent of a fallen meteor, hot metal. A ship has come
from another world. The brass smell, the dusty fire smell of burned
powder, sulphur, and rocket brimstone.”
This information, stamped on tapes which sprocketed into slots, slid
down through yellow cogs into further machines.
Click-chakk-chakk-chakk.
A calculator made the sound of a metronome. Five, six, seven, eight
nine. Nine men! An instantaneous typewriter inked this message on tape
which slithered and vanished.
Clickety-click-chakk-chakk.
The city awaited the soft tread of their rubberoid boots.
The great city nostrils dilated again.
The smell of butter. In the city air, from the stalking men, faintly,
the aura which wafted to the great Nose broke down into memories of
milk, cheese, ice cream, butter, the effluvium of a dairy economy.
Click-click.
“Careful, men!”
“Jones, get your gun out. Don’t be a fool!”
“The city’s dead; why worry?”
“You can’t tell.”
Now, at the barking talk, the Ears awoke. After centuries of listening
to winds that blew small and faint, of hearing leaves strip from trees
and grass grow softly in the time of melting snows, now the Ears oiled
themselves in a self-lubrication, drew taut, great drums upon which the
heartbeat of the invaders might pummel and thud delicately as the tremor
of a gnat’s wing. The Ears listened and the Nose siphoned up great
chambers of odor.
The perspiration of frightened men arose. There were islands of sweat
under their arms, and sweat in their hands as they held their guns.
The Nose sifted and worried this air, like a connoisseur busy with an
ancient vintage.
Chikk-chikk-chakk-click.
Information rotated down on parallel check tapes. Perspiration;
chlorides such and such per cent; sulphates so-and-so; urea nitrogen,
ammonia nitrogen,  thus:  creatinine, sugar, lactic acid,  there!
Bells rang. Small totals jumped up.
The Nose whispered, expelling the tested air. The great Ears listened:
“I think we should go back to the rocket, Captain.”
“I give the orders, Mr. Smith!”
“Yes, sir.”
“You, up there! Patrol! See anything?”
“Nothing, sir. Looks like it’s been dead a long time!”
“You see, Smith? Nothing to fear.”
“I don’t like it. I don’t know why. You ever feel you’ve seen a place
before? Well, this city’s too familiar.”
“Nonsense. This planetary system’s billions of miles from Earth; we
couldn’t possibly’ve been here ever before. Ours is the only light-year
rocket in existence.”
“That’s how I feel, anyway, sir. I think we should get out.” The
footsteps faltered. There was only the sound of the intruder’s breath on
the still air.
The Ear heard and quickened. Rotors glided, liquids glittered in small
creeks through valves and blowers. A formula and a concoction—one
followed another. Moments later, responding to the summons of the Ear
and Nose, through giant holes in the city walls a fresh vapor blew out
over the invaders.
“Smell  that,  Smith? Ahh. Green grass. Ever smell anything better? By
God, I just like to stand here and smell it.”
Invisible chlorophyll blew among the standing men.
“Ahh!”
The footsteps continued.
“Nothing wrong with  that,  eh, Smith? Come on!”
The Ear and Nose relaxed a billionth of a fraction. The countermove had
succeeded. The pawns were proceeding forward.
Now the cloudy Eyes of the city moved out of fog and mist.
“Captain, the windows!”
“What?”
“Those house windows, there! I saw them move!”
“I  didn’t see it.”
“They shifted. They changed color. From dark to light.”
“Look like ordinary square windows to me.”
Blurred objects focused. In the mechanical ravines of the city oiled
shafts plunged, balance wheels dipped over into green oil pools. The
window frames flexed. The windows gleamed.
Below, in the street, walked two men, a patrol, followed, at a safe
interval, by seven more. Their uniforms were white, their faces as pink
as if they had been slapped; their eyes were blue. They walked upright,
upon hind legs, carrying metal weapons. Their feet were booted. They
were males, with eyes, ears, mouths, noses.
The windows trembled. The windows thinned. They dilated imperceptibly,
like the irises of numberless eyes.
“I tell you, Captain, it’s the windows!”
“Get along.”
“I’m going back, sir.”
“What?”
“I’m going back to the rocket.”
“Mr. Smith!”
“I’m not falling into any trap!”
“Afraid of an empty city?”
The others laughed, uneasily.
“Go on, laugh!”
The street was stone-cobbled, each stone three inches wide, six inches
long. With a move unrecognizable as such, the street settled. It weighed
the invaders.
In a machine cellar a red wand touched a numeral: 178 pounds . . . 210,
154, 201, 198—each man weighed, registered and the record spooled down
into a correlative darkness.
Now the city was fully awake!
Now the vents sucked and blew air, the tobacco odor from the invaders’
mouths, the green soap scent from their hands. Even their eyeballs had a
delicate odor. The city detected it, and this information formed totals
which scurried down to total other totals. The crystal windows
glittered, the Ear tautened and skinned the drum of its hearing tight,
tighter—all of the senses of the city swarming like a fall of unseen
snow, counting the respiration and the dim hidden heartbeats of the men,
listening, watching, tasting.
For the streets were like tongues, and where the men passed, the taste
of their heels ebbed down through stone pores to be calculated on
litmus. This chemical totality, so subtly collected, was appended to the
now increasing sums waiting the final calculation among the whirling
wheels and whispering spokes.
Footsteps. Running.
“Come back! Smith!”
“No, blast you!”
“Get him, men!”
Footsteps rushing.
A final test. The city, having listened, watched, tasted, felt, weighed,
and balanced, must perform a final task.
A trap flung wide in the street. The captain, unseen to the others,
running, vanished.
Hung by his feet, a razor drawn across his throat, another down his
chest, his carcass instantly emptied of its entrails, exposed upon a
table under the street, in a hidden cell, the captain died. Great
crystal microscopes stared at the red twines of muscle; bodiless fingers
probed the still pulsing heart. The flaps of his sliced skin were pinned
to the table while hands shifted parts of his body like a quick and
curious player of chess, using the red pawns and the red pieces.
Above on the street the men ran. Smith ran, men shouted. Smith shouted,
and below in this curious room blood flowed into capsules, was shaken,
spun, shoved on smear slides under further microscopes, counts made,
temperatures taken, heart cut in seventeen sections, liver and kidneys
expertly halved. Brain was drilled and scooped from bone socket, nerves
pulled forth like the dead wires of a switchboard, muscles plucked for
elasticity, while in the electric subterrene of the city the Mind at
last totaled out its grandest total and all of the machinery ground to a
monstrous and momentary halt.
The total.
These  are  men. These  are  men from a far world, a  certain  planet,
and they have certain eyes, certain ears, and they walk upon legs in a
specified way and carry weapons and think and fight, and they have
particular hearts and all such organs as are recorded from long ago.
Above, men ran down the street toward the rocket.
Smith ran.
The total.
These are our enemies. These arc the ones we have waited for twenty
thousand years to see again. These are the men upon whom we waited to
visit revenge. Everything totals. These are the men of a planet called
Earth, who declared war upon Taollan twenty thousand years ago, who kept
us in slavery and ruined us and destroyed us with a great disease. Then
they went off to live in another galaxy to escape that disease which
they visited upon us after ransacking our world. They have forgotten
that war and that time, and they have forgotten us. But we have not
forgotten them. These are our enemies. This is certain. Our waiting is
done.
“Smith, come back!”
Quickly. Upon the red table, with the spread-eagled captain’s body
empty, new hands began a fight of motion. Into the wet interior were
placed organs of copper, brass, silver, aluminum, rubber and silk;
spiders spun gold web which was stung into the skin; a heart was
attached, and into the skull case was fitted a platinum brain which
hummed and fluttered small sparkles of blue fire, and the wires led down
through the body to the arms and legs. In a moment the body was sewn
tight, the incisions waxed, healed at neck and throat and about the
skull—perfect, fresh, new.
The captain sat up and flexed his arms.
“Stop!”
On the street the captain reappeared, raised his gun and fired. Smith
fell, a bullet in his heart.
The other men turned.
The captain ran to them.
“That fool! Afraid of a city!”
They looked at the body of Smith at their feet.
They looked at their captain, and their eyes widened and narrowed.
“Listen to me,” said the captain. “I have something important to tell
you.”
Now the city, which had weighed and tasted and smelled them, which had
used all its powers save one, prepared to use its final ability, the
power of speech. It did not speak with the rage and hostility of its
massed walls or towers, nor with the bulk of its cobbled avenues and
fortresses of machinery. It spoke with the quiet voice of one man.
“I am no longer your captain,” he said. “Nor am I a man.”
The men moved back.
“I am the city,” he said, and smiled.
“I’ve waited two hundred centuries,” he said. “I’ve waited for the sons
of the Sons of the sons to return.”
“Captain, sir!”
“Let me continue. Who built me? The city. The men who died built me. The
old race who once lived here. The people whom the Earthmen left to die
of a terrible disease, a form of leprosy with no cure. And the men of
that old race, dreaming of the day when Earthmen might return, built
this city, and the name of this city was and is Revenge, upon the planet
of Darkness, near the shore of the Sea of Centuries, by the Mountains of
the Dead; all very poetic. This city was to be a balancing machine, a
litmus, an antenna to test all future space travelers. In twenty
thousand years only two other rockets landed here. One from a distant
galaxy called Ennt, and the inhabitants of that craft were tested,
weighed, found wanting, and let free, unscathed, from the city. As were
the visitors in the second ship. But today! At long last, you’ve come!
The revenge will be carried out to the last detail. Those men have been
dead two hundred centuries, but they left a city here to welcome you.
“Captain, sir, you’re not feeling well. Perhaps you’d better come back
to the ship, sir.”
The city trembled.
The pavements opened and the men fell, screaming. Falling, they saw
bright razors flash to meet them!
Time passed. Soon came the call:
“Smith?”
“Here!”
“Jensen?”
“Here!”
“Jones, Hutchinson, Springer?”
“Here, here, here!”
They stood by the door of the rocket.
“We return to Earth immediately.”
“Yes, sir!”
The incisions on their necks were invisible, as were their hidden brass
hearts and silver organs and the fine golden wire of their nerves. There
was a faint electric hum from their heads.
“On the double!”
Nine men hurried the golden bombs of disease culture into the rocket.
“These are to be dropped on Earth.”
“Right, sir!”
The rocket valve slammed. The rocket jumped into the sky. As the thunder
faded, the city lay upon the summer meadow.
Its glass eyes were dulled over. The Ear relaxed, the great nostril
vents stopped, the streets no longer weighed or balanced, and the hidden
machinery paused in its bath of oil.
In the sky the rocket dwindled.
Slowly, pleasurably, the city enjoyed the luxury of dying.
      Zero Hour</p>

OH, IT was to be so jolly! What a game! Such excitement they hadn’t
known in years. The children catapulted this way and that across the
green lawns, shouting at each other, holding hands, flying in circles,
climbing trees, laughing. Overhead the rockets flew, and beetle cars
whispered by on the streets, but the children played on. Such fun, such
tremulous joy, such tumbling and hearty screaming.
Mink ran into the house, all dirt and sweat. For her seven years she was
loud and strong and definite. Her mother, Mrs. Morris, hardly saw her as
she yanked out drawers and rattled pans and tools into a large sack.
“Heavens, Mink, what’s going on?”
“The most exciting game ever!” gasped Mink, pink-faced.
“Stop and get your breath,” said the mother.
“No, I’m all right,” gasped Mink. “Okay I take these things, Mom?”
“But don’t dent them,” said Mrs. Morris.
“Thank you, thank you!” cried Mink, and boom! she was gone, like a
rocket.
Mrs. Morris surveyed the fleeing tot. “What’s the name of the game?”
“Invasion!” said Mink. The door slammed.
In every yard on the street children brought out knives and forks and
pokers and old stovepipes and can openers.
It was an interesting fact that this fury and bustle occurred only among
the younger children. The older ones, those ten years and more,
disdained the affair and marched scornfully off on hikes or played a
more dignified version of hide-and-seek on their own.
Meanwhile, parents came and went in chromium beetles. Repairmen came to
repair the vacuum elevators in houses, to fix fluttering television sets
or hammer upon stubborn food-delivery tubes. The adult civilization
passed and repassed the busy youngsters, jealous of the fierce energy of
the wild tots, tolerantly amused at their flourishings, longing to join
in themselves.
“This and this and  this,”  said Mink, instructing the others with their
assorted spoons and wrenches. “Do that, and bring  that  over here. No! 
Here,  ninny! Right. Now, get back while I fix this.” Tongue in teeth,
face wrinkled in thought. “Like that. See?”
“Yayyyy!” shouted the kids.
Twelve-year-old Joseph Connors ran up.
“Go away,” said Mink straight at him.
“I wanna play,” said Joseph.
“Can’t!” said Mink.
“Why not?”
“You’d just make fun of us.”
“Honest, I wouldn’t”
“No. We know you. Go away or we’ll kick you.”
Another twelve-year-old boy whirred by on little motor skates. “Hey,
Joe! Come on! Let them sissies play!”
Joseph showed reluctance and a certain wistfulness. “I want to play,” he
said.
“You’re old,” said Mink firmly.
“Not  that  old,” said Joe sensibly.
“You’d only laugh and spoil the Invasion.”
The boy on the motor skates made a rude lip noise. “Come on, Joe! Them
and their fairies! Nuts!”
Joseph walked off slowly. He kept looking back, all down the block.
Mink was already busy again. She made a kind of apparatus with her
gathered equipment. She had appointed another little girl with a pad and
pencil to take down notes in painful slow scribbles. Their voices rose
and fell in the warm sunlight.
All around them the city hummed. The streets were lined with good green
and peaceful trees. Only the wind made a conflict across the city,
across the country, across the continent. In a thousand other cities
there were trees and children and avenues, businessmen in their quiet
offices taping their voices, or watching televisors. Rockets hovered
like darning needles in the blue sky. There was the universal, quiet
conceit and easiness of men accustomed to peace, quite certain there
would never he trouble again. Arm in arm, men all over earth were a
united front. The perfect weapons were held in equal trust by all
nations. A situation of incredibly beautiful balance had been brought
about. There were no traitors among men, no unhappy ones, no disgruntled
ones; therefore the world was based upon a stable ground. Sunlight
illumined half the world and the trees drowsed in a tide of warm air.
Mink’s mother, from her upstairs window, gazed down.
The children. She looked upon them and shook her head. Well, they’d eat
well, sleep well, and be in school on Monday. Bless their vigorous
little bodies. She listened.
Mink talked earnestly to someone near the rose bush—though there was no
one there.
These odd children. And the little girl, what was her name? Anna? Anna
took notes on a pad. First, Mink asked the rosebush a question, then
called the answer to Anna.
“Triangle,” said Mink.
“What’s a tri,” said Anna with difficulty, “angle?”
“Never mind,” said Mink.
“How you spell it?” asked Anna.
“T-r-i——” spelled Mink slowly, then snapped, “Oh, spell it yourself!”
She went on to other words. “Beam,” she said.
“I haven’t got tri,” said Anna, “angle down yet!”
“Well, hurry, hurry!” cried Mink.
Mink’s mother leaned out the upstairs window. “A-n-g-1-e,” she spelled
down at Anna.
“Oh, thanks, Mrs. Morris,” said Anna.
“Certainly,” said Mink’s mother and withdrew, laughing, to dust the hail
with an electro-duster magnet.
The voices wavered on the shimmery air. “Beam,” said Anna. Fading.
“Four-nine-seven-A-and-B-and-X,” said Mink, far away, seriously. “And a
fork and a string and a—hex-hex-agony—hexagonal!”
At lunch Mink gulped milk at one toss and was at the door. Her mother
slapped the table.
“You sit right back down,” commanded Mrs. Morris. “Hot soup in a
minute.” She poked a red button on the kitchen butler, and ten seconds
later something landed with a bump in the rubber receiver. Mrs. Morris
opened it, took out a can with a pair of aluminum holders, unsealed it
with a flick, and poured hot soup into a bowl.
During all this Mink fidgeted. “Hurry, Mom! This is a matter of life and
death! Aw——”
“I was the same way at your age. Always life and death. I know.”
Mink banged away at the soup.
“Slow down,” said Mom.
“Can’t,” said Mink. “Drill’s waiting for me.”
“Who’s Drill? What a peculiar name,” said Mom.
“You don’t know him,” said Mink.
“A new boy in the neighborhood?” asked Mom.
“He’s new all right,” said Mink. She started on her second bowl.
“Which one is Drill?” asked Mom.
“He’s around,” said Mink evasively. “You’ll make fun. Everybody pokes
fun. Gee, darn.”
“Is Drill shy?”
“Yes. No. In a way. Gosh, Mom, I got to run if we want to have the
Invasion!”
“Who’s invading what?”
“Martians invading Earth. Well, not exactly Martians. They’re—I don’t
know. From up.” She pointed with her spoon.
“And  inside,”  said Mom, touching Mink’s feverish brow.
Mink rebelled. “You’re laughing! You’ll kill Drill and everybody.”
“I didn’t mean to,” said Mom. “Drill’s a Martian?”
“No. He’s—well—maybe from Jupiter or Saturn or Venus. Anyway, he’s had a
hard time.”
“I imagine.” Mrs. Morris hid her mouth behind her hand.
“They couldn’t figure a way to attack Earth.”
“We’re impregnable,” said Mom in mock seriousness. “That’s the word
Drill used! Impreg—— That was the word, Mom.”
“My, my, Drill’s a brilliant little boy. Two-bit words.”
“They couldn’t figure a way to attack, Mom. Drill says—he says in order
to make a good fight you got to have a new way of surprising people.
That way you win. And he says also you got to have help from your
enemy.”
“A fifth column,” said Mom.
“Yeah. That’s what Drill said. And they couldn’t figure a way to
surprise Earth or get help.”
“No wonder. We’re pretty darn strong.” Mom laughed, cleaning up. Mink
sat there, staring at the table, seeing what she was talking about.
“Until, one day,” whispered Mink melodramatically, “they thought of
children!”
“Well!”  said Mrs. Morris brightly.
“And they thought of how grownups are so busy they never look under
rosebushes or on lawns!”
“Only for snails and fungus.”
“And then there’s something about dim-dims.”
“Dim-dims?”
“Dimens-shuns.”
“Dimensions?”
“Four of ’em! And there’s something about kids under nine and
imagination. It’s real funny to hear Drill talk.”
Mrs. Morris was tired. “Well, it must be funny. You’re keeping Drill
waiting now. It’s getting late in the day and, if you want to have your
Invasion before your supper bath, you’d better jump.”
“Do I have to take a bath?” growled Mink.
“You do. Why is it children hate water? No matter what age you live in
children hate water behind the ears!”
“Drill says I won’t have to take baths,” said Mink.
“Oh, he does, does he?”
“He told all the kids that. No more baths. And we can stay up till ten
o’clock and go to two televisor shows on Saturday ’stead of one!”
“Well, Mr. Drill better mind his p’s and q’s. I’ll call up his mother
and—”
Mink went to the door. “We’re having trouble with guys like Pete Britz
and Dale Jerrick. They’re growing up. They make fun. They’re worse than
parents. They just won’t believe in Drill. They’re so snooty, ’cause
they’re growing up. You’d think they’d know better. They were little
only a coupla years ago. I hate them worst. We’ll kill them  first.”
“Your father and I last?”
“Drill says you’re dangerous. Know why? ’Cause you don’t believe in
Martians! They’re going to let us run the world. Well, not just us, but
the kids over in the next block, too. I might be queen.” She opened the
door.
“Mom?”
“Yes?”
“What’s lodge-ick?”
“Logic? Why, dear, logic is knowing what things are true and not true.”
“He  mentioned  that,” said Mink. “And what’s im-pres-sionable?” It took
her a minute to say it.
“Why, it means—” Her mother looked at the floor, laughing gently. “It
means—to be a child, dear.”
“Thanks for lunch!” Mink ran out, then stuck her head back in. “Mom,
I’ll be sure you won’t be hurt much, really!”
“Well, thanks,” said Mom.
Slam  went the door.
At four o’clock the audio-visor buzzed. Mrs. Morris flipped the tab.
“Hello, Helen!” she said in welcome.
“Hello, Mary. How are thinks in New York?”
“Fine. How are things in Scranton? You look tired.”
“So do you. The children. Underfoot,” said Helen.
Mrs. Morris sighed. “My Mink too. The super-Invasion.”
Helen laughed. “Are your kids playing that game too?”
“Lord, yes. Tomorrow it’ll be geometrical jacks and motorized hopscotch.
Were we this bad when we were kids in ’48?”
“Worse. Japs and Nazis. Don’t know how my parents put up with me.
Tomboy.”
“Parents learn to shut their ears.”
A silence.
“What’s wrong, Mary?” asked Helen.
Mrs. Morris’s eyes were half closed; her tongue slid slowly,
thoughtfully, over her lower lip. “Eh?” She jerked. “Oh, nothing. Just
thought about  that.  Shutting ears and such. Never mind. Where were
we?”
“My boy Tim’s got a crush on some guy named—Drill,  I think it was.”
“Must be a new password. Mink likes him too.”
“Didn’t know it had got as far as New York. Word of mouth, I imagine.
Looks like a scrap drive. I talked to Josephine and she said her
kids—that’s in Boston—are wild on this new game. It’s sweeping the
country.”
At this moment Mink trotted into the kitchen to gulp a glass of water.
Mrs. Morris turned. “How’re things going?”
“Almost finished,” said Mink.
“Swell,” said Mrs. Morris. “What’s  that?”
“A yo-yo,” said Mink. “Watch.”
She flung the yo-yo down its string. Reaching the end it—
It vanished.
“See?” said Mink. “Ope!” Dibbling her finger, she made the yo-yo
reappear and zip up the string.
“Do that again,” said her mother.
“Can’t. Zero hour’s five o’clock! ’By.” Mink exited, zipping her yo-yo.
On the audio-visor, Helen laughed. “Tim brought one of those yo-yos in
this morning, but when I got curious he said he wouldn’t show it to me,
and when I tried to work it, finally, it wouldn’t work.”
“You’re not  impressionable,”  said Mrs. Morris.
“What?”
“Never mind. Something I thought of. Can I help you, Helen?”
“I wanted to get that black-and-white cake recipe——”
The hour drowsed by. The day waned. The sun lowered in the peaceful blue
sky. Shadows lengthened on the green lawns. The laughter and excitement
continued. One little girl ran away, crying. Mrs. Morris came out the
front door.
“Mink, was that Peggy Ann crying?”
Mink was bent over in the yard, near the rosebush. “Yeah. She’s a
scarebaby. We won’t let her play, now. She’s getting too old to play. I
guess she grew up all of a sudden.”
“Is that why she cried? Nonsense. Give me a civil answer, young lady, or
inside you come!”
Mink whirled in consternation, mixed with irritation. “I can’t quit now.
It’s almost time. I’ll be good. I’m sorry.”
“Did you hit Peggy Ann?”
“No, honest. You ask her. It was something—well, she’s just a scaredy
pants.”
The ring of children drew in around Mink where she scowled at her work
with spoons and a kind of square-shaped arrangement of hammers and
pipes. “There and there,” murmured Mink.
“What’s wrong?” said Mrs. Morris.
“Drill’s stuck. Halfway. If we could only get him all the way through,
it’d be easier. Then all the others could come through after him.”
“Can I help?”
“No’m, thanks. I’ll fix it.”
“All right. I’ll call you for your bath in half an hour. I’m tired of
watching you.
She went in and sat in the electric relaxing chair, sipping a little
beer from a half-empty glass. The chair massaged her back. Children,
children. Children and love and hate, side by side. Sometimes children
loved you, hated you—all in half a second. Strange children, did they
ever forget or forgive the whippings and the harsh, strict words of
command? She wondered. How can you ever forget or forgive those over and
above you, those tall and silly dictators?
Time passed. A curious, waiting silence came upon the street, deepening.
Five o’clock. A clock sang softly somewhere in the house in a quiet,
musical voice: “Five o’clock—five o’clock. Time’s a-wasting. Five
o’clock,” and purred away into silence.
Zero hour.
Mrs. Morris chuckled in her throat. Zero hour.
A beetle car hummed into the driveway. Mr. Morris. Mrs. Morris smiled.
Mr. Morris got out of the beetle, locked it, and called hello to Mink at
her work. Mink ignored him. He laughed and stood for a moment watching
the children. Then he walked up the front steps.
“Hello, darling.”
“Hello, Henry.”
She strained forward on the edge of the chair, listening. The children
were silent. Too silent.
He emptied his pipe, refilled it. “Swell day. Makes you glad to be
alive.”
Buzz.
“What’s that?” asked Henry.
“I don’t know.” She got up suddenly, her eyes widening. She was going to
say something. She stopped it. Ridiculous. Her nerves jumped. “Those
children haven’t anything dangerous out there, have they?” she said.
“Nothing but pipes and hammers. Why?”
“Nothing electrical?”
“Heck, no,” said Henry. “I looked.”
She walked to the kitchen. The buzzing continued. “Just the same, you’d
better go tell them to quit. It’s after five. Tell them—” Her eyes
widened and narrowed. “Tell them to put off their Invasion until
tomorrow.” She laughed, nervously.
The buzzing grew louder.
“What are they up to? I’d better go look, all right.”
The explosion!
The house shook with dull sound. There were other explosions in other
yards on other streets.
Involuntarily, Mrs. Morris screamed. “Up this way!” she cried
senselessly, knowing no sense, no reason. Perhaps she saw something from
the corners of her eyes; perhaps she smelled a new odor or heard a new
noise. There was no time to argue with Henry to convince him. Let him
think her insane. Yes, insane! Shrieking, she ran upstairs. He ran after
her to see what she was up to. “In the attic!” she screamed. “That’s
where it is!” It was only a poor excuse to get him in the attic in time.
Oh, God—in time!
Another explosion outside. The children screamed with delight as if at a
great fireworks display.
“It’s not in the attic!” cried Henry. “It’s outside!”
“No, no!” Wheezing, gasping, she fumbled at the attic door. “I’ll show
you. Hurry! I’ll show you!”
They tumbled into the attic. She slammed the door, locked it, took the
key, threw it into a far, cluttered corner.
She was babbling wild stuff now. It came out of her. All the
subconscious suspicion and fear that had gathered secretly all afternoon
and fermented like a wine in her. All the little revelations and
knowledges and sense that had bothered her all day and which she had
logically and carefully and sensibly rejected and censored. Now it
exploded in her and shook her to bits.
“There, there,” she said, sobbing against the door. “We’re safe until
tonight. Maybe we can sneak out. Maybe we can escape!”
Henry blew up too, but for another reason. “Are you crazy? Why’d you
throw that key away? Damn it, honey!”
“Yes, yes, I’m crazy, if it helps, but stay here with me!”
“I don’t know how in hell I  can  get out!”
“Quiet. They’ll hear us. Oh, God, they’ll find us soon enough—”
Below them, Mink’s voice. The husband stopped. There was a great
universal humming and sizzling, a screaming and giggling. Downstairs the
audio-televisor buzzed and buzzed insistently, alarmingly, violently. 
Is that Helen calling?thought Mrs. Morris.  And is she calling about
what I think she’s calling about?
Footsteps came into the house. Heavy footsteps.
“Who’s coming in my house?” demanded Henry angrily. “Who’s tramping
around down there?”
Heavy feet. Twenty, thirty, forty, fifty of them. Fifty persons crowding
into the house. The humming. The giggling of the children. “This way!”
cried Mink, below.
“Who’s downstairs?” roared Henry. “Who’s there!”
“Hush. Oh, nononononono!” said his wife weakly, holding him. “Please, be
quiet. They might go away.
“Mom?” called Mink. “Dad?” A pause. “Where are you?”
Heavy footsteps, heavy, heavy,  very heavy  footsteps, came up the
stairs. Mink leading them.
“Mom?” A hesitation. “Dad?” A waiting, a silence.
Humming. Footsteps toward the attic. Mink’s first.
They trembled together in silence in the attic, Mr. and Mrs. Morris. For
some reason the electric humming, the queer cold light suddenly visible
under the door crack, the strange odor and the alien sound of eagerness
in Mink’s voice finally got through to Henry Morris too. He stood,
shivering, in the dark silence, his wife beside him.
“Mom! Dad!”
Footsteps. A little humming sound. The attic lock melted. The door
opened. Mink peered inside, tall blue shadows behind her.
“Peekaboo.” said Mink.
      The Rocket</p>

MANY nights Fiorello Bodoni would awaken to hear the rockets sighing in
the dark sky. He would tiptoe from bed, certain that his kind wife was
dreaming, to let himself out into the night air. For a few moments he
would be free of the smells of old food in the small house by the river.
For a silent moment he would let his heart soar alone into space,
following the rockets.
Now, this very night, he stood half naked in the darkness, watching the
fire fountains murmuring in the air. The rockets on their long wild way
to Mars and Saturn and Venus!
“Well, well, Bodoni.”
Bodoni started.
On a milk crate, by the silent river, sat an old man who also watched
the rockets through the midnight hush.
“Oh, it’s you, Bramante!”
“Do you come out every night, Bodoni?”
“Only for the air.”
“So? I prefer the rockets myself,” said old Bramante. “I was a boy when
they started. Eighty years ago, and I’ve never been on one yet.”
“I will ride up in one someday,” said Bodoni.
“Fool!” cried Bramante. “You’ll never go. This is a rich man’s world.”
He shook his gray head, remembering. “When I was young they wrote it in
fiery letters: THE WORLD OF THE FUTURE! Science, Comfort, and New Things
for All! Ha! Eighty years. The Future becomes Now! Do we fly rockets?
No! We live in shacks like our ancestors before us.”
“Perhaps my  sons——” said Bodoni.
“No, nor  their  sons!” the old man shouted. “It’s the rich who have
dreams and rockets!”
Bodoni hesitated. “Old man, I’ve saved three thousand dollars. It took
me six years to save it. For my business, to invest in machinery. But
every night for a month now I’ve been awake. I hear the rockets. I
think. And tonight I’ve made up my mind. One of us will fly to Mars!”
His eyes were shining and dark.
“Idiot,” snapped Bramante. “How will you choose? Who will go? If you go,
your wife will hate you, for you will be just a bit nearer God, in
space. When you tell your amazing trip to her, over the years, won’t
bitterness gnaw at her?”
“No, no!”
“Yes! And your children? Will their lives be filled with the memory of
Papa, who flew to Mars while they stayed here? What a senseless task you
will set your boys. They will think of the rocket all their lives. They
will lie awake. They will be sick with wanting it. Just as you are sick
now. They will want to die if they cannot go. Don’t set that goal, I
warn you. Let them be content with being poor. Turn their eyes down to
their hands and to your junk yard, not up to the stars.”
“But—”
“Suppose your wife went? How would you feel, knowing she had  seen  and
you had not? She would become holy. You would think of throwing her in
the river. No, Bodoni, buy a new wrecking machine, which you need, and
pull your dreams apart with it, and smash them to pieces.”
The old man subsided, gazing at the river in which, drowned, images of
rockets burned down the sky.
“Good night,” said Bodoni.
“Sleep well,” said the other.
When the toast jumped from its silver box, Bodoni almost screamed. The
night had been sleepless. Among his nervous children, beside his
mountainous wife, Bodoni had twisted and stared at nothing. Bramante was
right. Better to invest the money. Why save it when only one of the
family could ride the rocket, while the others remained to melt in
frustration?
“Fiorello, eat your toast,” said his wife, Maria.
“My throat is shriveled,” said Bodoni.
The children rushed in, the three boys fighting over a toy rocket, the
two girls carrying dolls which duplicated the inhabitants of Mars,
Venus, and Neptune, green mannequins with three yellow eyes and twelvc
fingers.
“I saw the Venus rocket!” cried Paolo.
“It took off,  whoosh!”  hissed Antonello.
“Children!” shouted Bodoni, hands to his ears. They stared at him. He
seldom shouted. Bodoni arose. “Listen, all of you,” he said. “I have
enough money to take one of us on the Mars rocket.”
Everyone yelled.
“You understand?” he asked. “Only  one  of us. Who?”
“Me, me, me!” cried the children.
“You,” said Maria.
“You,” said Bodoni to her. They all fell silent.
The children reconsidered. “Let Lorenzo go—he’s oldest.”
“Let Miriamne go—she’s a girl!”
“Think what you would see,” said Bodoni’s wife to him. But her eyes were
strange. Her voice shook. “The meteors, like fish. The universe. The
Moon. Someone should go who could tell it well on returning. You have a
way with words.”
“Nonsense. So have you,” he objected.
Everyone trembled.
“Here,” said Bodoni unhappily. From a broom he broke straws of various
lengths. “The short straw wins.” He held out his tight fist. “Choose.”
Solemnly each took his turn.
“Long straw.”
“Long straw.”
Another.
“Long straw.”
The children finished. The room was quiet.
Two straws remained. Bodoni felt his heart ache in him. “Now,” he
whispered. “Maria.”
She drew.
“The short straw,” she said.
“Ah,” sighed Lorenzo, half happy, half sad. “Mama goes to Mars.”
Bodoni tried to smile. “Congratulations. I will buy your ticket today.”
“Wait, Fiorello—”
“You can leave next week,” he murmured.
She saw the sad eyes of her children upon her, with the smiles beneath
their straight, large noses. She returned the straw slowly to her
husband. “I cannot go to Mars.”
“But why not?”
“I will be busy with another child.”
“What!”
She would not look at him. “It wouldn’t do for me to travel in my
condition.”
He took her elbow. “Is this the truth?”
“Draw again. Start over.”
“Why didn’t you tell me before?” he said incredulously.
“I didn’t remember.”
“Maria, Maria,” he whispered, patting her face. He turned to the
children. “Draw again.”
Paolo immediately drew the short straw.
“I go to Mars!” He danced wildly. “Thank you, Father!”
The other children edged away. “That’s swell, Paolo.”
Paolo stopped smiling to examine his parents and his brothers and
sisters. “I  can  go, can’t I?” he asked uncertainly.
“Yes.”
“And you’ll  like  me when I come back?”
“Of course.”
Paclo studied the precious broomstraw on his trembling hand and shook
his head. He threw it away. “I forgot. School starts. I can’t go. Draw
again.
But none would draw. A full sadness lay on them.
“None of us will go,” said Lorenzo.
“That’s best,” said Maria.
“Bramante was right,” said Bodoni.
With his breakfast curdled within him, Fiorello Bodoni worked in his
junk yard, ripping metal, melting it, pouring out usable ingots. His
equipment flaked apart; competition had kept him on the insane edge of
poverty for twenty years. It was a very bad morning.
In the afternoon a man entered the junk yard and called up to Bodoni on
his wrecking machine. “Hey, Bodoni, I got some metal for you!”
“What is it, Mr. Mathews?” asked Bodoni, listlessly.
“A rocket ship. What’s wrong? Don’t you want it?”
“Yes, yes!” He seized the man’s arm, and stopped, bewildered.
“Of course,” said Mathews, “it’s only a mockup. You know. When they plan
a rocket they build a full-scale model first, of aluminum. You might
make a small profit boiling her down. Let you have her for two
thousand——”
Bodoni dropped his hand. “I haven’t the money.”
“Sorry. Thought I’d help you. Last time we talked you said how everyone
outbid you on junk. Thought I’d slip this to you on the q.t. Well—”
“I need new equipment. I saved money for that.”
“I understand.”
“If I bought your rocket, I wouldn’t even be able to melt it down. My
aluminum furnace broke down last week——”
“Sure.”
“I couldn’t possibly use the rocket if I bought it from you.”
“I know.”
Bodoni blinked and shut his eyes. He opened them and looked at Mr.
Mathews. “But I am a great fool. I will take my money from the bank and
give it to you.”
“But if you can’t melt the rocket down——”
“Deliver it,” said Bodoni.
“All right, if you say so. Tonight?”
“Tonight,” said Bodoni, “would be fine. Yes, I would like to have a
rocket ship tonight.”
There was a moon. The rocket was white and big in the junk yard. It held
the whiteness of the moon and the blueness of the stars. Bodoni looked
at it and loved all of it. He wanted to pet it and lie against it,
pressing it with his cheek, telling it all the secret wants of his
heart.
He stared up at it. “You are all mine,” he said. “Even if you never move
or spit fire, and just sit there and rust for fifty years, you are
mine.”
The rocket smelled of time and distance. It was like walking into a
clock. It was finished with Swiss delicacy. One might wear it on one’s
watch fob. “I might even sleep here tonight,” Bodoni whispered
excitedly.
He sat in the pilot’s seat.
He touched a lever.
He hummed in his shut mouth, his eyes closed.
The humming grew louder, louder, higher, higher, wilder, stranger, more
exhilarating, trembling in him and leaning him forward and pulling him
and the ship in a roaring silence and in a kind of metal screaming,
while his fists flew over the controls, and his shut eyes quivered, and
the sound grew and grew until it was a fire, a strength, a lifting and a
pushing of power that threatened to tear him in half. He gasped. He
hummed again and again, and did not stop, for it could not be stopped,
it could only go on, his eyes tighter, his heart furious. “Taking off!”
he screamed.  The jolting concussion! The thunder!  “The Moon!” he
cried, eyes blind, tight. “The meteors!”  The silent rush in volcanic
light.“Mars. Oh, God, Mars! Mars!”
He fell back, exhausted and panting. His shaking hands came loose of the
controls and his head tilted back wildly. He sat for a long time,
breathing out and in, his heart slowing.
Slowly, slowly, he opened his eyes.
The junk yard was still there.
He sat motionless. He looked at the heaped piles of metal for a minute,
his eyes never leaving them. Then, leaping up, he kicked the levers.
“Take off, damn you!”
The ship was silent.
“I’ll show you!” he cried.
Out in the night air, stumbling, he started the fierce motor of his
terrible wrecking machine and advanced upon the rocket. He maneuvered
the massive weights into the moonlit sky. He readied his trembling hands
to plunge the weights, to smash, to rip apart this insolently false
dream, this silly thing for which he had paid his money, which would not
move, which would not do his bidding. “I’ll teach you!” he shouted.
But his hand stayed.
The silver rocket lay in the light of the moon. And beyond the rocket
stood the yellow lights of his home, a block away, burning warmly. He
heard the family radio playing some distant music. He sat for half an
hour considering the rocket and the house lights, and his eyes narrowed
and grew wide. He stepped down from the wrecking machine and began to
walk, and as he walked he began to laugh, and when he reached the back
door of his house he took a deep breath and called, “Maria, Maria, start
packing. We’re going to Mars!”
“Oh!”
“Ah!”
“I can’t  believe  it!”
“You will, you will.”
The children balanced in the windy yard, under the glowing rocket, not
touching it yet. They started to cry.
Maria looked at her husband. “What have you done?” she said. “Taken our
money for this? It will never fly.”
“It will fly,” he said, looking at it.
“Rocket ships cost millions. Have you millions?”
“It will fly,” he repeated steadily. “Now, go to the house, all of you.
I have phone calls to make, work to do. Tomorrow we leave! Tell no one,
understand? It is a secret.”
The children edged off from the rocket, stumbling. He saw their small,
feverish faces in the house windows, far away.
Maria had not moved. “You have ruined us,” she said. “Our money used for
this—this thing. When it should have been spent on equipment.”
“You will see,” he said.
Without a word she turned away.
“God help me,” he whispered, and started to work.
Through the midnight hours trucks arrived, packages were delivered, and
Bodoni, smiling, exhausted his bank account. With blowtorch and metal
stripping he assaulted the rocket, added, took away, worked fiery magics
and secret insults upon it. He bolted nine ancient automobile motors
into the rocket’s empty engine room. Then he welded the engine room
shut, so none could see his hidden labor.
At dawn he entered the kitchen. “Maria,” he said, “I’m ready for
breakfast.”
She would not speak to him.
At sunset he called to the children. “We’re ready! Come on!” The house
was silent.
“I’ve locked them in the closet,” said Maria.
“What do you mean?” he demanded.
“You’ll be killed in that rocket,” she said. “What kind of rocket can
you buy for two thousand dollars? A bad one!”
“Listen to me, Maria.”
“It will blow up. Anyway, you are no pilot.”
“Nevertheless, I can fly  this  ship. I have fixed it.”
“You have gone mad,” she said.
“Where is the key to the closet?”
“I have it here.”
He put out his hand. “Give it to me.”
She handed it to him. “You will kill them.”
“No, no.”
“Yes, you will. I  feel  it.”
He stood before her. “You won’t come along?”
“I’ll stay here,” she said.
“You will understand; you will see then,” he said, and smiled. He
unlocked the closet. “Come, children. Follow your father.”
“Good-by, good-by, Mama!”
She stayed in the kitchen window, looking out at them, very straight and
silent.
At the door of the rocket the father said, “Children, we will be gone a
week. You must come back to school, and I to my business.” He took each
of their hands in turn. “Listen. This rocket is very old and will fly
only  one  more journey. It will not fly again. This will be the one
trip of your life. Keep your eyes wide.”
“Yes, Papa.”
“Listen, keep your ears clean. Smell the smells of a rocket.  Feel.
Remember.  So when you return you will talk of it all the rest of your
lives.”
“Yes, Papa.”
The ship was quiet as a stopped clock. The airlock hissed shut behind
them. He strapped them all, like tiny mummies, into rubber hammocks.
“Ready?” he called.
“Ready!” all replied.
“Take-off!” He jerked ten switches. The rocket thundered and leaped. The
children danced in their hammocks, screaming.
“Here comes the Moon!”
The moon dreamed by. Meteors broke into fireworks. Time flowed away in a
serpentine of gas. The children shouted. Released from their hammocks,
hours later, they peered from the ports. “There’s Earth!” “There’s
Mars!”
The rocket dropped pink petals of fire while the hour dials spun; the
child eyes dropped shut. At last they hung like drunken moths in their
cocoon hammocks.
“Good,” whispered Bodoni, alone.
He tiptoed from the control room to stand for a long moment, fearful, at
the airlock door.
He pressed a button. The airlock door swung wide. He stepped out. Into
space? Into inky tides of meteor and gaseous torch? Into swift mileages
and infinite dimensions?
No. Bodoni smiled.
All about the quivering rocket lay the junk yard.
Rusting, unchanged, there stood the padlocked junk-yard gate, the little
silent house by the river, the kitchen window lighted, and the river
going down to the same sea. And in the center of the junk yard,
manufacturing a magic dream, lay the quivering, purring rocket. Shaking
and roaring, bouncing the netted children like flies in a web.
Maria stood in the kitchen window.
He waved to her and smiled.
He could not see if she waved or not. A small wave, perhaps. A small
smile.
The sun was rising.
Bodoni withdrew hastily into the rocket. Silence. All still slept. He
breathed easily. Tying himself into a hammock, he closed his eyes. To
himself he prayed, Oh, let nothing happen to the illusion in the next
six days. Let all of space come and go, and red Mars come up under our
ship, and the moons of Mars, and let there be no flaws in the color
film. Let there be three dimensions; let nothing go wrong with the
hidden mirrors and screens that mold the fine illusion. Let time pass
without crisis.
He awoke.
Red Mars floated near the rocket.
“Papa!” The children thrashed to be free.
Bodoni looked and saw red Mars and it was good and there was no flaw in
it and he was very happy.
At sunset on the seventh day the rocket stopped shuddering.
“We are home,” said Bodoni.
They walked across the junk yard from the open door of the rocket, their
blood singing, their faces glowing.
“I have ham and eggs for all of you,” said Maria, at the kitchen door.
“Mama, Mama, you should have come, to see it, to see Mars, Mama, and
meteors, and everything!”
“Yes,” she said.
At bedtime the children gathered before Bodoni. “We want to thank you,
Papa.”
“It was nothing.”
“We will remember it for always, Papa. We will never forget.”
Very late in the night Bodoni opened his eyes. He sensed that his wife
was lying beside him, watching him. She did not move for a very long
time, and then suddenly she kissed his cheeks and his forehead. “What’s
this?” he cried.
“You’re the best father in the world,” she whispered.
“Why?”
“Now I see,” she said. “I understand.”
She lay back and closed her eyes, holding his hand. “Is it a very lovely
journey?” she asked.
“Yes,” he said.
“Perhaps,” she said, “perhaps, some night, you might take me on just a
little trip, do you think?”
“Just a little one, perhaps,” he said.
“Thank you,” she said. “Good night.”
“Good night,” said Fiorello Bodoni.
Epilogue
IT WAS almost midnight. The moon was high in the sky now. The
Illustrated Man lay motionless. I had seen what there was to see. The
stories were told; they were over and done.
There remained only that empty space upon the Illustrated Man’s back,
that area of jumbled colors and shapes.
Now, as I watched, the vague patch began to assemble itself, in slow
dissolvings from one shape to another and still another. And at last a
face formed itself there, a face that gazed out at me from the colored
flesh, a face with a familiar nose and mouth, familiar eyes.
It was very hazy. I saw only enough of the Illustration to make me leap
up. I stood therein the moonlight, afraid that the wind or the stars
might move and wake the monstrous gallery at my feet. But he slept on,
quietly.
The picture on his back showed the Illustrated Man himself, with his
fingers about my neck, choking me to death. I didn’t wait for it to
become clear and sharp and a definite picture.
I ran down the road in the moonlight. I didn’t look back. A small town
lay ahead, dark and asleep. I knew that, long before morning, I would
reach the town. . . .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