                                  
                               Touched with Fire
                                      1954

     They  stood in the blazing sunlight for a long while, looking at the bright
faces  of their old-fashioned railroad watches, while the shadows tilted beneath
them, swaying, and the perspiration ran out under their porous summer hats. When
they uncovered their heads to mop their lined and pinkened brows, their hair was
white  and  soaked  through,  like  something that had been out of the light for
years.  One  of  the  men commented that his shoes felt like two loaves of baked
bread and then, sighing warmly, added:

     "Are you positive this is the right tenement?"

     The second old man, Foxe by name, nodded, as if any quick motion might make
him  catch  fire  by friction alone. "I saw this woman every day for three days.
She'll  show  up.  If  she's  still alive, that is. Wait till you see her, Shaw.
Lord! what a case."

     "Such  an odd business," said Shaw. "If people knew they'd think us Peeping
Toms, doddering old fools. Lord, I feel self-conscious standing here."

     Foxe  leaned on his cane. "Let me do all the talking if--hold on! There she
is!" He lowered his voice. "Take a slow look as she comes out."

     The  tenement  front door slammed viciously. A dumpy woman stood at the top
of  the  thirteen  porch steps glancing this way and that with angry jerkings of
her  eyes.  Jamming  a  plump hand in her purse, she seized some crumpled dollar
bills, plunged down the steps brutally, and set off down the street in a charge.
Behind  her,  several heads peered from apartment windows above, summoned by her
crashing of the door.

     "Come on," whispered Foxe. "Here we go to the butcher's."

      

     The  woman  flung open a butchershop door, rushed in. The two old men had a
glimpse  of  a  mouth sticky with raw lipstick. Her eyebrows were like mustaches
over  her  squinting,  always  suspicious eyes. Abreast of the butchershop, they
heard her voice already screaming inside.

     "I  want a good cut of meat. Let's see what you got hidden to take home for
yourself!"

     The  butcher  stood  silently  in his bloody-fingerprinted frock, his hands
empty.  The  two old men entered behind the woman and pretended to admire a pink
loaf of fresh-ground sirloin.

     "Them  lambchops  look  sickly!"  cried  the  woman.  "What's  the price on
brains?"

     The butcher told her in a low dry voice.

     "Well, weigh me a pound of liver!" said the woman. "Keep your thumbs off!"

     The butcher weighed it out, slowly.

     "Hurry up!" snapped the woman.

     The butcher now stood with his hands out of sight below the counter.

     "Look," whispered Foxe. Shaw leaned back a trifle to peer below the case.

     In  one  of the butcher's bloody hands, empty before, a silvery meat ax was
now  clenched  tightly,  relaxed,  clenched tightly, relaxed. The butcher's eyes
were  blue  and  dangerously  serene above the white porcelain counter while the
woman yelled into those eyes and that pink self-contained face.

     "Now do you believe?" whispered Foxe. "She really needs our help."

     They  stared  at  the raw red cube-steaks for a long time, noticing all the
little  dents  and  marks  where  it  had  been hit, ten dozen times, by a steel
mallet.

      

     The  braying continued at the grocer's and the dime store, with the two old
men following at a respectful distance.

     "Mrs.   Death-Wish,"   said   Mr.  Foxe  quietly.  "It's  like  watching  a
two-year-old  run  out on a battlefield. Any moment, you say, she'll hit a mine;
bang!  Get  the  temperature  just  right,  too much humidity, everyone itching,
sweating,  irritable.  Along'll  come this fine lady, whining, shrieking. And so
good-by. Well, Shaw, do we start business?"

     "You  mean  just  walk  up to her?" Shaw was stunned by his own suggestion.
"Oh,  but  we're not really going to do this, are we? I thought it was sort of a
hobby.  People,  habits,  customs, et cetera. It's been fun. But actually mixing
in--? We've better things to do."

     "Have  we?" Foxe nodded down the street to where the woman ran out in front
of  cars,  making  them  stop  with  a great squall of brakes, horn-blowing, and
cursing.  "Are  we  Christians? Do we let her feed herself subconsciously to the
lions? Or do we convert her?"

     "Convert her?"

     "To love, to serenity, to. a longer life. Look at her. Doesn't want to live
any  more.  Deliberately  aggravates people. One day soon, someone'll favor her,
with  a  hammer,  or strychnine. She's been going down for the third time a long
while  now.  When  you're drowning, you get nasty, grab at people, scream. Let's
have  lunch  and  lend  a  hand, eh? Otherwise, our victim will run on until she
finds her murderer."

     Shaw stood with the sun driving him into the boiling white sidewalk, and it
seemed  for a moment the street tilted vertically, became a cliff down which the
woman fell toward a blazing sky. At last he shook his head.

     "You're right," he said. "I wouldn't want her on my conscience."

      

     The  sun burnt the paint from the tenement fronts, bleached the air raw and
turned  the  gutter-waters to vapor by midafternoon when the old men, numbed and
evaporated,  stood  in the inner passageways of a house that funneled bakery air
from  front  to back in a searing torrent. When they spoke it was the submerged,
muffled talk of men in steam rooms, preposterously tired and remote.

     The front door opened. Foxe stopped a boy who carried a wellmangled loaf of
bread. "Son, we're looking for the woman who gives the door an _awful_ slam when
she goes out."

     "Oh, _her?_" The boy ran upstairs, calling back. "Mrs. Shrike!"

     Foxe grabbed Shaw's arm. "Lord, Lord! It can't be true!"

     "I want to go home," said Shaw.

     "But  there  it  is!"  said  Foxe,  incredulous,  tapping  his  cane on the
room-index  in the lobby. "Mr. and Mrs. Alfred Shrike, 331 upstairs! Husband's a
longshoreman,  big  hulking brute, comes home dirty. Saw them out on Sunday, her
jabbering, him never speaking, never looking at her. Oh, come _on_, Shaw."

     "It's  no use," said Shaw. "You can't help people like her unless they want
to  be helped. That's the first law of mental health. You know it, I know it. If
you get in her way, she'll trample you. Don't be a fool."

     "But who's to speak for her--and people like her? Her husband? Her friends?
The grocer, the butcher? They'd sing at her wake! Will they tell her she needs a
psychiatrist?  Does  she know it? No. Who knows it? We do. Well, then, you don't
keep vital information like that from the victim, do you?"

     Shaw  took off his sopping hat and gazed bleakly into it. "Once, in biology
class,  long  ago,  our  teacher  asked  if  we thought we could remove a frog's
nervous  system, intact, with a scalpel. Take out the whole delicate antennalike
structure,  with  all  its  little  pink  thistles and half-invisible ganglions.
Impossible,  of  course. The nervous system's so much a part of the frog there's
no  way to pull it like a hand from a green glove. You'd destroy the frog, doing
it.  Well,  that's Mrs. Shrike. There's no way to operate on a souring ganglion.
Bile is in the vitreous humor of her mad little elephant eyes. You might as well
try  to  get all the saliva out of her mouth forever. It's very sad. But I think
we've gone too far already."

     "True,"  said  Foxe patiently, earnestly, nodding. "But all I want to do is
post  a  warning.  Drop  a  little seed in her subconscious. Tell her, 'You're a
murderee, a victim looking for a place to happen.' One tiny seed I want to plant
in  her head and hope it'll sprout and flower. A very faint, very poor hope that
before it's too late, she'll gather her courage and go see a psychiatrist!"

     "It's too hot to talk."

     "All  the  more  reason  to  act!  More murders are committed at ninety-two
degrees Fahrenheit than any other temperature. Over one hundred, it's too hot to
move.  Under  ninety,  cool enough to survive. But right _at_ ninety-two degrees
lies  the  apex  of  irritability,  everything  is itches and hair and sweat and
cooked  pork.  The  brain becomes a rat rushing around a red-hot maze. The least
thing,  a  word,  a  look,  a  sound,  the drop of a hair and--irritable murder.
_irritable murder_, there's a pretty and terrifying phrase for you. Look at that
hall  thermometer,  eighty-nine  degrees.  Crawling up toward ninety, itching up
toward  ninety-one,  sweating  toward  ninety-two  an  hour, two hours from now.
Here's the first flight of stairs. We can rest on each landing. Up we go!"

      

     The two old men moved in the third-floor darkness.

     "Don't  check  the  numbers,"  said  Foxe.  "Let's guess which apartment is
hers."

     Behind  the  last  door  a  radio exploded, the ancient paint shuddered and
flaked  softly  onto  the  worn carpet at their feet. The men watched the entire
door jitter with vibration in its grooves.

     They looked at each other and nodded grimly.

     Another  sound  cut  like an ax through the paneling; a woman, shrieking to
someone across town on a telephone.

     "No phone necessary. She should just open her window and yell."

     Foxe rapped.

     The radio blasted out the rest of its song, the voice bellowed. Foxe rapped
again,  and  tested  the  knob. To his horror the door got free of his grasp and
floated swiftly inward, leaving them like actors trapped on-stage when a curtain
rises too soon.

     "Oh, no!" cried Shaw.

     They  were buried in a flood of sound. It was like standing in the spiliway
of  a  dam  and  pulling the gate-lever. Instinctively, the old men raised their
hands,  wincing  as  if  the  sound  were pure blazing sunlight that burnt their
eyes.

     The woman (it was indeed Mrs. Shrike!) stood at a wall phone, saliva flying
from  her  mouth at an incredible rate. She showed all of her large white teeth,
chunking  off  her monologue, nostrils flared, a vein in her wet forehead ridged
up,  pumping, her free hand flexing and unflexing itself. Her eyes were clenched
shut as she yelled:

     "Tell that damned son-in-law of mine I won't see him, he's a lazy hum!"

     Suddenly  the woman snapped her eyes wide, some animal instinct having felt
rather  than  heard  or seen an intrusion. She continued yelling into the phone,
meanwhile  piercing  her visitors with a glance forged of the coldest steel. She
yelled  for  a  full  minute  longer,  then  slammed down the receiver and said,
without taking a breath: "Well?"

     The two men moved together for protection. Their lips moved.

     "Speak up!" cried the woman.

     "Would you mind," said Foxe, "turning the radio down?"

     She  caught  the  word "radio" by lip reading. Still glaring at them out of
her  sunburnt  face, she slapped the radio without looking at it, as one slaps a
child that cries all day every day and has become an unseen pattern in life. The
radio subsided.

     "I'm not buyin' anything!"

     She  ripped  a dog-eared packet of cheap cigarettes like it was a bone with
meat  on  it,  snapped  one  of  the cigarettes in her smeared mouth and lit it,
sucking  greedily  on  the smoke, jetting it through her thin nostrils until she
was  a  feverish  dragon confronting them in a fire-clouded room. "I got work to
do. Make your pitch!"

     They  looked  at  the magazines spilled like great catches of brightcolored
fish  on  the  linoleum  floor,  the unwashed coffee cup near the broken rocking
chair,  the  tilted,  greasy  thumb-marked  lamps,  the smudged windowpanes, the
dishes piled in the sink under a steadily dripping, dripping faucet, the cobwebs
floating like dead skin in the ceiling corners, and over all of it the thickened
smell of life lived too much, too long, with the window down.

     They saw the wall thermometer.

     Temperature: ninety degrees Fahrenheit.

     They gave each other a half-startled look.

     "I'm Mr. Foxe, this is Mr. Shaw. We're retired insurance salesmen. We still
sell occasionally, to supplement our retirement fund. Most of the time, however,
we're taking it easy and--"

     "You  tryin' to sell me insurance!" She cocked her head at them through the
cigarette smoke.

     "There's no money connected with this, no."

     "Keep talking," she said.

     "I  hardly know how to begin. May we sit down?" He looked about and decided
there wasn't a thing in the room he would trust himself to sit on. "Never mind."
He  saw  she  was  about  to bellow again, so went on swiftly. "We retired after
forty  years  of  seeing people from nursery to cemetery gate, you might say. In
that  time  we'd  formulated  certain  opinions.  Last year, sitting in the park
talking,  we  put two and two together. We realized that many people didn't have
to  die  so  young.  With  the  correct  investigation, a new type of Customer's
Information might be provided as a sideline by insurance companies . . ."

     "I'm not sick," said the woman.

     "Oh,  hut you _are!_" cried Mr. Foxe, and then put two fingers to his mouth
in dismay.

     "Don't tell me what I am!" she cried.

     Foxe  plunged  headlong.  "Let  me  make  it  clear.  People die every day,
psychologically  speaking.  Some  part  of  them gets tired. And that small part
tries  to  kill off the entire person. For example--" He looked about and seized
on  his  first  evidence with what amounted to a vast relief. "There! That light
bulb  in  your  bathroom, hung right over the tub on frayed wire. Someday you'll
slip, make a grab and--pfft!"

     Mrs. Albert J. Shrike squinted at the light bulb in the bathroom. "So?"

     "People," Mr. Foxe warmed to his subject, while Mr. Shaw fidgeted, his face
now  flushed,  now  dreadfully  pale, edged toward the door, "people, like cars,
need  their  brakes  checked;  their emotional brakes, do you see? Their lights,
their batteries, their approaches and responses to life."

     Mrs.  Shrike  snorted. "Your two minutes are up. I haven't learned a damned
thing."

     Mr. Foxe blinked, first at her, then at the sun burning mercilessly through
the  dusty  windowpanes. Perspiration was running in the soft lines of his face.
He chanced a look at the wall thermometer.

     "Ninety-one," he said.

     "What's eating you, pop?" asked Mrs. Shrike.

     "I  beg  your  pardon."  He  stared  in  fascination at the red-hot line of
mercury firing up the small glass vent across the room. "Sometimes--sometimes we
all make wrong turnings. Our choice of marriage partners. A wrong job. No money.
Illness.  Migraine  headaches. Glandular deficiencies. Dozens of little prickly,
irritable  things.  Before  you  know  it,  you're  taking  it  out  on everyone
everywhere."

     She  was  watching  his mouth as if he were talking a foreign language; she
scowled,  she  squinted,  she  tilted  her head, her cigarette smoldering in one
plump hand.

     "We  run  about screaming, making enemies." Foxe swallowed and glanced away
from  her.  "We make people want to see us-- gone--sick--dead, even. People want
to hit us, knock us down, shoot us. It's all unconscious, though. You _see?_"

     God, it's hot in here, he thought. If there were only one window open. Just
one. Just one window open.

     Mrs. Shrike's eyes were widening, as if to allow in everything he said.

     "Some  people are not only accident-prones, which means they want to punish
themselves  physically,  for  some  crime, usually a petty immorality they think
they've   long   forgotten.  But  their  subconscious  puts  them  in  dangerous
situations, makes them jaywalk, makes them--" He hesitated and the sweat dripped
from  his chin. "Makes them ignore frayed electric cords over bathtubs-- they're
potential  victims. It is marked on their faces, hidden like-- like tattoos, you
might  say,  on  the inner rather than the outer skin. A murderer passing one of
these   accident-prones,  these  wishersafter-death,  would  see  the  invisible
markings, turn, and follow them, instinctively, to the nearest alley. With luck,
a  potential victim might not happen to cross the tracks of a potential murderer
for  fifty  years.  Then--one afternoon--fate! These people, these death-prones,
touch  all  the  wrong nerves in passing strangers; they brush the murder in all
our breasts."

     Mrs. Shrike mashed her cigarette in a dirty saucer, very slowly.

     Foxe shifted his cane from one trembling hand to the other. "So it was that
a  year  ago  we decided to try to find people who needed help. These are always
the  people  who don't even know they need help, who'd never dream of going to a
psychiatrist. At first, I said, we'll make dry-runs. Shaw was always against it,
save  as  a  hobby,  a  harmless little quiet thing between ourselves. I suppose
you'd  say I'm a fool. Well, we've just completed a year of dry-runs. We watched
two  men,  studied  their  environmental  factors,  their  work, marriages, at a
discreet distance. None of our business, you say? But each time, the men came to
a  bad  end.  One  killed in a bar-room. Another pushed out a window. A woman we
studied,  run  down  by  a  streetcar.  Coincidence?  What  about  that  old man
accidentally  poisoned?  Didn't  turn  on the bathroom light one night. What was
there in his mind that wouldn't let him turn the light on? What made him move in
the  dark  and  drink  medicine  in  the  dark and die in the hospital next day,
protesting  he  wanted  nothing  but to live? Evidence, evidence, we have it, we
have  it.  Two dozen cases. Coffins nailed to a good half of them in that little
time.  No more dry-runs; it's time for action, preventative use of data. Time to
work _with_ people, make friends before the undertaker slips in the side door."

     Mrs. Shrike stood as if he had struck her on the head, quite suddenly, with
a large weight. Then just her blurred lips moved. "And you came _here?_"

     "Well--"

     "You've been watching me?"

     "We only--"

     "Following _me?_"

     "In order to--"

     "Get out!" she said.

     "We can--"

     "Get out!" she said.

     "If you'll only listen--"

     "Oh, I _said_ this would happen," whispered Shaw, shutting his eyes.

     "Dirty old men, get out!" she shouted.

     "There's no money involved."

     "I'll  throw  you  out,  I'll  throw  you out!" she shrieked, clenching her
fists,  gritting  her  teeth. Her face colored insanely. "Who are you, dirty old
grandmas, coming here, spying, you old cranks!" she yelled. She seized the straw
hat  from  Mr.  Foxe's head; he cried out; she tore the lining from it, cursing.
"Get  out,  get out, get out, get out!" She hurled it to the floor. She crunched
one heel through the middle. She kicked it. "Get out, get out!"

     "Oh,  but  you _need_ us!" Foxe stared in dismay at the hat as she swore at
him  in a language that turned corners, blazing, that flew in the air like great
searing torches. The woman knew every language and every word in every language.
She spoke with fire and alcohol and smoke.

     "Who  do you think you are? God? God and the Holy Ghost, passing on people,
snooping,  prying,  you old jerks, you old dirtyminded grandmas! You, you--" She
gave  them  further  names,  names  that  forced  them toward the door in shock,
recoiling.  She  gave them a long vile list of names without pausing for breath.
Then  she  stopped,  gasped,  trembled,  heaved  in  a great suction of air, and
started a further list of ten dozen even viler names.

     "See here!" said Foxe, stiffening.

     Shaw was out the door, pleading with his partner to come along, it was over
and  done, it was as he expected, they were fools, they were everything she said
they were, oh, how embarrassing!

     "Old maid!" shouted the woman.

     "I'll thank you to keep a civil tongue."

     "Old maid, old maid!"

     Somehow this was worse than all the really vile names.

     Foxe swayed, his mouth clapped open, shut, open, shut.

     "Old woman!" she cried. "Woman, woman, woman!"

     He  was  in  a  blazing  yellow  jungle.  The  room was drowned in fire, it
clenched  upon  him, the furniture seemed to shift and whirl about, the sunlight
shot  through the rammed-shut windows, firing the dust, which leaped up from the
rug  in angry sparks when a fly buzzed a crazy spiral from nowhere; her mouth, a
feral  red  thing, licked the air with all the obscenities collected just behind
it  in  a  lifetime, and beyond her on the baked brown wallpaper the thermometer
said ninety-two, and he looked again and it said ninety-two, and still the woman
screamed  like the wheels of a train scraping around a vast iron curve of track;
fingernails down a blackboard, and steel across marble. "Old maid! Old maid! Old
maid!"

     Foxe drew his arm back, cane clenched in fist, very high, and struck.

     "No!" cried Shaw in the doorway.

     But  the  woman had slipped and fallen aside, gibbering, clawing the floor.
Foxe  stood over her with a look of positive disbelief on his face. He looked at
his  arm  and  his  wrist  and his hand and his fingers, each in turn, through a
great  invisible glaring hot wall of crystal that enclosed him. He looked at the
cane  as  if  it was an easily seen and incredible exclamation point come out of
nowhere  to  the  center  of  the  room. His mouth stayed open, the dust fell in
silent embers, dead. He felt the blood drop from his face as if a small door had
banged wide into his stomach. "I--"

     She frothed.

     Scrabbling  about, every part of her seemed a separate animal. Her arms and
legs,  her  hands,  her head, each was a lopped-off bit of some creature wild to
return  to  itself, but blind to the proper way of making that return. Her mouth
still  gushed  out her sickness with words and sounds that were not even faintly
words.  It  had been in her a long time, a long long time. Foxe looked upon her,
in  a  state  of shock, himself. Before today, she had spat her venom out, here,
there,  another  place. Now he had loosed the flood of a lifetime and he felt in
danger  of  drowning here. He sensed someone pulling him by his coat. He saw the
door  sills  pass  on either side. He heard the cane fall and rattle like a thin
bone  far  away  from his hand, which seemed to have been stung by some terrible
unseen wasp. And then he was out, walking mechanically, down through the burning
tenement,  between  the scorched walls. Her voice crashed like a guillotine down
the stair. "Get out! Get out! Get _out!_"

     Fading like the wail of a person dropped down an open well into darkness.

     At the bottom of the last flight, near the street door, Foxe turned himself
loose  from  this other man here, and for a long moment leaned against the wall,
his  eyes  wet, able to do nothing but moan. His hands, while he did this, moved
in  the  air  to  find  the  lost  cane, moved on his head, touched at his moist
eyelids,  amazed,  and  fluttered away. They sat on the bottom hall step for ten
minutes  in  silence,  drawing  sanity  into  their  lungs with every shuddering
breath. Finally Mr. Foxe looked over at Mr. Shaw, who had been staring at him in
wonder and fright for the full ten minutes.

     "Did  you _see_ what I did? Oh, oh, that was close. Close. Close." He shook
his head. "I'm a fool. That poor, poor woman. She was right."

     "There's nothing to be done."

     "I see that now. It had to fall on me."

     "Here, wipe your face. That's better."

     "Do you think she'll tell Mr. Shrike about us?"

     "No, no."

     "Do you think we could--"

     "Talk to _him?_"

     They considered this and shook their heads. They opened the front door to a
gush  of  furnace  heat  and  were  almost knocked down by a huge man who strode
between them.

     "Look where you're going!" he cried.

     They  turned  and  watched the man move ponderously, in fiery darkness, one
step  at  a  time,  up  into  the  tenement house, a creature with the ribs of a
mastodon  and  the  head  of  an unshorn lion, with great beefed arms, irritably
hairy,  painfully sunburnt. The face they had seen briefly as he shouldered past
was  a  sweating, raw, sunblistered pork face, salt droplets under the red eyes,
dripping  from the chin; great smears of perspiration stained the man's armpits,
coloring his tee-shirt to the waist.

     They shut the tenement door gently.

     "That's him," said Mr. Foxe. "That's the husband."

      

     They   stood  in  the  little  store  across  from  the  tenement.  It  was
five-thirty,  the  sun tilting down the sky, the shadows the color of hot summer
grapes under the rare few trees and in the alleys.

     "What was it, hanging out of the husband's back pocket?"

     "Longshoreman's   hook.  Steel.  Sharp,  heavy-looking.  Like  those  claws
one-armed men used to wear on the end of their stumps, years ago."

     Mr. Foxe did not speak.

     "What's the temperature?" asked Mr. Foxe, a minute later, as if he were too
tired to turn his head to look.

     "Store thermometer still reads ninety-two. Ninety-two right on the nose."

     Foxe sat on a packing crate, making the least motion to hold an orange soda
bottle  in  his  fingers.  "Cool  off," he said. "Yes, I need an orange pop very
much, right now."

     They  sat  there  in the furnace, looking up at one special tenement window
for a long time, waiting, waiting . . .