                                 
                                The Little Mice
                                      1955

     They're very odd," I said. "The little Mexican couple."
     "How do you mean?" asked my wife.
     "Never a sound," I said. "Listen."
     Ours  was a house deep back in among tenements, to which another half-house
had been added. When my wife and I purchased the house, we rented the additional
quarter  which  lay walled up against one side of our parlour. Now, listening at
this particular wall, we heard our hearts beat.
     "I  know  they're home," I whispered. "But in the three years they've lived
here  I've  never  heard  a  dropped pan, a spoken word, or the sound of a light
switch. Good God, what are they doing in there?"
     "I'd never thought," said my wife. "It is peculiar."
     "Only  one light on, that same dim little blue 25-watt bulb they bum in the
parlour.  If  you  walk by and peer in their front door, there he is, sitting in
his  armchair, not saying a word, his hands in his lap. There she is, sitting in
the other armchair, looking at him, saying nothing. They don't move."
     "At  first  glance  I  always think they're not home," said my wife. "Their
parlour's  so  dark.  But if you stare long enough, your eyes get used to it and
you can make them out, sitting there."
     "Some  day,"  I said, "I'm going to run in, turn on their lights, and yell!
My  God,  if  I  can't  stand  their silence, how can they? They can talk, can't
they?"
     "When he pays the rent each month, he says hello."
     "What else?"
     "Good-bye."
     I shook my head. "When we meet in the alley he smiles and runs."
     My  wife and I sat down for an evening of reading, the radio, and talk. "Do
they have a radio?"
     "No  radio,  television, telephone. Not a book, magazine, or paper in their
house."
     "Ridiculous!"
     "Don't get so excited."
     "I know, but you can't sit in a dark room two or three years and not speak,
not  listen  to  a  radio,  not  read or even eat, can you? I've never smelled a
steak,  or  an  egg  frying. Damn it, I don't believe I've ever heard them go to
bed!"
     "They're doing it to mystify us, dear."
     "They're succeeding!"
     I went for a walk around the block. It was a nice summer evening. Returning
I  glanced  idly  in their front door. The dark silence was there, and the heavy
shapes,  sitting,  and  the  little  blue  light  burning.  I stood a long time,
finishing  my  cigarette.  It  was  only  in turning to go that I saw him in the
doorway,  looking  out with his bland, plump face. He didn't move. He just stood
there, watching me.
     "Evening," I said.
     Silence. After a moment, he turned, moving away into the dark room.
     In  the  morning, the little Mexican left the house at seven o'clock alone,
hurrying  down  the  alley, observing the same silence he kept in his rooms. She
followed  at  eight o'clock, walking carefully, all lumpy under her dark coat, a
black  hat  balanced  on  her frizzy, beauty parlour hair. They had gone to work
this way, remote and silent, for years.
     "Where do they work?" I asked, at breakfast.
     "He's  a  blast  furnaceman  at  U.S.  Steel here. She sews in a dress loft
somewhere.'
     "That's hard work."
     I  typed  a few pages of my novel, read, idled, typed some more. At five in
the  afternoon  I saw the little Mexican woman come home, unlock her door, hurry
inside, hook the screen, and lock the door tight.
     He  arrived  at six sharp, in a rush. Once on their back porch, however, he
became  infinitely  patient.  Quietly, raking his hand over the screen, lightly,
like  a  fat  mouse scrabbling, he waited. At last she let him in. I did not see
their mouths move.
     Not a sound during supper time. No frying. No rattle of dishes. Nothing.
     I saw the small blue lamp go on.
     "That's how he is," said my wife, "when he pays the rent. Raps so quietly I
don't hear. I just happen to glance out of the window and there he is. God knows
how long he's waited, standing, sort of 'nibbling' at the door."
     Two  nights  later, on a beautiful July evening the little Mexican man came
out  on the back porch and looked at me, working in the garden and said, "You're
crazy!"  He  turned  to  my  wife. "You're crazy, too!" He waved his plump hand,
quietly. "I don't like you. Too much noise. I don't like you. You're crazy."
     He went back into his little house.

     
     August,  September,  October,  November.  The 'mice', as we now referred to
them,  lay quietly in their dark nest. Once, my wife gave him some old magazines
with  his  rent receipt. He accepted these politely, with a smile and a bow, but
no word. An hour later she saw him put the magazines in the yard incinerator and
strike a match.
     The  next  day  he paid the rent three months in advance, no doubt figuring
that  he  would only have to see us up close once every twelve weeks. When I saw
him  on  the  street, he crossed quickly to the other side to greet an imaginary
friend.  She, similarly, ran by me, smiling wildly, bewildered, nodding. I never
got  nearer than twenty yards to her. If there was plumbing to be fixed in their
house, they went silently forth on their own, not telling us, and brought back a
plumber who worked, it seemed, with a flashlight.
     "God  damnedest  thing," he told me when I saw him in the alley. "Damn fool
place  there  hasn't got any light bulbs in the sockets. When I asked where they
all were, damn it, they just smiled at me!"
     I  lay  at  night  thinking  about  the  little mice. Where were they from?
Mexico, yes. What part? A farm, a small village, somewhere by a river? Certainly
no  city  or  town. But a place where there were stars and the normal lights and
darknesses,  the  goings  and comings of the moon and the sun they had known the
better  part  of  their lives. Yet here they were, far far away from home, in an
impossible city, he sweating out the hell of blast furnaces all day, she bent to
jittering needles in a sewing loft. They came home then to this block, through a
loud  city,  avoided  clanging  streetcars  and  saloons  that screamed like red
parrots  along  their  way.  Through a million shriekings they ran back to their
parlour,  their blue light, their comfortable chairs, and their silence. I often
thought  of  this.  Late at night I felt if I put out my hand, in the dark of my
own  bedroom,  I  might  feel  adobe, and hear a cricket, and a river running by
under the moon, and someone singing, softly, to a faint guitar.

     
     Late  one  December evening the next door tenement burned. Flames roared at
the sky, bricks fell in avalanches, and sparks littered the roof where the quiet
mice lived.
     I pounded their door.
     "Fire!" I cried. "Fire!"
     They sat motionless, in their blue-lighted room.
     I pounded violently. "You hear? Fire!"
     The  fire engines arrived. They gushed water into the tenement. More bricks
fell.  Four  of  them  smashed holes in the little house. I climbed to the roof,
extinguished  the  small  fires  there  and scrambled down, my face dirty and my
hands cut. The door to the little house opened. The quiet little Mexican and his
wife stood in the doorway, solid and unmoved.
     "Let  me  in!"  I cried. "There's a hole in your roof; some sparks may have
fallen in your bedroom!"
     I pulled the door wide, pushed past them.
     "No!" the little man grunted.
     "Ah!" the little woman ran in a circle like a broken toy.
     I was inside with a flashlight. The little man seized my arm.
     I smelled his breath.
     And  then  my  flashlight  shot  through  the  rooms  of their house. Light
sparkled  on  a  hundred  wine bottles standing in the hall, two hundred bottles
shelved  in  the  kitchen,  six dozen along the parlour wall-boards, more of the
same  on  bedroom  bureaus and in closets. I do not know if I was more impressed
with  the hole in the bedroom ceiling or the endless glitter of so many bottles.
I  lost count. It was like an invasion of gigantic shining beetles, struck dead,
deposited, and left by some ancient diseased
     In the bedroom, I felt the little man and woman behind me in the doorway. I
heard  their loud breathing and I could feel their eyes. I raised the beam of my
flashlight  away  from  the glittering bottles, I focused it, carefully, and for
the rest of my visit, on the hole in the yellow ceiling.
     The little woman began to cry. She cried softly. Nobody moved.
     The next morning they left.
     Before  we  even knew they were going, they were half down the alley at six
a.m.  carrying  their  luggage,  which  was light enough to be entirely empty. I
tried to stop them. I talked to them. They were old friends, I said. Nothing had
changed, I said. They had nothing to do with the fire, I said, or the roof. They
were innocent bystanders, I insisted! I would fix the roof myself, no charge, no
charge to them! But they did not look at me. They looked at the house and at the
open  end of the alley, ahead of them, while I talked. Then, when I stopped they
nodded  to  the alley as if agreeing that it was time to go, and walked off, and
then  began to run, it seemed, away from me, towards the street where there were
street-cars  and  buses  and  automobiles  and many loud avenues stretching in a
maze. They hurried proudly, though, heads up, not looking back.
     It  was  only  by  accident  I  ever met them again. At Christ-mastime, one
evening, I saw the little man running quietly along the twilight street ahead of
me.  On  a  personal  whim,  I followed. When he turned, I turned. At last, five
blocks  away  from  our  old neighborhood, he scratched quietly at the door of a
little white house. I saw the door open, shut, and lock him in. As night settled
over,  the  tenement  city,  a  small  light  burned  like blue mist in the tiny
living-room as I passed. I thought I saw, but probably imagined, two silhouettes
there,  he  on  his side of the room in his own particular chair, and she on her
side of the room, sitting, sitting in the dark, and one or two bottles beginning
to  collect on the floor behind the chairs, and not a sound, not a sound between
them. Only the silence.
     I  did  not  go  up and knock. I strolled by. I walked on along the avenue,
listening  to  the  parrot cafes scream. I bought a newspaper, a magazine, and a
quarter-edition  book.  Then  I  went  home to where all the lights were lit and
there was warm food upon the table.