                                 
                      The Wonderful Death of Dudley Stone
                                      1954

     "Alive!"
     "Dead!"
     "Alive in New England, damn it."
     "Died twenty years ago!"
     "Pass the hat, I'll go myself and bring back his head!"
     That's  how  the  talk  went  that  night.  A  stranger set it off with his
mouthings  about  Dudley  Stone  dead.  Alive!  we cried. And shouldn't we know?
Weren't  we  the last frail remnants of those who had burnt incense and read his
books by the light of blazing intellectual votives in the twenties?
     _The_  Dudley  Stone.  That  magnificent stylist, that proudest of literary
lions. Surely you recall the head-pounding, the cliff-jumping, the whistlings of
doom that followed on his writing his publishers this note:
      
     _Sirs:  Today, aged 30, I retire from the field, renounce writing, burn all
my  effects, toss my latest manuscript on the dump, cry hail and fare thee well.
Yrs., affect_.
     _Dudley Stone_
      
     Earthquakes and avalanches, in that order.
     "_Why?_" we asked ourselves, meeting down the years.
     In  fine  soap-opera  fashion we debated if it was women caused him to hurl
his  literary  future  away.  Was  it  the Bottle? Or Horses that outran him and
stopped a fine pacer in his prime?
     We  freely  admitted to one and all, that were Stone writing now, Faulkner,
Hemingway, and Steinbeck would be buried in his lava. All the sadder that Stone,
on the brink of his greatest work, turned one day and went off to live in a town
we shall call Obscurity by the sea best named The Past.
     "_Why?_"
     That  question  forever  lived  with those of us who had seen the glints of
genius in his piebald works.
     One  night  a  few  weeks ago, musing off the erosion of the years, finding
each  others'  faces  somewhat  more pouched and our hairs more conspicuously in
absence, we became enraged over the typical citizen's ignorance of Dudley Stone.
     At  least,  we  muttered,  Thomas  Wolfe  had had a full measure of success
before  he  seized  his  nose  and  jumped off the rim of Eternity. At least the
critics  gathered to stare after his plunge into darkness as after a meteor that
made  much  fire  in  its  passing.  But  who  now  remembered Dudley Stone, his
coteries, his frenzied followers of the twenties?
     "Pass the hat," I said. "I'll travel three hundred miles, grab Dudley Stone
by  the  pants and say: 'Look here, Mr. Stone, why did you let us down so badly?
Why haven't you written a book in twenty-five years?'"
     The hat was lined with cash; I sent a telegram and took a train.
      
     I  do  not  know  what  I  expected.  Perhaps to find a doddering and frail
praying  mantis,  whisping  about  the station, blown by seawinds, a chalk-white
ghost  who  would  husk  at  me  with the voices of grass and reeds blown in the
night.  I clenched my knees in agony as my train chuffed into the station. I let
myself  down  into  a  lonely  country-side,  a  mile  from  the sea, like a man
foolishly insane, wondering why I had come so far.
     On  a  bulletin  board  in  front of the boarded-up ticket office I found a
cluster  of  announcements, inches thick, pasted and nailed one upon another for
uncountable years. Leafing under, peeling away anthropological layers of printed
tissue  I  found  what  I  wanted.  Dudley  Stone for alderman, Dudley Stone for
Sheriff,  Dudley  Stone  for  mayor!  On  up  through  the years his photograph,
bleached  by sun and rain, faintly recognizable, asked for ever more responsible
positions in the life of this world near the sea. I stood reading them.
     "Hey!"
     And  Dudley  Stone  plunged across the station platform behind me suddenly.
"Is  that  you, Mr. Douglas!" I whirled to confront this great architecture of a
man,  big  but  not  in the least fat, his legs huge pistons thrusting him on, a
bright flower in his lapel, a bright tie at his neck. He crushed my hand, looked
down upon me like Michelangelo's God creating Adam with a mighty touch. His face
was  the face of those illustrated North Winds and South Winds that blow hot and
cold  in  ancient  mariners'  charts. It was the face that symbolizes the sun in
Egyptian carvings, ablaze with life!
     My  God!  I  thought.  And this is the man who hasn't written in twenty-odd
years. Impossible. He's so alive it's sinful. I can hear his _heartbeat!_
     I  must  have  stood  with my eyes very wide to let the look of him cram in
upon my startled senses.
     "You thought you'd find Marley's Ghost," he laughed. "Admit it."
     "I--"
     "My  wife's  waiting  with a New England boiled dinner, we've plenty of ale
and  stout.  I  like  the ring of those words. To _ale_ is not to sicken, but to
revive  the  flagging  spirit.  A tricky word, that. And _stout?_ There's a nice
ruddy  sound to it. Stout!" A great golden watch bounced on his vest-front, hung
in bright chains. He vised my elbow and charmed me along, a magician well on his
way  back to his cave with a luckless rabbit. "Glad to see you! I suppose you've
come,  as  the  others  came, to ask the same question, eh! Well, this time I'll
tell everything!"
     My heart jumped. "Wonderful!"
     Behind  the empty station sat an open-top 1927-vintage Model-T Ford. "Fresh
air.  Drive  at  twilight  like  this,  you  get  all the fields, the grass, the
flowers,  coming  at  you in the wind. I hope you're not one of those who tiptoe
around shutting windows! Our house is like the top of a mesa. We let the weather
do our broom-work. Hop in!"
      
     Ten  minutes  later we swung off the highway onto a drive that had not been
leveled  or  filled  in  years. Stone drove straight on over the pits and bumps,
smiling  steadily.  Bang!  We  shuddered the last few yards to a wild, unpainted
two-story house. The car was allowed to gasp itself away into mortal silence.
     "Do  you  want  the truth?" Stone turned to look me in the face and hold my
shoulder  with  an earnest hand. "I was murdered by a man with a gun twenty-five
years ago almost to this very day."
     I  sat staring after him as he leapt from the car. He was solid as a ton of
rock,  no ghost to him, but yet I knew that somehow the truth was in what he had
told me before firing himself like a cannon at the house.
      
     "This is my wife, and this is the house, and that is our supper waiting for
us!  Look  at our view. Windows on three sides of the living room, a view of the
sea, the shore, the meadows. We nail the windows open three out of four seasons.
I  swear you get a smell of limes here midsummer, and something from Antarctica,
ammonia and ice cream, come December. Sit down! Lena, isn't it _nice_ having him
here?"
     "I  hope  you  like  New  England  boiled dinner," said Lena, now here, now
there,  a  tall,  firmly-built  woman,  the  sun  in the East, Father Christmas'
daughter,  a bright lamp of a face that lit our table as she dealt out the heavy
useful  dishes  made  to stand the pound of giants' fists. The cutlery was solid
enough  to take a lion's teeth. A great whiff of steam rose up, through which we
gladly descended, sinners into Hell. I saw the seconds-plate skim by three times
and  felt the ballast gather in my chest, my throat, and at last my ears. Dudley
Stone  poured me a brew he had made from wild Concords that had cried for mercy,
he  said.  The  wine  bottle,  empty,  had its green glass mouth blown softly by
Stone, who summoned out a rhythmic one-note tune that was quickly done.
     "Well, I've kept you waiting long enough," he said, peering at me from that
distance  which  drinking  adds  between  people  and which, at odd turns in the
evening, seems closeness itself. "I'll tell you about my murder. I've never told
anyone before; believe me. Do you know John Oatis Kendall?"
     "A  minor  writer  in the twenties, wasn't he?" I said. "A few books. Burnt
out by '31. Died last week."
     "God rest him." Mr. Stone lapsed into a special brief melancholy from which
he revived as he began to speak again.
     "Yes.  John  Oatis  Kendall,  burnt out by the year 1931, a writer of great
potentialities."
     "Not as great as yours," I said, quickly.
     "Well,  just  wait. We were boys together, John Oatis and I, born where the
shade  of  an  oak  tree touched my house in the morning and his house at night,
swam  every  creek in the world together, got sick on sour apples and cigarettes
together,  saw  the  same  lights in the same blonde hair of the same young girl
together,  and  in  our  late teens went out to kick Fate in the stomach and get
heat  on the head together. We both did fair, and then I better and still better
as  the years ran. If his first book got one good notice, mine got six, if I got
one  bad  notice,  he got a dozen. We were like two friends on a train which the
public  has uncoupled. There went John Oatis on the caboose, left behind, crying
out,  'Save  me! You're leaving me in Tank Town, Ohio; we're on the same track!'
And  the  conductor saying, 'Yes, but not the same _train!_' And myself yelling,
'_I_  believe  in  you, John, he of good heart, I'll come back for you!' And the
caboose  dwindling behind with its red and green lamps like cherry and lime pops
shining  in  the  dark  and  we yelling our friendship to each other: 'John, old
man!' 'Dudley, old pal!' while John Oatis went out on a dark siding behind a tin
baling-shed at midnight and my engine, with all the flag-wavers and brass bands,
boiled on toward dawn."
     Dudley Stone paused and noticed my look of general confusion.
     "All this to lead up to my murder," he said. "For it was John Oatis Kendall
who,  in 1930, traded a few old clothes and some remaindered copies of his books
for a gun and came out to this house and this room."
     "He really meant to kill you?"
     "Meant to, hell! He did! Bang! Have some more wine? That's better."
     A  strawberry  shortcake  was  set  upon  the table by Mrs. Stone, while he
enjoyed my gibbering suspense. Stone sliced it into three huge chunks and served
it around, fixing me with his kindly approximation of the Wedding Guest's eye.
     "There  he  sat,  John  Oatis, in that chair where you sit now. Behind him,
outside,  in  the  smokehouse, seventeen hams; in our wine cellars, five hundred
bottles  of  the  best;  beyond the window open country, the elegant sea in full
lace,  overhead a moon like a dish of cool cream, everywhere the full panoply of
spring,  and  Lena across the table, too, a willow tree in the wind, laughing at
everything  I said or did not choose to say, both of us thirty, mind you, thirty
years  old,  life  our magnificent carousel, our fingers playing full chords, my
books  selling  well,  fan mail pouring upon us in crisp white founts, horses in
the  stables  for  moonlight  rides  to  coves  where either we or the sea might
whisper  all  we  wished in the night. And John Oatis seated there where you sit
now, quietly taking the little blue gun from his pocket."
     "I laughed, thinking it was a cigar lighter of some sort," said his wife.
     "But John Oatis said quite seriously: 'I'm going to kill you, Mr. Stone.'
     "What did you do?"
     "Do?  I  sat there, stunned, riven; I heard a terrible slam! the coffin lid
in  my  face!  I heard coal down a black chute; dirt on my buried door. They say
all  your  past  hurtles  by at such times. Nonsense. The _future_ does. You see
your  face  a  bloody porridge. You sit there until your fumbling mouth can say,
'But why, John, what have I _done_ to you?'
     "'Done!' he cried.
     "And  his eyes skimmed along the vast bookshelf and the handsome brigade of
books  drawn  stiffly  to  attention  there  with my name on each blazing like a
panther's  eyes  in  the Moroccan blackness. 'Done!' he cried, mortally. And his
hand  itched  the  revolver  in  a sweat. 'Now, John,' I cautioned. 'What do you
want?'
     "'One  thing  more  than anything else in the world,' he said, 'to kill you
and  be  famous. Get my name in headlines. Be famous as you are famous. Be known
for a lifetime and beyond as the man who killed Dudley Stone!'
     "'You can't mean that!'
     "'I  do.  I'll  be  very  famous.  Far more famous than I am today, in your
shadow.  Oh,  listen  here,  no one in the world knows how to hate like a writer
does.  God,  how  I  love your work and God, how I hate you because you write so
well. Amazing ambivalence. But I can't take it any more, not being able to write
as  you do, so I'll take my fame the easy way. I'll cut you off before you reach
your prime. They say your next book will be your finest, your most brilliant!'
     "'They exaggerate.'
     "'My guess is they're right!' he said.
     "I  looked  beyond  him  to  Lena who sat in her chair, frightened, but not
frightened  enough  to  scream  or  run  and  spoil  the  scene  so it might end
inadvertently.
     "'Calm,'  I  said.  'Calmness. Sit there, John. I ask only one minute. Then
pull the trigger.'
     "'No!' Lena whispered.
     "'Calmness,' I said to her, to myself, to John Oatis.
     "I  gazed  out  the open windows, I felt the wind, I thought of the wine in
the  cellar,  the  coves  at  the  beach, the sea, the night moon like a disc of
menthol  cooling  the summer heavens, drawing clouds of flaming salt, the stars,
after  it  in  a  wheel  toward  morning.  I thought of myself only thirty, Lena
thirty,  our whole lives ahead. I thought of all the flesh of life hung high and
waiting for me to really start banqueting! I had never climbed a mountain, I had
never  sailed an ocean, I had never run for Mayor, I had never dived for pearls,
I  had never owned a telescope, I had never acted on a stage or built a house or
read  all  the classics I had so wished to read. All the _actions_ waiting to be
done!
     "So  in  that  almost  instantaneous sixty seconds, I thought at last of my
career.  The  books I had written, the books I was writing, the books I intended
to  write. The reviews, the sales, our huge balance in the bank. And, believe or
disbelieve  me, for the first time in my life I got free of it all. I became, in
one  moment,  a  critic. I cleared the scales. On one hand I put all the boats I
hadn't  taken,  the  flowers I hadn't planted, the children I hadn't raised, all
the  hills  I  hadn't looked at, with Lena there, goddess of the harvest. In the
middle  I  put  John  Oatis  Kendall  with  his  gun--the  upright that held the
balances. And on the empty scale opposite I laid my pen, my ink, my empty paper,
my  dozen  books.  I made some minor adjustments. The sixty seconds were ticking
by.  The  sweet  night  wind blew across the table. It touched a curl of hair on
Lena's neck, oh Lord, how softly, softly it touched . . .
     "The  gun  pointed  at me. I have seen the moon craters in photographs, and
that  hole  in  space called the Great Coal Sack Nebula, but neither was as big,
take my word, as the mouth of that gun across the room from me.
     "'John,'  I  said  at  last, 'do you hate me _that_ much? Because I've been
lucky and you not?'
     "'Yes, damn it!' he cried.
     "It was almost funny he should envy me. I was not that much better a writer
than he. A flick of the wrist made the difference.
     "'John,' I said quietly to him, 'if you want me dead, I'll _be_ dead. Would
you like for me never to write again?'
     "'I'd like nothing better!' he cried. 'Get ready!' He aimed at my heart!
     "'All right,' I said, 'I'll never write again.'
     "'What?' he said.
     "'We're old old friends, we've never lied to each other, have we? Then take
my word, from this night on I'll never put pen to paper.'
     "'Oh _God_,' he said, and laughed with contempt and disbelief.
     "'There,'  I  said,  nodding  my  head  at the desk near him, 'are the only
original  copies of the two books I've been working on for the last three years.
I'll  burn one in front of you now. The other you yourself may throw in the sea.
Clean  out  the  house,  take  everything faintly resembling literature, burn my
published books, too. Here.' I got up. He could have shot me then, but I had him
fascinated. I tossed one manuscript on the hearth and touched a match to it.
     "'No!'  Lena  said. I turned. 'I know what I'm doing,' I said. She began to
cry.  John Oatis Kendall simply stared at me, bewitched. I brought him the other
unpublished  manuscript.  'Here,' I said, tucking it under his right shoe so his
foot  was a paper weight. I went back and sat down. The wind was blowing and the
night was warm and Lena was white as apple-blossoms there across the table.
     "I said, 'From this day forward I will not write ever again.'
     "At last John Oatis managed to say, 'How can you do this?'
     "'To  make  everyone  happy,'  I  said. 'To make you happy because we'll be
friends  again,  eventually. To make Lena happy because I'll be just her husband
again  and  no agent's performing seal. And myself happy because I'd rather be a
live  man  than  a  dead author. A dying man will do anything, John. Now take my
last novel and get along with you.'
     "We sat there, the three of us, just as we three are sitting tonight. There
was  a  smell  of  lemons and limes and camellias. The ocean roared on the stony
coastland  below;  God, what a lovely moonlit sound. And at last, picking up the
manuscript,  John Oatis took it, like my body, out of the room. He paused at the
door  and said, 'I believe you.' And then he was gone. I heard him drive away. I
put Lena to bed. That was one of the few nights in my life I ever walked down by
the  shore, but walk I did, taking deep breaths and feeling my arms and legs and
my  face  with  my hands, crying like a child, walking and wading in the surf to
feel the cold salt water foaming about me in a million suds."
     Dudley  Stone paused. Time had made a stop in the room. Time was in another
year, the three of us sitting there, enchanted with his telling of the murder.
     "And did he destroy your last novel?" I asked.
     Dudley  Stone  nodded.  "A  week  later  one of the pages drifted up on the
shore. He must have thrown them over the cliff, a thousand pages, I see it in my
mind's  eye,  a flock of white sea-gulls it might seem, flying down to the water
and  going out with the tide at four in the black morning. Lena ran up the beach
with that single page in her hand, crying, 'Look, look!' And when I saw what she
handed me, I tossed it back in the ocean."
     "Don't tell me you honored your promise!"
     Dudley  Stone looked at me steadily. "What would you have done in a similar
position?  Look at it this way: John Oatis did me a favor. He didn't kill me. He
didn't  shoot me. He took my word. He honored my word. He let me live. He let me
go  on  eating  and  sleeping  and breathing. Quite suddenly he had broadened my
horizons.  I  was  so grateful that standing on the beach hip-deep in water that
night,  I cried. I was grateful. Do you really understand that word? Grateful he
had let me live when he had had it in his hand to annihilate me forever."
     Mrs.  Stone  rose  up, the dinner was ended. She cleared the dishes, we lit
cigars;  and Dudley Stone strolled me over to his office-athome, a rolltop desk,
its  jaws  propped  wide  with parcels and papers and ink bottles, a typewriter,
documents, ledgers, indexes.
     "It  was  all  rolling to a boil in me. John Oatis simply spooned the froth
off  the  top  so  I  could see the brew. It was very clear," said Dudley Stone.
"Writing  was  always  so  much  mustard  and gallweed to me; fidgeting words on
paper,  experiencing  vast  depressions  of  heart and soul. Watching the greedy
critics  graph  me  up, chart me down, slice me like sausage, eat me at midnight
breakfasts.  Work of the worst sort. I was _ready_ to fling the pack. My trigger
was set. Boom! There was John Oatis! Look here."
     He  rummaged  in  the desk and brought forth hand-bills and posters. "I had
been  _writing_  about living. Now I wanted to live. _Do_ things instead of tell
about  things.  I  ran  for the board of education. I won. I ran for alderman. I
won.  I ran for Mayor. I won! Sheriff! Town librarian! Sewage disposal official.
I  shook  a  lot  of  hands, saw a lot of life, did a lot of things. We've lived
every  way  there  is to live, with our eyes and noses and mouths, with our ears
and hands. We've climbed hills and painted pictures, there are some on the wall!
We've  been  three  times  around  the  world!  I  even  delivered our baby son,
unexpectedly. He's grown and married now--lives in New York! We've done and done
again."  Stone  paused  and  smiled.  "Come  on  out in the yard; we've set up a
telescope, would you like to see the rings of Saturn?"
     We  stood  in  the yard, and the wind blew from a thousand miles at sea and
while  we  were standing there, looking at the stars through the telescope, Mrs.
Stone went down into the midnight cellar after a rare Spanish wine.
      
     It  was  noon  the  next  day  when  we  reached the lonely station after a
hurricane  trip  across  the jouncing meadows from the sea. Mr. Dudley Stone let
the  car  have  its  head, while he talked to me, laughing, smiling, pointing to
this  or  that  outcrop  of  Neolithic  stone, this or that wild flower, falling
silent  again  only  as  we  parked and waited for the train to come and take me
away.
     "I suppose," he said, looking at the sky, "you think I'm quite insane."
     "No, I'd never say that."
     "Well," said Dudley Stone, "John Oatis Kendall did me one other favor."
     "What was that?"
     Stone hitched around conversationally in the patched leather seat.
     "He helped me get out when the going was good. Deep down inside I must have
guessed  that my literary success was something that would melt when they turned
off  the cooling system. My subconscious had a pretty fair picture of my future.
I knew what none of my critics knew, that I was headed nowhere but down. The two
books  John Oatis destroyed were very bad. They would have killed me deader than
Oatis possibly could. So he helped me decide, unwittingly, what I might not have
had  the courage to decide myself, to how gracefully out while the cotillion was
still  on,  while  the  Chinese lanterns still cast flattering pink lights on my
Harvard  complexion.  I  had  seen  too  many  writers  up, down, and out, hurt,
unhappy,  suicidal.  The  combination of circumstance, coincidence, subconscious
knowledge,  relief, and gratitude to John Oatis Kendall to just _be alive_, were
fortuitous, to say the least."
     We sat in the warm sunlight another minute.
     "And  then  I  had the pleasure of seeing myself compared to all the greats
when  I  announced  my  departure from the literary scene. Few authors in recent
history  have bowed out to such publicity. It was a lovely funeral. I looked, as
they  say,  natural.  And  the  echoes  lingered. 'His _next_ book!' the critics
cried,  'would  have  been  _it!_  A  masterpiece!' I had them panting, waiting.
Little  did  they  know.  Even now, a quarter-century later, my readers who were
college  boys  then, make sooty excursions on drafty kerosene-stinking shortline
trains  to  solve  the  mystery  of  why  I've  made  them  wait  so long for my
'masterpiece.'  And  thanks  to  John  Oatis  Kendall  I  still  have  a  little
reputation;  it  has receded slowly, painlessly. The next year I might have died
by  my  own writing hand. How much better to cut your own caboose off the train,
before others do it for you.
     "My  friendship  with  John  Oatis  Kendall? It came back. It took time, of
course.  But  he  was out here to see me in 1947; it was a nice day, all around,
like old times. And now he's dead and at last I've told someone everything. What
will  you  tell your friends in the city? They won't believe a word of this. But
it  _is_  true, I swear it, as I sit here and breathe God's good air and look at
the calluses on my hands and begin to resemble the faded handbills I used when I
ran for county treasurer."
     We stood on the station platform.
     "Good-by,  and thanks for coming and opening your ears and letting my world
crash  in  on  you. God bless to all your curious friends. Here comes the train!
I've  got  to run; Lena and I are going to a Red Cross drive down the coast this
afternoon! Good-by!"
     I  watched  the  dead  man  stomp  and  leap  across the platform, felt the
plankings shudder, saw him jump into his Model-T, heard it lurch under his bulk,
saw  him  bang  the floor-boards with a big foot, idle the motor, roar it, turn,
smile,  wave  to  me,  and then roar off and away toward that suddenly brilliant
town called Obscurity by a dazzling seashore called The Past.