                                  
                                A Story of Love
                                      1951

     That  was  the  week  Ann  Taylor came to teach summer school at Green Town
Central.  It was the summer of her twenty-fourth birthday, and it was the summer
when Bob Spaulding was just fourteen.
     Every one remembered Anna Taylor, for she was that teacher for whom all the
children  wanted to bring huge oranges or pink flowers, and for whom they rolled
up  the rustling green and yellow maps of the world without being asked. She was
that  woman  who always seemed to be passing by on days when the shade was green
under  the  tunnels of oaks and elms in the old town, her face shifting with the
bright  shadows as she walked, until it was all thing to all people. She was the
fine  peaches of summer in the snow of winter, and she was cool milk for cereals
on  a  hot  early-June  morning. Whenever you needed on opposite, Ann Taylor was
there.  And  those  rare  few days in the world when the climate was balanced as
fine  as maple leaf between winds that blew just right, those were days like Ann
Taylor, and should have been so named on the calendar.
     As  for  Bob  Spaulding, he was the cousin who walked alone through town on
any  October  evening  with a pack of leaves after him like a horde of Halloween
mice,  or you would seem hem, like a slow white fish spring in the tart water of
the  Fox  Hill  Creek,  baking brown with the shine of a chestnut to his face by
autumn.  Or  you  might  hear  his  voice  in  those  treetops  where  the  wind
entertained;  dropping  down hand by hand, there would come Bob Spaulding to sit
alone  and look the world, and later you might see him on the lawn with the ants
crawling  over  his book as he read through the long afternoons alone, or played
himself  a  game  of chess on Grandmother's porch, or picked out a solitary tune
upon the black piano in the bay windows. You never saw him with any other child.
     That  first  morning,  Miss Ann Taylor entered through the side door of the
schoolroom and all of the children sat still in their seat as they saw her write
her name on the board in a nice round lettering.
     "My name is Ann Taylor." She said, quietly. "And I'm your new teacher."
     The  room  seemed  suddenly  flooded  with illumination, as if the roof had
moved  back;  and the trees were full of singing birds. Bob Spaulding sat with a
spitball he had just made, hidden in his hand. After a half hour of listening to
Miss Taylor, he quietly let the spitball drop to the floor.
     That  day, after class, he brought in a bucket of water and a rag and began
to wash the board.
     "What's  this?"  She  turned  to  him  from  her  desk,  where she had been
correcting spelling papers.
     "The boards are kind of dirty." Said Bob, at work.
     "Yes. I know. Are you sure you want to clean them?"
     "I suppose I should have asked permission." He said, halting uneasily.
     "I  think  we can pretend you did." She replied, smiling, and at this smile
he  finished  the boards in an amazing burst of speed and pounded the erasers so
furiously that the air was full of snow, it seemed, outside the open window.
     "Let's see." Said Miss Taylor. "You are Bob Spaulding, aren't you?"
     "Yes, I'm."
     "Well, thank you, Bob."
     "Could I do them every day?" He asked.
     "Don't you think you should let the other try?"
     "I'd like to do them." He said. "Every day."
     "We'll try it for a while and see." She said.
     He lingered.
     "I think you'd better run home." She said, finally.
     "Good night." He walked slowly and was gone.

     
     The  next  morning  he  happened by the place where she took board and room
just as she was coming out to walk to school.
     "Well, here I am." He said.
     "And do you know." She said. "I'm not surprised."
     They walked together.
     "May I carry your books?" He asked.
     "Why, thank you, Bob."
     "It's nothing." He said, taking them.
     They  walked  for  a few minutes and he did no say a word. She glanced over
and slightly down at him and saw how at ease he was and how happy he seemed, and
she  decided  to  let him break the silence, but he never did. When they reached
the  edge  of the school ground he gave the books back to her. "I guess I better
leave you here." He said. "The other kids wouldn't understand."
     "I'm not sure I do, either, Bob." Said Miss Taylor.
     "Why we're friends." Said Bob earnestly and with a great natural honesty.
     "Bob --" She started to say.
     "I'll be in class." He said.
     And he was in class, and he was there after school every night for the next
two  weeks,  never  saying  a  word, quietly washing the boards and cleaning the
eraser and rolling up the maps while she worked at her papers, and there was the
clock  silence  of  four o'clock, the silence of sun going down in the slow sky,
the  silence  with the catlike sound of erasers patted together, and the drip of
water  from a moving sponge, and rustle and turn of papers and scratch of a pen,
and  perhaps  the buzz of a fly banging with a tiny high anger the tallest clean
pane  windows  in  the  room.  Sometimes  the silence would go on this way until
almost  five,  when Miss Taylor would find Bob Spaulding in the last seat of the
room, sitting and looking at her silently, waiting for further orders.
     "Well, it's time to go home." Miss Taylor would say, getting up.
     "Yes'm."
     And he would run to fetch and coat. He would also lock the school-room door
for  her unless the janitor was coming in later. Then they would lock out of the
school  and across the yard , which was empty, the janitor taking down the chain
swing  slowly  on his stepladder, the sun behind the umbrella trees. They talked
of all sorts of things.
     "And what are you going to be, Bob, when you grow up?"
     "A writer." He said.
     "Oh, that is a big ambition: it takes a lot of work."
     "I know, but I'm going to try." He said. "I've read a lot."
     "Bob, haven't you anything to do after school?"
     "How do you mean?"
     I mean, I hate to see you kept in so much, washing the boards."
     "I like it." He said. "I never do what I don't like."
     "But nevertheless."
     "No,  I've  got to that." He said. He thought for a while and said "Do me a
favour, Miss Taylor?"
     "It all depends."
     "I  walk  every Saturday from out around Buetrick Street along the creek to
Lake  Michigan. There's a lot of butterflies and crayfish and birds. Maybe you'd
like to walk, too."
     "Thank you." She said.
     "Then you'll come?"
     "I'm afraid not."
     "Don't you think it'd be fun?"
     "Yes, I'm sure of that, but I'm going to be busy."
     He started to ask what, but stopped.
     "I  take  along sandwiches." He said. " Ham-and-pickle ones. And orange pop
and  just  walk  along,  taking my time. I get down to the lake about non and go
back  and get home about three o'clock. It makes a real fine day, and I wish you
come.  Do  you  collect butterflies? I have a big collection. We could start one
for you."
     "Thanks, Bob, but no, perhaps some other time."
     He looked at her and said. "I shouldn't have asked you, should I?"
     "You have every right to ask anything you want to." She said.
     A  few  days  later  found an old copy of 'Great Expectation', which she no
longer  wanted,  and  gave  it to Bob. He was very grateful and took it home and
stayed  up  that night and read it through and talked about it the next morning.
Each  day  now  he met her just beyond sight of boarding house and many days she
would  start  to say "Bob --" and tell hem not to come to meet her any more, but
she  never  finished  saying it, and be talked her about Dickens and Kipling and
Poe and others, coming and going to school. She found a butterfly on her desk on
Friday  morning.  She  almost waved it away before she found it was dead and had
been  placed  there  while  she was out of the room. She glanced at Bob over the
heads  of  her  other  students,  but he was looking his book; not reading, just
looking at it.
     It  was  about this time that she found impossible to call on Bob to recite
in  class.  She  would  hover  her  pencil about his name and then call the next
person up or down the list. Nor would she look at him while they were walking to
or  from  school.  But  on  several  late  afternoons as he moved his arm on the
blackboard,  sponging  away  the  arithmetic symbols, she found herself glancing
over at him for a few second at a time before she returned to her papers.
     And  then  on  Saturday  morning he was standing in the middle of the creek
with  his  overalls  rolled  up to his knees, kneeling down the catch a crayfish
under  a  rock, when he looked up and there on the edge of the return stream was
Miss Ann Taylor.
     "Well, here I am." She said, laughing.
     "And do you know," he said "I'm not surprised."
     "Show me the crayfish and the butterflies." She said.
     They  walked  down to the lake and sat on the sand with a warm wind blowing
softly  about them, fluttering her hair and the ruffle of her blouse, and he sat
a  few  yards back from her and they ate the ham-and-pickle sandwiches and drank
the orange pop solemnly.
     "Gee, this is swell." He said. "This is the swellest time ever in my life."
     "I didn't think I would ever come on a picnic like this." She said.
     "With some kid." He said.
     "I'm comfortable, however." She said.
     "That's good news."
     They said little else during the afternoon.
     "This  is  all  wrong," he said later "and I can't figure out why it should
be.  Just  walking  along  and  catching old butterflies and crayfish and eating
sandwiches.  But Mom and Dad'd rib the heck out of me if they knew, and the kids
would,  too.  And  the  other  teachers, I suppose, would laugh at you, wouldn't
they?"
     "I'm afraid so."
     "I guess we better not do any more butterfly catching, then."
     "I don't exactly understand how I came here at all." she said.
     And the day was over.
     That  was  about  all  there  was  to  the  meeting  of  Ann Taylor and Bob
Spaulding,  two  or  three  monarch  butterflies,  a  copy  of  Dickens, a dozen
crayfish,  four  sandwiches  and  two  bottles of Orange Crush. The next Monday,
quite  unexpectedly,  though  he waited a long time, Bob did not see Miss Taylor
come  out  to walk to school, but discovered later that she had left earlier and
was  already at school. Also, Monday night, she left early, with a headache, and
another teacher finished her last class. He walked by her boarding house but did
not see her anywhere, and he was afraid to ring bell and inquire.
     On  Tuesday  night after school they were both in the silent room again, he
sponging  the  board  contently, as if this might go on forever, and she seated,
working  on her papers as if she, too, would be in this room and this particular
peace and happiness forever, when suddenly the courthouse clock struck. It was a
block  away  and this great bronze boom shuddered one's body and made the ash of
time  shake  away  off  your bones and slide through your blood, making you seem
older by the minute. Stunned by that clock, you could not but sense the crashing
flow  of time, and as the clock said five o'clock Miss Taylor suddenly looked up
at it for a long time, and then she put down her pen.
     "Bob." She said.
     He  turned,  startled.  Neither of them had spoken in the peaceful and good
hour before.
     "Will you come here?" She asked.
     He put down the sponge slowly.
     "Yes." He said.
     "Bob, I want you sit down."
     "Yes'm."
     She  looked  at  him  intently  for  a moment until he looked away. "Bob, I
wonder if you know what I'm going to talk to you about. Do you know?"
     "Yes."
     "Maybe it'd be a good idea if you told me, first."
     "About us." He said, at last.
     "How old are you, Bob?"
     "Going on fourteen."
     "You're thirteen years old."
     He winced. "Yes'm."
     "And do you know how old I am?"
     "Yes'm. I heard. Twenty-four."
     "Twenty-four."
     "I'll be twenty-four in ten years, almost." He said.
     "But unfortunately you're not twenty-four now."
     "No, but sometimes I feel twenty-four."
     "Yes, and sometimes you almost act it."
     "Do I really."
     "Now sit still there, don't bound around, we've a lot to discuss. It's very
important that we understand exactly what is happening, don't you agree?"
     "Yes, I guess so."
     "First,  let's  admit  that we are the greatest and the best friends of the
world.  Let's  admit  I  have  never  had  a student like you, nor I had as much
affection for any boy I've ever know." He flushed at this. She went on. "And let
me  speak  for  you  -- you've found me to be the nicest teacher of all teachers
you've ever know."
     "Oh, more than that." He said.
     "Perhaps  more than that, but there are facts to be faced and an entire way
of  life  to  be  considered.  I've thought this over for a good many days, Bob.
Don't think I missed anything, or been unaware of my own feelings in the matter.
Under  any normal circumstances our friendship would be odd indeed. But then you
are  no  ordinary  boy.  I know my self pretty well, I think, and I know I'm not
sick, either mentally or physically, and that whatever has evolved here has been
true  regard  for your character and goodness, Bob; but those are not the things
we  consider  in  this  world, Bob, unless they occur in a man of certain age. I
don't know if I'm saying this right."
     "It's  all  right."  He said. "It's just if I was ten years older and about
fifteen  inches  taller it'd make all the difference, and that's silly," he said
"to go by tall a person is."
     "The world hasn't found it so."
     "I'm not all the world." He protested.
     "I  know it seem foolish." She said. "When you feel very grown up and right
and  have  nothing  to be ashamed of. You have nothing at all to be ashamed off,
Bob,  remember that. You have been very honest and good, and I hope I have been,
too."
     "You have." He said.
     "In  an  ideal  climate,  Bob, maybe someday they will be able to judge the
oldness of a person's mind so accurately that you can say 'This is a man, though
is  body  is  only  thirteen; by miracle of circumstances and fortune, this is a
man,  with  a  man's  recognition  of responsibility and position and duty'; but
until  that  day, Bob, I'm afraid we are going to have to go by ages and heights
and ordinary way in an ordinary world."
     "I don't like that." He said.
     "Perhaps  I  don't like it, either, but do you want to end up far unhappier
than you are now? Do you want both of us to be unhappy? Which we certainly would
be.  There  really is no way to do anything about us -- it is so strange even to
try to talk about us."
     "Yes'm."
     "But  at least we know all about us and the fact of that we have been right
and  fair  and  good and there is nothing wrong with our knowing each other, nor
did  we  ever  intended that it should be, for both understand how impossible it
is, don't we?"
     "Yes, I know. But I can't help it."
     "Now  we  must  decide  what to do about it." She said. "Now only you and I
know  about  this.  Later,  other  might know. I can secure a transfer from this
school to another one --"
     "No!"
     "Or I can have you transferred to another school."
     "You don't have to do that." He said.
     "Why?"
     "We're  moving.  My  folks  and  I,  we're  going to live in Madison. We're
leaving next week."
     "It has nothing to do with all this, has it?"
     "No,  no,  everything's  all  right. It's just that my father has a new job
there. It's only fifty miles away. I can see you, can't I, when I come to town?"
     "Do you think that would be a good idea?"
     "No, I guess not."
     They sat awhile in the silent schoolroom.
     "When did all of this happen?" he said, helplessly.
     "I  don't  know."  She  said.  "Nobody  ever  knows. They haven't known for
thousands  of  years.  And I don't think they ever will. People either like each
other  or don't, and sometimes two people like each other who shouldn't. I can't
explain myself, and certainly you can't explain you."
     "I guess I'd better get home." He said.
     "You're not mad at me, are you?"
     "Oh, gosh no, I could never be mad at you."
     "There's one more thing. I want you to remember, there are compensations in
life.  There  always are, or we wouldn't go on living. You don't feel well, now;
neither do I. But something will happen to fix that. Do you believe that?"
     "I'd like to."
     "Well, it's true."
     "If only." He said.
     "What?"
     "If only you'd wait for me." He blurted.
     "Ten years?"
     "I'd be twenty-four then."
     "But  I'd  be thirty-four and another person entirely, perhaps. No, I don't
think it can be done."
     "Wouldn't you like it to be done?" He cried.
     "Yes." She said quietly. "It's silly and it wouldn't work, but I would like
it very much."
     He sat there a long time.
     "I'll never forget you." He said.
     "It's  nice  for  you to say that, even though it can be true, because life
isn't that way. You'll forget."
     "I'll never forget. I'll find a way of never forgetting you." He said.
     She got up and went to erase the boards.
     "I'll help you." He said.
     "No,  no."  She  said. "You go on now, get home, and no more tending to the
boards after school. I'll assign Helen Stevens to do it."
     He left school. Looking back, outside, he saw Miss Ann Taylor, for the last
time,  at  the  board,  slowly washing out chalked words, her hand moving up and
down.

     
     He  moved  away  from  the  town  the next week and gone for sixteen years.
Though he was only fifty miles away, he never got down to Green Town again until
he  was almost thirty and married, and then one spring they were driving through
on their way to Chicago and stopped off for a day.
     Bob  left  his  wife  at the hotel and walked around town and finally asked
about  Miss  Ann  Taylor,  but  no-one remembered at first, and then one of them
remembered.
     "Oh, yes, the pretty teacher. She died in 1936, not longer after you left."
     Had she ever married? No, come to think of it, she never had.
     He  walked  out to the cemetery in the afternoon and found her stone, which
said  "Ann  Taylor, born 1910, died 1936." And he thought, twenty-six years old.
Why I'm three years older than you are now, Miss Taylor.
     Later  in the day the people in the town saw Bob Spaulding's wife strolling
to  meet him under the elm trees and the oak trees, and they all turned to watch
her  pass,  for  her face shifted with bright shadows as she walked; she was the
fine  peaches of summer in the snow of winter, and she was cool milk for cereals
on  a  hot early-summer morning. And this was one of those rare few days in time
when  the  climate  was  balanced  like a maple leaf between wind that blow just
right,  one  of  those  days that should have been named, everyone agreed, after
Robert Spaulding's wife. 