                                 
                          Almost the End of the World
                                      1957

     Sighting Rock Junction, Arizona, at noon on 22 August 1961, Willy Bersinger
let  his  miner's boot rest easy on the jalopy's' accelerator and talked quietly
to his partner, Samuel Fitts.
     'Yes, sir, Samuel, it's great hitting town. After a couple of months out at
the  mine, a juke-box looks like a stained-glass window to me. We need the town;
without  it,  we  might wake some morning and find ourselves all jerked beef and
petrified rock. And then, of course, the town needs us, too.'
     'How's that?' asked Samuel Fitts.
     'Well, we bring things into the town that it hasn't got -mountains, creeks,
desert night, stars, things like that...'
     And  it  was  true,  thought Willy, driving along. Set a man way out in the
strange lands and he fills with wellsprings of silence. Silence of sagebrush, or
a  mountain  lion  purring  like  a  warm  beehive at noon. Silence of the river
shallows  deep  in  the  canyons. All this a man takes in. Opening his mouth, in
town, he breathes it out.
     'Oh,  how  I  love to climb in that old barber-shop chair,' Willy admitted.
'And see all those city men lined up under the naked-lady calendars staring back
at me, waiting while I chew over my philosophy of rocks and mirages and the kind
of  Time  that  just  sits  out there in the hills waiting for Man to go away. I
exhale  -  and that wilderness settles in a fine dust on the customers. Oh, it's
nice, me talking, soft and easy, up and down, on and on...'
     In  his  mind  he  saw the customers' eyes strike fire. Some day they would
yell  and  rabbit  for  the  hills, leaving families and time-clock civilization
behind.
     'It's  good  to  feel  wanted,'  said Willy. 'You and me, Samuel, are basic
necessities for those city-dwelling folks. Gangway, Rock Junction!'
     And with a tremulous tin whistling they steamed across city limits into awe
and wonder.
     They  had  driven perhaps a hundred feet through town when Willy kicked the
brakes.  A  great  shower of rust flakes sifted from the jalopy fenders. The car
stood cowering in the road.
     'Something's  wrong,'  said  Willy.  He squinted his lynx eyes this way and
that. He snuffed his huge nose. 'You feel it? You smell it?'
     'Sure,' said Samuel, uneasily, 'but, what...?'
     Willy scowled. 'You ever see a sky-blue cigar-store?'
     'Never did.'
     'There's one over there. Ever see a pink dog-kennel, an orange out-house, a
lilac-coloured bird-bath? There, there, and over there!'
     Both men had risen slowly now to stand on the creaking floorboards.
     'Samuel,'   whispered  Willy.  'Every  kindling  pile,  porch-rail,  gewgaw
gingerbread, fence, fireplug, garbage truck, the whole blasted town, look at it!
It was painted just an hour ago!'
     'No!' said Samuel Fitts.
     But  there  stood the band pavilion, the Baptist church, the firehouse, the
orphanage,  the  railroad  depot,  the  country  jail,  the cat hospital and the
bungalows,  cottages,  greenhouses,  shop-signs, mailboxes, telephone poles, and
trash-bins,  around  and  in  between,  and  they  all  blazed with corn yellow,
crab-apple  greens,  circus  reds.  From water-tank to tabernacle, each building
looked  as  if God had jig-sawed it, coloured it, and set it out to dry a moment
ago.
     Not only that, but where weeds had always been, now cabbages, green onions,
and  lettuce  crammed  every yard, crowds of curious sunflowers clocked the noon
sky,  and pansies lay under unnumbered trees cool as summer puppies, their great
damp  eyes  peering over rolled lawns mint-green as Irish travel posters. To top
it  all, ten boys, faces scrubbed, hair brilliantined, shirts, pants, and tennis
shoes clean s chunks of snow, raced by.
     'The  town,' said Willy, watching them run, 'has gone mad. Mystery. Mystery
everywhere.  Samuel,  what  kind  of tyrant's come to power? What law was passed
that  keeps  boys  clean, drives people to paint every toothpick, every geranium
pot? Smell that smell? There's fresh wallpaper in all those houses! Doom in some
horrible shape has tried arid tested these people. Human nature doesn't just get
this  picky  perfect  overnight. I'll bet all the gold I panned last month those
attics,  those cellars are cleaned out, all shipshape. I'll bet you a real Thing
fell on this town.'
     'Why,  I  can  almost  hear  the  cherubim  singing  in the Garden,' Samuel
protested. 'How you figure Doom? Shake my hand. I'll bet and take your money!'
     The  jalopy  swerved  around  a  corner  through  a  wind  that  smelled of
turpentine  and  whitewash.  Samuel  threw  out  a gum wrapper, snorting. He was
somewhat  surprised  at  what  happened  next.  An old man in new overalls, with
mirror-bright shoes, ran out in the street, grabbed the crumpled gum wrapper and
shook his fist after the departing jalopy.
     'Doom...'  Samuel  Fitts  looked  back,  his voice fading. 'Well.., the bet
still stands.'
     They  opened  the door upon a barber-shop teeming with customers whose hair
had  already been cut and oiled, whose faces were shaved close and pink, yet who
sat  waiting  to vault back into the chairs where three barbers flourished their
shears and combs. A stock-market uproar filled the room as customers and barbers
all talked at once.
     When  Willy  and  Samuel entered, the uproar ceased instantly. It was as if
they had fired a shot-gun blast through the door.
     'Sam.. .Willy...'
     In  the  silence  some of the sitting men stood up and some of the standing
men sat down, slowly, staring.
     'Samuel,' said Willy out of the corner of his mouth, 'I feel like the Death
standing  here.'  Aloud  he  said, 'Howdy! Here I am to finish my lecture on the
"Interesting Flora and Fauna of the Great American Desert", and –
     'No!'
     Antonelli,  the  head  barber, rushed frantically at Willy, seized his arm,
clapped  his  hand  over  Willy's  mouth like a snuffer on a candle. 'Willy,' he
whispered,  looking  apprehensively over his shoulder at his customers. 'Promise
me  one  thing:  buy a needle and thread, sew up your lips. Silence, man, if you
value your life!'
     Willy  and  Samuel  felt  themselves  hurried  forward.  Two  already  neat
customers  leapt  out  of the barber chairs without being asked. As they stepped
into  the  chairs,  the  two  miners glimpsed their own images in the flyspecked
mirror.
     'Samuel, there we are! Look! Compare!'
     'Why.'  said  Samuel,  blinking,  'we're  the only men in Rock Junction who
really  need  a shave and a haircut.' Strangers!' Antonelli laid them out in the
chairs as if anaesthetize them quickly. 'You don't know what strangers you are!'
     'Why,  we've  only  been  gone  a  couple  of  months...'  A steaming towel
inundated  Willy's face; he subsided with muffled cries. In steaming darkness he
heard Antonelli's and urgent voice.
     'We'll  fix  you  to  look  like  everyone  else.  Not that the you look is
dangerous,  no, but the kind of talk you miners talk might upset folks at a time
like this...'
     'Time  like  this, hell!' Willy lifted the seething towel. bleary eye fixed
Antonelli. 'What's wrong with Rock Junction?'
     'Not  just  Rock  Junction.'  Antonelli gazed off at some incredible mirage
beyond the horizon. 'Phoenix, Tucson, Denver. All the cities in America! My wife
and  I are going as tourists to Chicago next week. Imagine Chicago all paint-and
clean  and  new.  The  Pearl of the Orient they call it! Pittsburgh, Cincinnati,
Buffalo,  the  same! All because... well… get up now, walk over, and switch on
that television set against the wall.'
     Willy  handed  Antonelli the steaming towel, walked over, on the television
set,  listened to it hum, fiddled with the dials, and waited. White snow drifted
down the screen
     "Try the radio now,' said Antonelli.
     Willy felt everyone watch as he twisted the radio dial station to station.
     'Hell,' he said at last, 'both your television and radio are
     'No,' said Antonelli, simply.
     Willy lay back down in the chair and closed his eyes.
     Antonelli leaned forward, breathing hard.
     "Listen,'he said.

     
     'Imagine  four  weeks  ago,  a  late  Saturday  morning, women and children
staring  at  clowns  and  magicians  on TV. In beauty shops, women staring at TV
fashions.  In  the  barbershop  and  hardware stores, men staring at baseball or
trout  fishing.  Everybody everywhere in the civilized world starling. No sound,
no motion, except on the little black and white screens.
     ‘And then, in the middle of all that staring...’
     Antonelli paused to lift up one corner of the broiling cloth.
     ‘Sunspots on the sun,’ he said.
     Willy stiffened.
     ‘Biggest  damn  sunspots  in  the  history of mortal man, said Antonelli.
‘Whole  damn  world  flooded with electricity Wiped every TV screen clear as a
whistle, leaving nothing and, after that, more nothing.’
     His  voice was remote as the voice of a man describing an Arctic landscape.
He lathered Willy’s face not looking at what he was doing. Willy peered across
the  barber-shop,  at the soft snow falling down and down that humming screen in
an eternal winter. He could almost hear the rabbit-thumping of all the hearts in
the shop.
     Antonelli continued his funeral oration.
     ‘It  took  us  all that first day to realize what had happened. Two hours
after  that first sunspot storm hit, every TV repairman in the United States was
on  the road. Everyone figured it was just their own set. With the radios conked
out  too  it  was  only  that  night  when  newsboys,  like in the old days, ran
headlines  through  the  streets  that we got the shock about the sunspots maybe
going on — for the rest of our lives!’
     The customers murmured.
     Antonelli’s hand, holding the razor, shook. He had to wait.
     ‘All  that  blankness, that empty stuff falling down, falling down inside
our  television sets, oh, I tell you, it gave everyone the willies It was like a
good  friend  who talks to you in your front room and suddenly shuts up and lies
there, pale, and you know he’s dead and you begin to turn cold yourself.
     ‘That  first  night,  there  was  a  run  on  the  town’s movie houses.
Drug-store  fizzed  up  two  hundred vanilla, three hundred chocolate sodas that
first  night  of the Calamity. But you can’t buy movies and sodas every night.
What then? Phone your in-laws for canasta or parchesi?’
     ‘Might as well,’ observed Willy, ‘blow your brains out.’
     ‘Sure, but people had to get out of their haunted houses.
     Walking  through  their  parlours  was like whistling past a graveyard. All
that silence —
     ‘Willy sat up a little. ‘Speaking of silence —'
     'On  the  third  night,’ said Antonelli, quickly, ‘we were all still in
shock.  We  were saved from outright lunacy by one woman. Somewhere in this town
this  woman strolled out of the house, and came back a minute later. In one hand
she held a paintbrush. And in the other...’
     ‘A bucket of paint,’ said Willy.
     Everyone smiled, seeing how well he understood.
     ‘If  those  psychologists ever strike off 10 gold medals, they should pin
one  on  that  woman and every woman like her in every little town who saved our
world  from  coming  to  an  end.  Those  women who instinctively wandered in at
twilight, and brought us the miracle cure...'
     Willy  imagined  it.  There  were the glaring fathers and the scowling sons
slumped  by their dead TV sets waiting for the damn things to shout Ball One, or
Strike  Two!  And  then they looked up from their wake and there in the twilight
saw  the  fair  women  of  great  purpose  and dignity standing and waiting with
brushes and paint. And a glorious light kindled their cheeks and eyes...’
     ‘Lord,  it  spread  like  wildfire!’ said Antonelli. ‘House to house,
city to city. Jigsaw-puzzle craze, 1932; yo-yocraze, 1928, were nothing compared
with  the  Everybody  Do Everything Craze that blew this town to smithereens and
glued  it  back again. Men everywhere slapped paint on anything that stood still
ten  seconds;  men  everywhere climbed steeples straddled fences, fell off roofs
and  ladders  by  the  hundreds.  Women painted cupboards, closets; kids painted
toys, wagons, kites. All towns, everywhere, the same, where people had forgotten
how  to  waggle  their jaws, make their own talk. I tell you, men were moving in
mindless  circles,  dazed,  until  their  wives shoved a brush in their hand and
pointed them towards the nearest unpainted wall!’
      'Looks like you finished the job,’ said Willy.
     ‘Paint  stores  ran out of paint three times the first week.’ Antonelli
surveyed  the  town  with  pride.  ‘The  painting  could only last so long, of
course,  unless  you start painting hedges spraying grass blades one by one. Now
that  the attics and cellars are cleaned out, too, our fire is seeping off into,
well—women  canning  fruit again, making tomato pickles, raspberry, strawberry
preserves.  Basement  shelves  are  loaded.  Big  church  doings, too. Organized
bowling,  box  socials,  beer  busts. Music shop sold five hundred ukuleles, two
hundred  twelve  steel  guitars,  four hundred sixty ocarinas and kazoos in four
weeks.  I’m  studying  trombone. Mac, there, the flute. Band concerts Thursday
and  Sunday  nights.  Hand-crank  ice-cream  machines?  Bert  Tyson’s sold two
hundred last week alone. Twenty-eight days, ‘Willy, twenty-eight days.’
     ‘Willy  Bersinger  and Samuel Fitts sat there, trying to imagine and feel
the shock, the crushing blow.
     ‘Twenty-eight days, the barber-shop jammed with men, getting shaved twice
a day so they can sit and stare at customers like they might _say _something,’
said  Antonelli,  shaving  Willy now. ‘Once, remember, before TV, barbers were
supposed to be great talkers. Well, this month it took us one whole week to warm
up,  get  the rust out. No quality, but our quantity is ferocious. When you came
in  you  heard  the  commotion.  Oh, it’ll simmer down when we get used to the
great Oblivion...’
     ‘Is _that_ what everyone calls it?’
     ‘It sure looked that way to most of us, there for a while.’
     Willy Bersinger laughed quietly and shook his head.
     ‘Now  I know why you didn’t want me to start lecturing when I walked in
that door.’
     Of course, thought Willy, why didn’t I see it right off? Four short weeks
ago  the  wilderness  fell  on this town and shook it good and scared it plenty.
Because  of the sunspots, all the towns in all the western world have had enough
silence to last them ten years. And here I come by with another doze of silence,
my  easy  talk about deserts and nights with no moon and only stars and just the
little  sound of the sand blowing along the empty river bottoms. No telling what
might  have  happened  if  Antonelli  hadn’t  shut me up. I see me, tarred and
feathered, leaving town.
     ‘Antonelli,’ he said aloud. ‘Thanks.’
     ‘For  nothing,’  said  Antonelli.  He  picked  up  his comb and shears.
‘Now, short on the sides, long in back?’
     ‘Long  on  the  sides,’  said  Willy Bersinger, closing his eyes again,
‘short in back.’
     An  hour  later  Willy  and  Samuel  climbed  back into their jalopy, which
someone,  they  never  knew  who, had washed and polished while they were in the
barber-shop.
     ‘Doom,’  Samuel  handed  over a small sack of gold-dust. With a capital
D.’
     ‘Keep it.’ Willy sat, thoughtful, behind the wheel.
     ‘Let's  take this money and hit out for Phoenix, Tucson, Kansas City, why
not?  Right  now, we’re a surplus commodity around here. We won’t be welcome
again  until  those  little  begin  to dance and sing. Sure as hell, if we stay,
we’ll  open our traps and the desert monsters and chicken hawks the wilderness
will slip out and make us trouble.’
     'Willy squinted at the highway straight ahead.
     ‘Pearl  of  the Orient, that’s what he said. Can you imagine that dirty
old  town,  Chicago, all painted up fresh and as a babe in the morning light? We
just got to see Chicago, by God!’
     'He started the car, let it idle, and looked at the town.
     ‘Man  survives,’ he murmured. ‘Man endures. Too bad we missed the big
change. It must have been a fierce thing, a time of trials and testings. Samuel,
I don’t recall, do you? What have _we_ ever seen on TV?’
     ‘Saw a woman wrestle a bear two falls out of three, one night.'
     -Who won?’
     ‘Damned if I know. She —‘
     But  then  the  jalopy moved and took Willy Bersinger and Samuel Fitts with
it, their hair cut, oiled, and neat on their sweet-smelling skulls, their cheeks
pink-shaven,  their  finger-nails  flashing  the  sun. They sailed under clipped
green,  fresh-watered  trees,  through  flowered  lanes,  past  daffodil, lilac,
violet, rose, and peppermint-coloured houses on the dustless road.
     'Pearl of the Orient, here we come!’
      'A perfumed dog, with permed hair, ran out, nipped their tyres and barked,
until they were gone away and completely out sight.
