antiqueRayBradburyThe October CountryundRayBradburycalibre
0.8.6522.8.201256fc205f-c456-4efa-9c4b-9ba3c63c36b11.0
Fifteen of the stories included in this collection were written before
my twenty-sixth birthday and published in August Derleth's Arkham House
edition of my first book DARK CARNIVAL. This book has been out of print
for some years and I welcomethe opportunity given me by the editors of
Ballantine Books to select, edit, and in some cases rewrite my favorite
stories from that early work. For my later readers, THE OCTOBER COUNTRY
will present a side of my writing that is probably unfamiliar to them,
and a type of story that I have rarely done since 1946. Looking back on
those years I cannot help but express again my gratitude to August
Derleth, who was my first publisher-editor, and to my hardest-working
and most patient teachers, Leigh Brackett and Henry Kuttner.
R. B.
    <emphasis>For</emphasis></p><empty-line /><p><emphasis>who else but</emphasis></p>

August Derleth
    <emphasis></emphasis></p><empty-line /><p><emphasis></emphasis></p>

    <emphasis>THE OCTOBER COUNTRY</emphasis></p><empty-line /><empty-line /><empty-line /><p>

. . . that country where it is always turning late in the year. That
country where the hills are fog and the rivers are mist; where noons go
quickly, dusks and twilights linger, and midnights stay. That country
composed in the main of cellars, sub-cellars, coalbins, closets, attics,
and pantries faced away from the sun. That country whose people are
autumn people, thinking only autumn thoughts. Whose people passing at
night on the empty walks sound like rain . . .
The Dwarf
Aimee watched the sky, quietly.
Tonight was one of those motionless hot summer nights. The concrete pier
empty, the strong red, white, yellow bulbs like insects in the air above
the wooden emptiness. The managers of the various carnival pitches
stood, like melting wax dumrnies, eyes staring blindly, not talking, all
down the line.
Two customers had passed through an hour before. Those two lonely people
were now in the roller coaster, screaming murderously as it plummeted
down the blazing night, around one emptiness after another.
Aimee moved slowly across the strand, a few worn wooden hoopla rings
sticking to her wet hands. She stopped behind the ticket booth that
fronted the MIRROR MAZE. She saw herself grossly misrepresented in three
rippled mirrors outside the Maze. A thousand tired replicas of herself
dissolved in the corridor beyond, hot images among so much clear
coolness.
She stepped inside the ticket booth and stood looking a long while at
Ralph Banghart's thin neck. He clenched an unlit cigar between his long
uneven yellow teeth as he laid out a battered game of solitaire on the
ticket shelf.
When the roller coaster wailed and fell in its terrible avalanche again,
she was reminded to speak.
"What kind of people go up in roller coasters?"
Ralph Banghart worked his cigar a full thirty seconds. "People wanna
die. That rollie coaster's the handiest thing to dying there is." He sat
listening to the faint sound of rifle shots from the shooting gallery.
"This whole damn carny business's crazy. For instance, that dwarf. You
seen him? Every night, pays his dime, runs in the Mirror Maze all the
way back through to Screwy Louie's Room. You should see this little runt
head back there. My God!"
"Oh, yes," said Aimee, remembering. "I always wonder what it's like to
be a dwarf. I always feel sorry when I see him."
"I could play him like an accordion."
"Don't say that!"
"My Lord." Ralph patted her thigh with a free hand. "The way you carry
on about guys you never even met." He shook his head and chuckled. "Him
and his secret. Only he don't know I know, see? Boy howdy!"
"It's a hot night." She twitched the large wooden hoops nervously on her
damp fingers.
"Don't change the subject. He'll be here, rain or shine."
Aimee shifted her weight.
Ralph seized her elbow. "Hey! You ain't mad? You wanna see that dwarf,
don't you? Sh!" Ralph turned. "Here he comes now!"
The Dwarf's hand, hairy and dark, appeared all by itself reaching up
into the booth window with a silver dime. An invisible person called,
"One!" in a high, child's voice.
Involuntarily, Aimee bent forward.
The Dwarf looked up at her, resembling nothing more than a dark-eyed,
dark-haired, ugly man who has been locked in a winepress, squeezed and
wadded down and down, fold on fold, agony on agony, until a bleached,
outraged mass is left, the face bloated shapelessly, a face you know
must stare wide-eyed and awake at two and three and four o'clock in the
morning, lying flat in bed, only the body asleep.
Ralph tore a yellow ticket in half. "One!"
The Dwarf, as if frightened by an approaching storm, pulled his black
coatlapels tightly about his throat and waddled swiftly. A moment later,
ten thousand lost and wandering dwarfs wriggled between the mirror
flats, like frantic dark beetles, and vanished.
"Quick!"
Ralph squeezed Aimee along a dark passage behind the mirrors. She felt
him pat her all the way back through the tunnel to a thin partition with
a peekhole.
"This is rich," he chuckled. "Go on--look."
Aimee hesitated, then put her face to the partition.
"You see him?" Ralph whispered.
Aimee felt her heart beating. A full minute passed.
There stood the Dwarf in the middle of the small blue room. His eyes
were shut. He wasn't ready to open them yet. Now, now he opened his
eyelids and looked at a large mirror set before him. And what he saw in
the mirror made him smile. He winked, he pirouetted, he stood sidewise,
he waved, he bowed, he did a little clumsy dance.
And the mirror repeated each motion with long, thin arms, with a tall,
tall body, with a huge wink and an enormous repetition of the dance,
ending in a gigantic bow!
"Every night the same thing," whispered Ralph in Aimee's ear. "Ain't
that rich?"
Aimee turned her head and looked at Ralph steadily out of her motionless
face, for a long time, and she said nothing. Then, as if she could not
help herself, she moved her head slowly and very slowly back to stare
once more through the opening. She held her breath. She felt her eyes
begin to water.
Ralph nudged her, whispering.
"Hey, what's the little gink doin' now?"
They were drinking coffee and not looking at each other in the ticket
booth half an hour later, when the Dwarf came out of the mirrors. He
took his hat off and started to approach the booth, when he saw Aimee
and hurried away.
"He wanted something," said Aimee.
"Yeah." Ralph squashed out his cigarette, idly. "I know what, too. But
he hasn't got the nerve to ask. One night in this squeaky little voice
he says, 'I bet those mirrors are expensive.' Well, I played dumb. I
said yeah they were. He sort of looked at me, waiting, and when I didn't
say any more, he went home, but next night he said, 'I bet those mirrors
cost fifty, a hundred bucks.' I bet they do, I said. I laid me out a
hand of solitaire."
"Ralph," she said.
He glanced up. "Why you look at me that way?"
"Ralph," she said, "why don't you sell him one of your extra ones?"
"Look, Aimee, do I tell you how to run your hoop circus?"
"How much do those mirrors cost?"
"I can get 'em secondhand for thirty-five bucks."
"Why don't you tell him where he can buy one, then?"
"Aimee, you're not smart." He laid his hand on her knee. She moved her
knee away. "Even if I told him where to go, you think he'd buy one? Not
on your life. And why? He's self-conscious. Why, if he even knew I knew
he was flirtin' around in front of that mirror in Screwy Louie's Room,
he'd never come back. He plays like he's goin' through the Maze to get
lost, like everybody else. Pretends like he don't care about that
special room. Always waits for business to turn bad, late nights, so he
has that room to himself. What he does for entertainment on nights when
business is good, God knows. No, sir, he wouldn't dare go buy a mirror
anywhere. He ain't got no friends, and even if he did he couldn't ask
them to buy him a thing like that. Pride, by God, pride. Only reason he
even mentioned it to me is I'm practically the only guy he knows.
Besides, look at him--he ain't got enough to buy a mirror like those. He
might be savin' up, but where in hell in the world today can a dwarf
work? Dime a dozen, drug on the market, outside of circuses."
"I feel awful. I feel sad." Aimee sat staring at the empty boardwalk.
"Where does he live?"
"Flytrap down on the waterfront. The Ganghes Arms. Why?"
"I'm madly in love with him, if you must know."
He grinned around his cigar. "Aimee," he said. "You and your very funny
jokes."
A warm night, a hot morning, and a blazing noon. The sea was a sheet of
burning tinsel and glass.
Aimee came walking, in the locked-up carnival alleys out over the warm
sea, keeping in the shade, half a dozen sun-bleached magazines under her
arm. She opened a flaking door and called into hot darkness. "Ralph?"
She picked her way through the black hall behind the mirrors, her heels
tacking the wooden floor. "Ralph?"
Someone stirred sluggishly on the canvas cot. "Aimee?"
He sat up and screwed a dim light bulb into the dressing table socket.
He squinted at her, half blinded. "Hey, you look like the cat that
swallowed a canary."
"Ralph, I came about the midget!"
"Dwarf, Aimee honey, dwarf. A midget is in the cells, born that way. A
dwarf is in the glands. . . ."
"Ralph! I just found out the most wonderful thing about him!"
"Honest to God," he said to his hands, holding them out as witnesses to
his disbelief. "This woman! Who in hell gives two cents for some ugly
little --"
"Ralph!" She held out the magazines, her eyes shining. "He's a writer!
Think of that!"
"It's a pretty hot day for thinking." He lay back and examined her,
smiling faintly.
"I just happened to pass the Ganghes Arms, and saw Mr. Greeley, the
manager. He says the typewriter runs all night in Mr. Big's room!"
"Is that his name?" Ralph began to roar with laughter.
"Writes just enough pulp detective stories to live. I found one of his
stories in the secondhand magazine place, and, Ralph, guess what?"
"I'm tired, Aimee."
"This little guy's got a soul as big as all outdoors; he's got every-
thing in his head!"
"Why ain't he writin' for the big magazines, then, I ask you?"
"Because maybe he's afraid--maybe he doesn't know he can do it. That
happens. People don't believe in themselves. But if he only tried, I bet
he could sell stories anywhere in the world."
"Why ain't he rich, I wonder?"
"Maybe because ideas come slow because he's down in the dumps. Who
wouldn't be? So small that way? I bet it's hard to think of anything
except being so small and living in a one-room cheap apartment."
"Hell!" snorted Ralph. "You talk like Florence Nightingale's grandma."
She held up the magazine. "I'll read you part of his crime story. It's
got all the guns and tough people, but it's told by a dwarf. I bet the
editors never guessed the author knew what he was writing about. Oh,
please don't sit there like that, Ralph! Listen."
And she began to read aloud.
"I am a dwarf and I am a murderer. The two things cannot be separated.
One is the cause of the other.
"The man I murdered used to stop me on the street when I was twenty-one,
pick me up in his arms, kiss my brow, croon wildly to me, sing
Rock-a-bye Baby, haul me into meat markets, toss me on the scales and
cry, 'Watch it. Don't weigh your thumb, there, butcher!'
"Do you see how our lives moved toward murder? This fool, this
persecutor of my flesh and soul!
"As for my childhood: my parents were small people, not quite dwarfs,
not quite. My father's inheritance kept us in a doll's house, an amazing
thing like a white-scrolled wedding cake--little rooms, little chairs,
miniature paintings, cameos, ambers with insects caught inside,
everything tiny, tiny, tiny! The world of Giants far away, an ugly rumor
beyond the garden wall. Poor mama, papa! They meant only the best for
me. They kept me, like a porcelain vase, small and treasured, to
themselves, in our ant world, our beehive rooms, our microscopic
library, our land of beetle-sized doors and moth windows. Only now do I
see the magnificent size of my parents' psychosis! They must have
dreamed they would live forever, keeping me like a butterfly under
glass. But first father died, and then fire ate up the little house, the
wasp's nest, and every postage-stamp mirror and saltcellar closet
within. Mama, too, gone! And myself alone, watching the fallen embers,
tossed out into a world of Monsters and Titans, caught in a landslide of
reality, rushed, rolled, and smashed to the bottom of the cliff!
"It took me a year to adjust. A job with a sideshow was unthinkable.
There seemed no place for me in the world. And then, a month ago, the
Persecutor came into my life, clapped a bonnet on my unsuspecting head,
and cried to friends, 'I want you to meet the little woman!'
Aimee stopped reading. Her eyes were unsteady and the magazine shook as
she handed it to Ralph. "You finish it. The rest is a murder story. It's
all right. But don't you see? That little man. That little man."
Ralph tossed the magazine aside and lit a cigarette lazily. "I like
Westerns better."
"Ralph, you got to read it. He needs someone to tell him how good he is
and keep him writing."
Ralph looked at her, his head to one side. "And guess who's going to do
it? Well, well, ain't we just the Saviour's right hand?"
"I won't listen!"
"Use your head, damn it! You go busting in on him he'll think you're
handing him pity. He'll chase you screamin' outa his room."
She sat down, thinking about it slowly, trying to turn it over and see
it from every side. "I don't know. Maybe you're right. Oh, it's not just
pity, Ralph, honest. But maybe it'd look like it to him. I've got to be
awful careful."
He shook her shoulder back and forth, pinching softly, with his fingers.
"Hell, hell, lay off him, is all I ask; you'll get nothing but trouble
for your dough. God, Aimee, I never seen you so hepped on anything.
Look, you and me, let's make it a day, take a lunch, get us some gas,
and just drive on down the coast as far as we can drive; swim, have
supper, see a good show in some little town--to hell with the carnival,
how about it? A damn nice day and no worries. I been savin' a coupla
bucks."
"It's because I know he's different," she said, looking off into
darkness. "It's because he's something we can never be--you and me and
all the rest of us here on the pier. It's so funny, so funny. Life fixed
him so he's good for nothing but carny shows, yet there he is on the
land. And life made us so we wouldn't have to work in the camy shows,
but here we are, anyway, way out here at sea on the pier. Sometimes it
seems a million miles to shore. How come, Ralph, that we got the bodies,
but he's got the brains and can think things we'll never even guess?"
"You haven't even been listening to me!" said Ralph.
She sat with him standing over her, his voice far away. Her eyes were
half shut and her hands were in her lap, twitching.
"I don't like that shrewd look you're getting on," he said, finally.
She opened her purse slowly and took out a small roll of bills and
started counting. "Thirty-five, forty dollars. There. I'm going to phone
Billie Fine and have him send out one of those tall-type mirrors to Mr.
Bigelow at the Ganghes Arms. Yes, I am!"
"What!"
"Think how wonderful for him, Ralph, having one in his own room any time
he wants it. Can I use your phone?"
"Go ahead, be nutty."
Ralph turned quickly and walked off down the tunnel. A door slammed.
Aimee waited, then after a while put her hands to the phone and began to
dial, with painful slowness. She paused between numbers, holding her
breath, shutting her eyes, thinking how it might seem to he small in the
world, and then one day someone sends a special mirror by. A mirror for
your room where you can hide away with the big reflection of yourself,
shining, and write stories and stories, never going out into the world
unless you had to. How might it he then, alone, with the wonderful
illusion all in one piece in the room. Would it make you happy or sad,
would it help your writing or hurt it? She shook her head back and
forth, back and forth. At least this way there would be no one to look
down at you. Night after night, perhaps rising secretly at three in the
cold morning, you could wink and dance around and smile and wave at
yourself, so tall, so tall, so very fine and tall in the bright
looking-glass.
A telephone voice said, "Billie Fine's."
"Oh, Billie!" she cried.
Night came in over the pier. The ocean lay dark and loud under the
planks. Ralph sat cold and waxen in his glass coffin, laying out the
cards, his eyes fixed, his mouth stiff. At his elbow, a growing pyramid
of burnt cigarette butts grew larger. When Aimee walked along under the
hot red and blue bulbs, smiling, waving, he did not stop setting the
cards down slow and very slow. "Hi, Ralph!" she said.
"How's the love affair?" he asked, drinking from a dirty glass of iced
water. "How's Charlie Boyer, or is it Gary Grant?"
"I just went and bought me a new hat," she said, smiling. "Gosh, I feel
good! You know why? Billie Fine's sending a mirror out tomorrow! Can't
you just see the nice little guy's face?"
"I'm not so hot at imagining."
"Oh, Lord, you'd think I was going to marry him or something."
"Why not? Carry him around in a suitcase. People say, Where's your
husband? All you do is open your bag, yell, Here he is! Like a silver
cornet. Take him outa his case any old hour, play a tune, stash him
away. Keep a little sandbox for him on the back porch."
"I was feeling so good," she said.
"Benevolent is the word." Ralph did not look at her, his mouth tight.
"Ben-ev-o-lent. I suppose this all comes from me watching him through
that knothole, getting my kicks? That why you sent the mirror? People
like you run around with tambourines, taking the joy out of my life."
"Remind me not to come to your place for drinks any more. I'd rather go
with no people at all than mean people."
Ralph exhaled a deep breath. "Aimee, Aimee. Don't you know you can't
help that guy? He's bats. And this crazy thing of yours is like saying,
Go ahead, be batty, I'll help you, pal."
"Once in a lifetime anyway, it's nice to make a mistake if you think
it'll do somebody some good," she said.
"God deliver me from do-gooders, Aimee."
"Shut up, shut up!" she cried, and then said nothing more.
He let the silence lie a while, and then got up, putting his
fingerprinted glass aside. "Mind the booth for me?"
"Sure. Why?"
She saw ten thousand cold white images of him stalking down the glassy
corridors, between mirrors, his mouth straight and his fingers working
themselves.
She sat in the booth for a full minute and then suddenly shivered. A
small clock ticked in the booth and she turned the deck of cards over,
one by one, waiting. She heard a hammer pounding and knocking and
pounding again, far away inside the Maze; a silence, more waiting, and
then ten thousand images folding and refolding and dissolving, Ralph
striding, looking out at ten thousand images of her in the booth. She
heard his quiet laughter as he came down the ramp.
"Well, what's put you in such a good mood?" she asked, suspiciously.
"Aimee," he said, carelessly, "we shouldn't quarrel. You say tomorrow
Billie's sending that mirror to Mr. Big's?"
"You're not going to try anything funny?"
"Me?" He moved her out of the booth and took over the cards, humming,
his eyes bright. "Not me, oh no, not me." He did not look at her, but
started quickly to slap out the cards. She stood behind him. Her right
eye began to twitch a little. She folded and unfolded her arms. A minute
ticked by. The only sound was the ocean under the night pier, Ralph
breathing in the heat, the soft ruffle of the cards. The sky over the
pier was hot and thick with clouds. Out at sea, faint glows of lightning
were beginning to show.
"Ralph," she said at last.
"Relax, Aimee," he said.
"About that trip you wanted to take down the coast--"
"Tomorrow," he said. "Maybe next month. Maybe next year. Old Ralph
Banghart's a patient guy. I'm not worried, Aimee. Look." He held up a
hand. "I'm calm."
She waited for a roll of thunder at sea to fade away.
"I just don't want you mad, is all. I just don't want anything bad to
happen, promise me."
The wind, now warm, now cool, blew along the pier. There was a smell of
rain in the wind. The clock ticked. Aimee began to perspire heavily,
watching the cards move and move. Distantly, you could hear targets
being hit and the sound of the pistols at the shooting gallery.
And then, there he was.
Waddling along the lonely concourse, under the insect bulbs, his face
twisted and dark, every movement an effort. From a long way down the
pier he came, with Aimee watching. She wanted to say to him, This is
your last night, the last time you'll have to embarrass yourself by
coming here, the last time you'll have to put up with being watched by
Ralph, even in secret. She wished she could cry out and laugh and say it
right in front of Ralph. But she said nothing.
"Hello, hello!" shouted Ralph. "It's free, on the house, tonight!
Special for old customers!"
The Dwarf looked up, startled, his little black eyes darting and
swimming in confusion. His mouth formed the word thanks and he turned,
one hand to his neck, pulling his tiny lapels tight up about his
convulsing throat, the other hand clenching the silver dime secretly.
Looking back, he gave a little nod, and then scores of dozens of
compressed and tortured faces, burnt a strange dark color by the lights,
wandered in the glass corridors.
"Ralph." Aimee took his elbow. "What's going on?"
He grinned. "I'm being benevolent, Aimee, benevolent."
"Ralph," she said.
"Sh," he said. "Listen."
They waited in the booth in the long warm silence.
Then, a long way off, muffled, there was a scream.
"Ralph!" said Aimee.
"Listen, listen!" he said.
There was another scream, and another and still another, and a threshing
and a pounding and a breaking, a rushing around and through the maze.
There, there, wildly colliding and ricocheting, from mirror to mirror,
shrieking hysterically and sobbing, tears on his face, mouth gasped
open, came Mr. Bigelow. He fell out in the blazing night air, glanced
about wildly, wailed, and ran off down the pier.
"Ralph, what happened?"
Ralph sat laughing and slapping at his thighs.
She slapped his face. "What'd you do?"
He didn't quite stop laughing. "Come on. I'll show you!"
And then she was in the maze, rushed from white-hot mirror to mirror,
seeing her lipstick all red fire a thousand times repeated on down a
burning silver cavern where strange hysterical women much like herself
followed a quick-moving, smiling man. "Come on!" he cried. And they
broke free into a dust-smelling tiny room.
"Ralph!" she said.
They both stood on the threshold of the little room where the Dwarf had
come every night for a year. They both stood where the Dwarf had stood
each night, before opening his eyes to see the miraculous image in front
of him.
Aimee shuffled slowly, one hand out, into the dim room.
The mirror had been changed.
This new mirror made even normal people small, small, small; it made
even tall people little and dark and twisted smaller as you moved
forward.
And Aimee stood before it thinking and thinking that if it made big
people small, standing here, God, what would it do to a dwarf, a tiny
dwarf, a dark dwarf, a startled and lonely dwarf?
She turned and almost fell. Ralph stood looking at her. "Ralph," she
said. "God, why did you do it?"
"Aimee, come back!"
She ran out through the mirrors, crying. Staring with blurred eyes, it
was hard to find the way, but she found it. She stood blinking at the
empty pier, started to run one way, then another, then still another,
then stopped. Ralph came up behind her, talking, but it was like a voice
heard behind a wall late at night, remote and foreign.
"Don't talk to me," she said.
Someone came running up the pier. It was Mr. Kelly from the shooting
gallery. "Hey, any you see a little guy just now? Little stiff swiped a
pistol from my place, loaded, run off before I'd get a hand on him! You
help me find him?"
And Kelly was gone, sprinting, turning his head to search between all
the canvas sheds, on away under the hot blue and red and yellow strung
bulbs.
Aimee rocked back and forth and took a step.
"Aimee, where you going?"
She looked at Ralph as if they had just turned a corner, strangers
passing, and bumped into each other. "I guess," she said, "I'm going to
help search."
"You won't be able to do nothing."
"I got to try, anyway. Oh God, Ralph, this is all my fault! I shouldn't
have phoned Billie Fine! I shouldn't've ordered a mirror and got you so
mad you did this! It's me should've gone to Mr. Big, not a crazy thing
like I bought! I'm going to find him if it's the last thing I ever do in
my life."
Swinging about slowly, her cheeks wet, she saw the quivery mirrors that
stood in front of the Maze, Ralph's reflection was in one of them. She
could not take her eyes away from the image; it held her in a cool and
trembling fascination, with her mouth open.
"Aimee, what's wrong? What're you--"
He sensed where she was looking and twisted about to see what was going
on. His eyes widened.
He scowled at the blazing mirror.
A horrid, ugly little man, two feet high, with a pale, squashed face
under an ancient straw hat, scowled back at him. Ralph stood there
glaring at himself, his hands at his sides.
Aimee walked slowly and then began to walk fast and then began to run.
She ran down the empty pier and the wind blew warm and it blew large
drops of hot rain out of the sky on her all the time she was running.

The Next in Line
It was a little caricature of a town square. In it were the following
fresh ingredients: a candy-box of a bandstand where men stood on
Thursday and Sunday nights exploding music; fine, green-patinated
bronze-copper benches all scrolled and flourished; fine blue and pink
tiled walks--blue as women's newly lacquered eyes, pink as women's
hidden wonders; and fine French-clipped trees in the shapes of exact
hatboxes. The whole, from your hotel window, had the fresh ingratiation
and unbelievable fantasy one might expect of a French villa in the
nineties. But no, this was Mexico! and this a plaza in a small colonial
Mexican town, with a fine State Opera House (in which movies were shown
for two pesos admission: Rasputin and the Empress, The Big House, Madame
Curie, Love Affair, Mama Loves Papa).
Joseph came out on the sun-heated balcony in the morning and knelt by
the grille, pointing his little box Brownie. Behind him, in the bath,
the water was running and Marie's voice came out:
"What're you doing?"
He muttered "--a picture." She asked again. He clicked the shutter,
stood up, wound the spool inside, squinting, and said, "Took a picture
of the town square. God, didn't those men shout last night? I didn't
sleep until twothirty. We would have to arrive when the local Rotary's
having its wingding."
"What're our plans for today?" she asked.
"We're going to see the mummies," he said.
"Oh," she said. There was a long silence.
He came in, set the camera down, and lit himself a cigarette.
"I'll go up and see them alone," he said, "if you'd rather."
"No," she said, not very loud. "I'll go along. But I wish we could
forget the whole thing. It's such a lovely little town."
"Look here!" he cried, catching a movement from the corner of his eyes.
He hurried to the balcony, stood there, his cigarette smoking and
forgotten in his fingers. "Come quick, Marie!"
"I'm drying myself," she said.
"Please, hurry," he said, fascinated, looking down into the street.
There was movement behind him, and then the odor of soap and
water-rinsed flesh, wet towel, fresh cologne; Marie was at his elbow.
"Stay right there," she cautioned him, "so I can look without exposing
myself. I'm stark. What is it?"
"Look!" he cried.
A procession traveled along the street. One man led it, with a package
on his head. Behind him came women in black rebozos, chewing away the
peels of oranges and spitting them on the cobbles; little children at
their elbows, men ahead of them. Some ate sugar cane, gnawing away at
the outer bark until it split down and they pulled it off in great hunks
to get at the succulent pulp, and the juicy sinews on which to suck. In
all, there were fifty people.
"Joe," said Marie behind him, holding his arm.
It was no ordinary package the first man in the procession carried on
his head, balanced delicately as a chicken-plume. It was covered with
silver satin and silver fringe and silver rosettes. And he held it
gently with one brown hand, the other hand swinging free.
This was a funeral and the little package was a coffin.
Joseph glanced at his wife.
She was the color of fine, fresh milk. The pink color of the bath was
gone. Her heart had sucked it all down to some hidden vacuum in her. She
held fast to the french doorway and watched the traveling people go,
watched them eat fruit, heard them talk gently, laugh gently. She forgot
she was naked.
He said, "Some little girl or boy gone to a happier place."
"Where are they taking--her?"
She did not think it unusual, her choice of the feminine pronoun.
Already she had identified herself with that tiny fragment parceled like
an unripe variety of fruit. Now, in this moment, she was being carried
up the hill within compressing darkness, a stone in a peach, silent and
terrified, the touch of the father against the coffin material outside;
gentle and noiseless and firm inside.
"To the graveyard, naturally; that's where they're taking her," he said,
the cigarette making a filter of smoke across his casual face.
"Not the graveyard?"
"There's only one cemetery in these towns, you know that. They usually
hurry it. That little girl had probably been dead only a few hours."
"A few hours--"
She turned away, quite ridiculous, quite naked, with only the towel
supported by her limp, untrying hands. She walked toward the bed. "A few
hours ago she was alive, and now--"
He went on, "Now they're hurrying her up the hill. The climate isn't
kind to the dead. It's hot, there's no embalming. They have to finish it
quickly."
"But to that graveyard, that horrible place," she said, with a voice
from a dream.
"Oh, the mummies," he said. "Don't let that bother you."
She sat on the bed, again and again stroking the towel laid across her
lap. Her eyes were blind as the brown paps of her breasts. She did not
see him or the room. She knew that if he snapped his fingers or coughed,
she wouldn't even look up.
"They were eating fruit at her funeral, and laughing," she said.
"It's a long climb to the cemetery."
She shuddered, a convulsive motion, like a fish trying to free itself
from a deep-swallowed hook. She lay back and he looked at her as one
examines a poor sculpture; all criticism, all quiet and easy and
uncaring. She wondered idly just how much his hands had had to do with
the broadening and flattening and changement of her body. Certainly this
was not the body he'd started with. It was past saving now. Like clay
which the sculptor has carelessly impregnated with water, it was
impossible to shape again. In order to shape clay you warm it with your
hands, evaporate the moisture with heat. But there was no more of that
fine summer weather between them. There was no warmth to bake away the
aging moisture that collected and made pendant now her breasts and body.
When the heat is gone, it is marvelous and unsettling to see how quickly
a vessel stores self-destroying water in its cells.
"I don't feel well," she said. She lay there, thinking it over. "I don't
feel well," she said again, when he made no response. After another
minute or two she lifted herself. "Let's not stay here another night,
Joe."
"But it's a wonderful town."
"Yes, but we've seen everything." She got up. She knew what came next.
Gayness, blitheness, encouragement, everything quite false and hopeful.
"We could go on to Patzcuaro. Make it in no time. You won't have to
pack, I'll do it all myself, darling! We can get a room at the Don
Posada there. They say it's a beautiful little town--"
"This," he remarked, "is a beautiful little town."
"Bougainvillea climb all over the buildings--" she said.
"These--" he pointed to some flowers at the window "--are
bougainvillea."
"--and we'd fish, you like fishing," she said in bright haste. "And I'd
fish, too, I'd learn, yes I would, I've always wanted to learn! And they
say the Tarascan Indians there are almost Mongoloid in feature, and
don't speak much Spanish, and from there we could go to ParacutIn,
that's near Uruapán, and they have some of the finest lacquered boxes
there, oh, it'll be fun, Joe. I'll pack. You just take it easy, and--"
"Marie."
He stopped her with one word as she ran to the bathroom door.
"Yes?"
"I thought you said you didn't feel well?"
"I didn't. I don't. But, thinking of all those swell places--"
"We haven't seen one-tenth of this town," he explained logically.
"There's that statue of Morelos on the hill, I want a shot of that, and
some of that French architecture up the street.. . we've traveled three
hundred miles and we've been here one day and now you want to rush off
somewhere else. I've already paid the rent for another night. . . ."
"You can get it back," she said.
"Why do you want to run away?" he said, looking at her with an attentive
simplicity. "Don't you like the town?"
"I simply adore it," she said, her cheeks white, smiling. "It's so green
and pretty."
"Well, then," he said. "Another day. You'll love it. That's settled."
She started to speak.
"Yes?" he asked.
"Nothing."
She closed the bathroom door. Behind it she rattled open a medicine box.
Water rushed into a tumbler. She was taking something for her stomach.
He came to the bathroom door.
"Marie, the mummies don't bother you, do they?"
"Unh-unh," she said.
"Was it the funeral, then?"
"Unh."
"Because, if you were really afraid, I'd pack in a moment, you know
that, darling."
He waited.
"No, I'm not afraid," she said.
"Good girl," he said.
The graveyard was enclosed by a thick adobe wall, and at its four
corners small stone angels tilted out on stony wings, their grimy heads
capped with bird droppings, their hands gifted with amulets of the same
substance, their faces unquestionably freckled.
In the warm smooth flow of sunlight which was like a depthless, tideless
river, Joseph and Marie climbed up the hill, their shadows slanting blue
behind them. Helping one another, they made the cemetery gate, swung
back the Spanish blue iron grille and entered.
It was several mornings after the celebratory fiesta of El Dia de los
Muertos, the Day of the Dead, and ribbons and ravels of tissue and
sparkle-tape still clung like insane hair to the raised stones, to the
hand-carved, love-polished crucifixes, and to the above-ground tombs
which resembled marble jewel-cases. There were statues frozen in angelic
postures over gravel mounds, and intricately carved stones tall as men
with angels spilling all down their rims, and tombs as big and
ridiculous as beds put out to dry in the sun after some nocturnal
accident. And within the four walls of the yard, inserted into square
mouths and slots, were coffins, walled in, plated in by marble plates
and plaster, upon which names were struck and upon which hung tin
pictures, cheap peso portraits of the inserted dead. Thumb-tacked to the
different pictures were trinkets they'd loved in life, silver charms,
silver arms, legs, bodies, silver cups, silver dogs, silver church
medallions, bits of red crape and blue ribbon. On some places were
painted slats of tin showing the dead rising to heaven in oil-tinted
angels' arms.
Looking at the graves again, they saw the remnants of the death fiesta.
The little tablets of tallow splashed over the stones by the lighted
festive candles, the wilted orchid blossoms lying like crushed
red-purple tarantulas against the milky stones, some of them looking
horridly sexual, limp and withered. There were loopframes of cactus
leaves, bamboo, reeds, and wild, dead morning-glories. There were
circles of gardenias and sprigs of bougainvillea, desiccated. The entire
floor of the yard seemed a ballroom after a wild dancing, from which the
participants have fled; the tables askew, confetti, candles, ribbons and
deep dreams left behind.
They stood, Marie and Joseph, in the warm silent yard, among the stones,
between the walls. Far over in one corner a little man with high
cheekbones, the milk color of the Spanish infiltration, thick glasses, a
black coat, a gray hat and gray, unpressed pants and neatly laced shoes,
moved about among the stones, supervising something or other that
another man in overalls was doing to a grave with a shovel. The little
man with glasses carried a thrice folded newspaper under his left arm
and had his hands in his pockets.
"Buenos dias, señora y señor!" he said, when he finally noticed Joseph
and Marie and came to see them.
"Is this the place of las mommias?" asked Joseph. "They do exist, do
they not?"
"Si, the mummies," said the man. "They exist and are here. In the
catacombs."
"Por favor," said Joseph. "Yo quiero veo las mommias, si?"
"Si, señor."
"Me Español es mucho estupido, es muy malo," apologized Joseph.
"No, no, señor. You speak well! This way, please."
He led between the flowered stones to a tomb near the wall shadows. It
was a large flat tomb, flush with the gravel, with a thin kindling door
flat on it, padlocked. It was unlocked and the wooden door flung back
rattling to one side. Revealed was a round hole the circled interior of
which contained steps which screwed into the earth.
Before Joseph could move, his wife had set her foot on the first step.
"Here," he said. "Me first."
"No. That's all right," she said, and went down and around in a
darkening spiral until the earth vanished her. She moved carefully, for
the steps were hardly enough to contain a child's feet. It got dark and
she heard the caretaker stepping after her, at her ears, and then it got
light again. They stepped out into a long whitewashed hall twenty feet
under the earth, dimly lit by a few small gothic windows high in the
arched ceiling. The hall was fifty yards long, ending on the left in a
double door in which were set tall crystal panes and a sign forbidding
entrance. On the right end of the hall was a large stack of white rods
and round white stones.
"The soldiers who fought for Father Morelos," said the caretaker.
They walked to the vast pile. They were neatly put in place, bone on
bone, like firewood, and on top was a mound of a thousand dry slculls.
"I don't mind skulls and bones," said Marie. "There's nothing even
vaguely human to them. I'm not scared of skulls and hones. They're like
something insectile. If a child was raised and didn't know he had a
skeleton in him, he wouldn't think anything of hones, would he? That's
how it is with me. Everything human has been scraped off these. There's
nothing familiar left to be horrible. In order for a thing to be
horrible it has to suffer a change you can recognize. This isn't
changed. They're still skeletons, like they always were. The part that
changed is gone, and so there's nothing to show for it. Isn't that
interesting?"
Joseph nodded.
She was quite brave now.
"Well," she said, "let's see the mummies."
"Here, señora," said the caretaker.
He took them far down the hall away from the stack of hones and when
Joseph paid him a peso he unlocked the forbidden crystal doors and
opened them wide and they looked into an even longer, dimly lighted hall
in which stood the people.
They waited inside the door in a long line under the archroofed ceiling,
fifty-five of them against one wall, on the left, fifty-five of them
against the right wall, and five of them way down at the very end.
"Mister Interlocutor!" said Joseph, briskly.
They resembled nothing more than those preliminary erections of a
sculptor, the wire frame, the first tendons of clay, the muscles, and a
thin lacquer of skin. They were unfinished, all one hundred and fifteen
of them.
They were parchment-colored and the skin was stretched as if to dry,
from bone to bone. The bodies were intact, only the watery humors had
evaporated from them.
"The climate," said the caretaker. "It preserves them. Very dry."
"How long have they been here?" asked Joseph.
"Some one year, some five, señor, some ten, some seventy."
There was an embarrassment of horror. You started with the first man on
your right, hooked and wired upright against the wall, and he was not
good to look upon, and you went on to the woman next to him who was
unbelievable and then to a man who was horrendous and then to a woman
who was very sorry she was dead and in such a place as this.
"What are they doing here?" said Joseph.
"Their relatives did not pay the rent upon their graves."
"Is there a rent?"
"Si, señor. Twenty pesos a year. Or, if they desire the permanent
interment, one hundred seventy pesos. But our people, they are very
poor, as you must know, and one hundred seventy pesos is as much as many
of them make in two years. So they carry their dead here and place them
into the earth for one year, and the twenty pesos are paid, with fine
intentions of paying each year and each year, but each year and each
year after the first year they have a burro to buy or a new mouth to
feed, or maybe three new mouths, and the dead, after all, are not
hungry, and the dead, after all, can pull no ploughs; or there is a new
wife or there is a roof in need of mending, and the dead, remember, can
be in no beds with a man, and the dead, you understand, can keep no rain
off one, and so it is that the dead are not paid up upon their rent."
"Then what happens? Are you listening, Marie?" said Joseph.
Marie counted the bodies. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, "What?" she said, quietly.
"Are you listening?"
"I think so. What? Oh, yes! I'm listening."
Eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen.
"Well, then," said the little man. "I call a trabajando and with his
delicate shovel at the end of the first year he does dig and dig and dig
down. How deep do you think we dig, señor?"
"Six feet. That's the usual depth."
"Ah, no, ah, no. There, señor, you would be wrong. Knowing that after
the first year the rent is liable not to be paid, we bury the poorest
two feet down. It is less work, you understand? Of course, we must judge
by the family who own a body. Some of them we bury sometimes three,
sometimes four feet deep, sometimes five, sometimes six, depending on
how rich the family is, depending on what the chances are we won't have
to dig him from out his place a year later. And, let me tell you, señor,
when we bury a man the whole six feet deep we are very certain of his
staying. We have never dug up a six-foot-buried one yet, that is the
accuracy with which we know the money of the people."
Twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three. Marie's lips moved with a small
whisper.
"And the bodies which are dug up are placed down here against the wall,
with the other compañeros."
"Do the relatives know the bodies are here?"
"Si." The small man pointed. "This one, yo veo? It is new. It has been
here but one year. His madre y padre know him to be here. But have they
money? Ah, no."
"Isn't that rather gruesome for his parents?"
The little man was earnest. "They never think of it," he said.
"Did you hear that, Marie?"
"What?" Thirty, thirty-one, thirty-two, thirty-three, thirty-four. "Yes.
They never think of it."
"What if the rent is paid again, after a lapse?" inquired Joseph.
"In that time," said the caretaker, "the bodies are reburied for as many
years as are paid."
"Sounds like blackmail," said Joseph.
The little man shrugged, hands in pockets. "We must live."
"You are certain no one can pay the one hundred seventy pesos all at
once," said Joseph. "So in this way you get them for twenty pesos a
year, year after year, for maybe thirty years. If they don't pay, you
threaten to stand mamacita or little niño in the catacomb."
"We must live," said the little man.
Fifty-one, fifty-two, fifty-three.
Marie counted in the center of the long corridor, the standing dead on
all sides of her.
They were screaming.
They looked as if they had leaped, snapped upright in their graves,
clutched hands over their shriveled bosoms and screamed, jaws wide,
tongues out, nostrils flared.
And been frozen that way.
All of them had open mouths. Theirs was a perpetual screaming. They were
dead and they knew it. In every raw fiber and evaporated organ they knew
it.
She stood listening to them scream.
They say dogs hear sounds humans never hear, sounds so many decibels
higher than normal hearing that they seem nonexistent.
The corridor swarmed with screams. Screams poured from terror-yawned
lips and dry tongues, screams you couldn't hear because they were so
high.
Joseph walked up to one standing body.
"Say 'ah,' " he said.
Sixty-five, sixty-six, sixty-seven, counted Marie, among the screams.
"Here is an interesting one," said the proprietor.
They saw a woman with arms flung to her head, mouth wide, teeth intact,
whose hair was wildly flourished, long and shimmery on her head. Her
eyes were small pale white-blue eggs in her skull.
"Sometimes, this happens. This woman, she is a cataleptic. One day she
falls down upon the earth, hut is really not dead, for, deep in her, the
little drum of her heart beats and beats, so dim one cannot hear. So she
was buried in the graveyard in a fine inexpensive l)OX. . . ."
"Didn't you know she was cataleptic?"
"Her sisters knew. But this time they thought her at last dead. And
funerals are hasty things in this warm town."
"She was buried a few hours after her 'death'?"
"Si, the same. All of this, as you see her here, we would never have
known, if a year later her sisters, having other things to buy, had not
refused the rent on her burial. So we dug very quietly down and loosed
the box and took it up and opened the top of her box and laid it aside
and looked in upon her--"
Marie stared.
This woman had wakened under the earth. She had torn, shrieked, clubbed
at the box-lid with fists, died of suffocation, in this attitude, hands
flung over her gaping face, horror-eyed, hair wild.
"Be pleased, señor, to find that difference between her hands and these
other ones," said the caretaker. "Their peaceful fingers at their hips,
quiet as little roses. Hers? Ah, hers! are jumped up, very wildly, as if
to pound the lid free!"
"Couldn't rigor mortis do that?"
"Believe me, señor, rigor mortis pounds upon no lids. Rigor mortis
screams not like this, nor twists nor wrestles to rip free nails, señor,
or prise boards loose hunting for air, señor. All these others are open
of mouth, si, because they were not injected with the fluids of
embalming, but theirs is a simple screaming of muscles, señor. This
señorita, here, hers is the muerte horrible."
Marie walked, scuffling her shoes, turning first this way, then that.
Naked bodies. Long ago the clothes had whispered away. The fat women's
breasts were lumps of yeasty dough left in the dust. The men's loins
were indrawn, withered orchids.
"Mr. Grimace and Mr. Gape," said Joseph.
He pointed his camera at two men who seemed in conversation, mouths in
mid-sentence, hands gesticulant and stiffened over some long-dissolved
gossip.
Joseph clicked the shutter, rolled the film, focused the camera on
another body, clicked the shutter, rolled the film, walked on to
another.
Eighty-one, eighty-two, eighty-three. Jaws down, tongues out like
jeering children, eyes pale brown-irised in upclenched sockets. Hairs,
waxed and prickled by sunlight, each sharp as quills embedded on the
lips, the cheeks, the eyelids, the brows. Little beards on chins and
bosoms and loins. Flesh like drumheads and manuscripts and crisp bread
dough. The women, huge ill-shaped tallow things, death-melted. The
insane hair of them, like nests made and unmade and remade. Teeth, each
single, each fine, each perfect, in jaw. Eighty-six, eighty-seven,
eighty-eight. A rushing of Marie's eyes. Down the corridor, flicking.
Counting, rushing, never stopping. On! Quick! Ninety-one, ninety-two,
ninety-three! Here was a man, his stomach open, like a tree hollow where
you dropped your child love letters when you were eleven! Her eyes
entered the hole in the space under his ribs. She peeked in. He looked
like an Erector set inside. The spine, the pelvic plates. The rest was
tendon, parchment, bone, eye, beardy jaw, ear, stupefied nostril. And
this ragged eaten cincture in his navel into which a pudding might be
spooned. Ninety-seven, ninety-eight! Names, places, dates, things!
"This woman died in childbirth!"
Like a little hungry doll, the prematurely born child was wired,
dangling, to her wrist.
"This was a soldier. His uniform still half on him--"
Marie's eyes slammed the furthest wall after a back-forth, backforth
swinging from horror to horror, from skull to skull, beating from rib to
rib, staring with hypnotic fascination at paralyzed, loveless, fleshless
loins, at men made into women by evaporation, at women made into dugged
swine. The fearful ricochet of vision, growing, growing, taking impetus
from swollen breast to raving mouth, wall to wall, wall to wall, again,
again, like a ball hurled in a game, caught in the incredible teeth,
spat in a scream across the corridor to be caught in claws, lodged
between thin teats, the whole standing chorus invisibly chanting the
game on, on, the wild game of sight recoiling, rebounding, reshuttling
on down the inconceivable procession, through a montage of erected
horrors that ended finally and for all time when vision crashed against
the corridor ending with one last scream from all present!
Marie turned and shot her vision far down to where the spiral steps
walked up into sunlight. How talented was death. How many expressions
and manipulations of hand, face, body, no two alike. They stood like the
naked pipes of a vast derelict calliope, their mouths cut into frantic
vents. And now the great hand of mania descended upon all keys at once,
and the long calliope screamed upon one hundred-throated, unending
scream.
Click went the camera and Joseph rolled the film. Click went the camera
and Joseph rolled the film.
Moreno, Morelos, Cantine, Gómez, Gutiérrez, Villanousul, Ureta, Licón,
Navarro, Iturbi, Jorge, Filomena, Nena, Manuel, José, Tomás, Ramona.
This man walked and this man sang and this man had three wives; and this
man died of this, and that of that, and the third from another thing,
and the fourth was shot, and the fifth was stabbed and the sixth fell
straight down dead; and the seventh drank deep and died dead, and the
eighth died in love, and the ninth fell from his horse, and the tenth
coughed blood, and the eleventh stopped his heart, and the twelfth used
to laugh much, and the thirteenth was a dancing one, and the fourteenth
was most beautiful of all, the fifteenth had ten children and the
sixteenth is one of those children as is the seventeenth; and the
eighteenth was Tomás and did well with his guitar; the next three cut
maize in their fields, had three lovers each; the twentysecond was never
loved; the twenty-third sold tortillas, patting and shaping them each at
the curb before the Opera House with her little charcoal stove; and the
twenty-fourth beat his wife and now she walks proudly in the town and is
merry with new men and here he stands bewildered by this unfair thing,
and the twenty-fifth drank several quarts of river with his lungs and
was pulled forth in a net, and the twenty-sixth was a great thinker and
his brain now sleeps like a burnt plum in his skull.
"I'd like a color shot of each, and his or her name and how he or she
died," said Joseph. "It would be an amazing, an ironical book to
publish. The more you think, the more it grows on you. Their life
histories and then a picture of each of them standing here."
He tapped each chest, softly. They gave off hollow sounds, like someone
rapping on a door.
Marie pushed her way through screams that hung net-wise across her path.
She walked evenly, in the corridor center, not slow, hut not too fast,
toward the spiral stair, not looking to either side. Click went the
camera behind her.
"You have room down here for more?" said Joseph.
"Si, señor. Many more."
"Wouldn't want to be next in line, next on your waiting list."
"Ah, no, señor, one would not wish to be next."
"How are chances of buying one of these?"
"Oh, no, no, señor. Oh, no, no. Oh no, señor."
"I'll pay you fifty pesos."
"Oh, no, señor, no, no, señor."
In the market, the remainder of candy skulls from the Death Fiesta were
sold from flimsy little tables. Women hung with black rebozos sat
quietly, now and then speaking one word to each other, the sweet sugar
skeletons, the saccharine corpses and white candy skulls at their
elbows. Each skull had a name on top in gold candy curlicue; José or
Carmen or Ramón or Tena or Guiermo or Rosa. They sold cheap. The Death
Festival was gone. Joseph paid a peso and got two candy skulls.
Marie stood in the narrow street. She saw the candy skulls and Joceph
and the dark ladies who put the skulls in a hag.
"Not really," said Marie.
"Why not?" said Joseph.
"Not after just now," she said.
"In the catacombs?"
She nodded.
He said, "But these are good."
"They look poisonous."
"Just because they're skull-shaped?"
"No. The sugar itself looks raw, how do you know what kind of people
made them, they might have the colic."
"My dear Marie, all people in Mexico have colic," he said.
"You can eat them both," she said.
"Alas, poor Yorick," he said, peeking into the bag.
They walked along a street that was held between high buildings in which
were yellow window frames and pink iron grilles and the smell of tamales
came from them and the sound of lost fountains splashing on hidden tiles
and little birds clustering and peeping in bamboo cages and someone
playing Chopin on a piano.
"Chopin, here," said Joseph. "How strange and swell." He looked up. "I
like that bridge. Hold this." He handed her the candy hag while he
clicked a picture of a red bridge spanning two white buildings with a
man walking on it, a red serape on his shoulder. "Fine," said Joseph.
Marie walked looking at Joseph, looking away from him and then back at
him, her lips moving but not speaking, her eyes fluttering, a little
neck muscle under her chin like a wire, a little nerve in her brow
ticking. She passed the candy bag from one hand to the other. She
stepped up a curb, leaned back somehow, gestured, said something to
restore balance, and dropped the hag.
"For Christ's sake." Joseph snatched up the bag. "Look what you've done!
Clumsy!"
"I should have broken my ankle," she said, "I suppose."
"These were the best skulls; both of them smashed; I wanted to save them
for friends up home."
"I'm sorry," she said, vaguely.
"For God's sake, oh, damn it to hell!" He scowled into the hag. "I might
not find any more good as these. Oh, I don't know, I give up!"
The wind blew and they were alone in the street, he staring down into
the shattered debris in the bag, she with the street shadows all around
her, sun on the other side of the street, nobody about, and the world
far away, the two of them alone, two thousand miles from anywhere, on a
street in a false town which was nothing and around which was nothing
but blank desert and circled hawks. On top the State Opera House, a
block down, the golden Greek statues stood sun-bright and high, and in a
beer place a shouting phonograph cried AY! MARIMBA . . . corazón . . .
and all kinds of alien words which the wind stirred away.
Joseph twisted the bag shut, stuck it furiously in his pocket.
They walked back to the two-thirty lunch at the hotel.
He sat at the table with Marie, sipping Albóndigas soup from his moving
spoon, silently. Twice she commented cheerfully upon the wall murals and
he looked at her steadily and sipped. The bag of cracked skulls lay on
the table. . . .
"Señora . . ."
The soup plates were cleared by a brown hand. A large plate of
enchiladas was set down.
Marie looked at the plate.
There were sixteen enchiladas.
She put her fork and knife out to take one and stopped. She put her fork
and knife down at each side of her plate. She glanced at the walls and
then at her husband and then at the sixteen enchiladas.
Sixteen. One by one. A long row of them, crowded together.
She counted them.
One, two, three, four, five, six.
Joseph took one on his plate and ate it.
Six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven.
She put her hands on her lap.
Twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen. She finished counting.
"I'm not hungry," she said.
He placed another enchilada before himself. It had an interior clothed
in a papyrus of corn tortilla. It was slender and it was one of many he
cut and placed in his mouth and she chewed it for him in her mind's
mouth, and squeezed her eyes tight.
"Eh?" he asked.
"Nothing," she said.
Thirteen enchiladas remained, like tiny bundles, like scrolls.
He ate five more.
"I don't feel well," she said.
"Feel better if you ate," he said.
"No."
He finished, then opened the sack and took out one of the halfdemolished
skulls.
"Not here?" she said.
"Why not?" And he put one sugar socket to his lips, chewing. "Not bad,"
he said, thinking the taste. He popped in another section of skull. "Not
bad at all."
She looked at the name on the skull he was eating.
Marie, it said.
It was tremendous, the way she helped him pack. In those newsreels you
see men leap off diving-boards into pools, only, a moment later when the
reel is reversed, to jump back up in airy fantasy to alight once more
safe on the diving-board. Now, as Joseph watched, the suits and dresses
flew into their boxes and cases, the hats were like birds darting,
clapped into round, bright hatboxes, the shoes seemed to run across the
floor like mice to leap into valises. The suitcases banged shut, the
hasps clicked, the keys turned.
"There!" she cried. "All packed! Oh, Joe, I'm so glad you let me change
your mind."
She started for the door.
"Here, let me help," he said.
"They're not heavy," she said.
"But you never carry suitcases. You never have. I'll call a boy."
"Nonsense," she said, breathless with the weight of the valises.
A boy seized the cases outside the door. "Señora, por favor!"
"Have we forgotten anything?" He looked under the two beds, he went out
on the balcony and gazed at the plaza, came in, went to the bathroom,
looked in the cabinet and on the washbowl. "Here," he said, coming out
and handing her something. "You forgot your wristwatch."
"Did I?" She put it on and went out the door.
"I don't know," he said. "It's damn late in the day to be moving out."
"It's only three-thirty," she said. "Only three-thirty."
"I don't know," he said, doubtfully.
He looked around the room, stepped out, closed the door, locked it, went
downstairs, jingling the keys.
She was outside in the car already, settled in, her coat folded on her
lap, her gloved hands folded on the coat. He came out, supervised the
loading of what luggage remained into the trunk receptacle, came to the
front door and tapped on the window. She unlocked it and let him in.
"Well, here we go!" She cried with a laugh, her face rosy, her eyes
frantically bright. She was leaning forward as if by this movement she
might set the car rolling merrily down the hill. "Thank you, darling,
for letting me get the refund on the money you paid for our room
tonight. I'm sure we'll like it much better in Guadalajara tonight.
Thank you!"
"Yeah," he said.
Inserting the ignition keys he stepped on the starter.
Nothing happened.
He stepped on the starter again. Her mouth twitched.
"It needs warming," she said. "It was a cold night last night."
He tried it again. Nothing.
Marie's hands tumbled on her lap.
He tried it six more times. "Well," he said, lying back, ceasing.
"Try it again, next time it'll work," she said.
"It's no use," he said. "Something's wrong."
"Well, you've got to try it once more."
He tried it once more.
"It'll work, I'm sure," she said. "Is the ignition on?"
"Is the ignition on," he said. "Yes, it's on."
"It doesn't look like it's on," she said.
"It's on." He showed her by twisting the key.
"Now, try it," she said.
"There," he said, when nothing happened. "I told you."
"You're not doing it right; it almost caught that time," she cried.
"I'll wear out the battery, and God knows where you can buy a battery
here."
"Wear it out, then. I'm sure it'll start next time!"
"Well, if you're so good, you try it." He slipped from the car and
beckoned her over behind the wheel. "Go ahead!"
She bit her lips and settled behind the wheel. She did things with her
hands that were like a little mystic ceremony; with moves of hands and
body she was trying to overcome gravity, friction and every other
natural law. She patted the starter with her toeless shoe. The car
remained solemnly quiet. A little squeak came out of Marie's tightened
lips. She rammed the starter home and there was a clear smell in the air
as she fluttered the choke.
"You've flooded it," he said. "Fine! Get back over on your side, will
you?"
He got three boys to push and they started the car downhill. He jumped
in to steer. The car rolled swiftly, bumping and rattling. Marie's face
glowed expectantly. "This'll start it!" she said.
Nothing started. They rolled quietly into the filling Station at the
bottom of the hill, bumping softly on the cobbles, and stopped by the
tanks.
She sat there, saying nothing, andwhen the attendant came from the
station her door was locked, the window up, and he had to come around on
the husband's side to make his query.
The mechanic arose from the car engine, scowled at Joseph and they spoke
together in Spanish, quietly.
She rolled the window down and listened.
"What's he say?" she demanded.
The two men talked on.
"What's he say?" she demanded.
The dark mechanic waved at the engine. Joseph nodded and they conversed.
"What's wrong?" Marie wanted to know.
Joseph frowned over at her. "Wait a moment, will you? I can't listen to
both of you."
The mechanic took Joseph's elbow. They said many words.
"What's he saying now?" she asked.
"He says--" said Joseph, and was lost as the Mexican took him over to
the engine and bent him down in earnest discovery.
"How much will it cost?" she cried, out the window, around at their bent
backs.
The mechanic spoke to Joseph.
"Fifty pesos," said Joseph.
"How long will it take?" cried his wife.
Joseph asked the mechanic. The man shrugged and they argued for five
minutes.
"How long will it take?" said Marie.
The discussion continued.
The sun went down the sky. She looked at the sun upon the trees that
stood high by the cemetery yard. The shadows rose and rose until the
valley was enclosed and only the sky was clear and untouched and blue.
"Two days, maybe three," said Joseph, turning to Marie.
"Two days! Can't he fix it so we can just go on to the next town and
have the rest done there?"
Joseph asked the man. The man replied.
Joseph said to his wife. "No, he'll have to do the entire job."
"Why, that's silly, it's so silly, he doesn't either, he doesn't really
have to do it all, you tell him that, Joe, tell him that, he can hurry
and fix it--"
The two men ignored her. They were talking earnestly again.
This time it was all in very slow motion. The unpacking of the
suitcases. He did his own, she left hers by the door.
"I don't need anything," she said, leaving it locked. "You'll need your
nightgown," he said.
"I'll sleep naked," she said.
"Well, it isn't my fault," he said. "That damned car."
"You can go down and watch them work on it, later," she said.
She sat on the edge of the bed. They were in a new room. She had refused
to return to their old room. She said she couldn't stand it. She wanted
a new room so it would seem they were in a new hotel in a new city. So
this was a new room, with a view of the alley and the sewer system
instead of the plaza and the drum-box trees. "You go down and supervise
the work, Joe. If you don't, you know they'll take weeks!" She looked at
him. "You should be down there now, instead of standing around."
"I'll go down," he said.
"I'll go down with you. I want to buy some magazines."
"You won't find any American magazines in a town like this."
"I can look, can't I?"
"Besides, we haven't much money," he said. "I don't want to have to wire
my bank. It takes a god-awful time and it's not worth the bother."
"I can at least have my magazines," she said.
"Maybe one or two," he said.
"As many as I want," she said, feverishly, on the bed.
"For God's sake, you've got a million magazines in the car now, Posts,
Collier's, Mercury, Atlantic Monthlys, Barnaby, Superman! You haven't
read half of the articles."
"But they're not new," she said. "They're not new, I've looked at them
and after you've looked at a thing, I don't know--"
"Try reading them instead of looking at them," he said.
As they came downstairs night was in the plaza.
"Give me a few pesos," she said, and he gave her some. "Teach me to say
about magazines in Spanish," she said.
"Quiero una publicación Americano," he said, walking swiftly.
She repeated it, stumblingly, and laughed. "Thanks."
He went on ahead to the mechanic's shop, and she turned in at the
nearest Farmacia Botica, and all the magazines racked before her there
were alien colors and alien names. She read the titles with swift moves
of her eyes and looked at the old man behind the counter. "Do you have
American magazines?" she asked in English, embarrassed to use the
Spanish words.
The old man stared at her.
"Habla Inglés?" she asked.
"No, señorita."
She tried to think of the right words. "Quiero--no!" She stopped. She
started again. "Americano--uh--magg-ah-zeen-as?"
"Oh, no, señorita!"
Her hands opened wide at her waist, then closed, like mouths. Her mouth
opened and closed. The shop had a veil over it, in her eyes. Here she
was and here were these small baked adobe people to whom she could say
nothing and from whom she could get no words she understood, and she was
in a town of people who said no words to her and she said no words to
them except in blushing confusion and bewilderment. And the town was
circled by desert and time, and home was far away, far away in another
life.
She whirled and fled.
Shop following shop she found no magazines save those giving bullfights
in blood on their covers or murdered people or laceconfection priests.
But at last three poor copies of the Post were bought with much display
and loud laughter and she gave the vendor of this small shop a handsome
tip.
Rushing out with the Posts eagerly on her bosom in both hands she
hurried along the narrow walk, took a skip over the gutter, ran across
the street, sang la-la, jumped onto the further walk, made another
little scamper with her feet, smiled an inside smile, moving along
swiftly, pressing the magazines tightly to her, half-closing her eyes,
breathing the charcoal evening air, feeling the wind watering past her
ears.
Starlight tinkled in golden nuclei off the highly perched Greek figures
atop the State Theatre. A man shambled by in the shadow, balancing upon
his head a basket. The basket contained bread loaves.
She saw the man and the balanced basket and suddenly she did not move
and there was no inside smile, nor did her hands clasp tight the
magazines. She watched the man walk, with one hand of his gently poised
up to tap the basket any time it unbalanced, and down the Street he
dwindled, while the magazines slipped from Marie's fingers and scattered
on the walk.
Snatching them up, she ran into the hotel and almost fell going
upstairs.
She sat in the room. The magazines were piled on each side of her and in
a circle at her feet. She had made a little castle with portcullises of
words and into this she was withdrawn. All about her were the magazines
she had bought and bought and looked at and looked at on other days, and
these were the outer barrier, and upon the inside of the barrier, upon
her lap, as yet unopened, but her hands were trembling to open them and
read and read and read again with hungry eyes, were the three battered
Post magazines. She opened the first page. She would go through them
page by page, line by line, she decided. Not a line would go unnoticed,
a comma unread, every little ad and every color would be fixed by her.
And--she smiled with discovery--in those other magazines at her feet
were still advertisements and cartoons she had neglected--there would be
little morsels of stuff for her to reclaim and utilize later.
She would read this first Post tonight, yes tonight she would read this
first delicious Post. Page on page she would eat it and tomorrow night,
if there was going to be a tomorrow night, but maybe there wouldn't be a
tomorrow night here, maybe the motor would start and there'd be odors of
exhaust and round hum of rubber tire on road and wind riding in the
window and pennanting her hair--but, suppose, just suppose there would
BE a tomorrow night here, in this room. Well, then, there would be two
more Posts, one for tomorrow night, and the next for the next night. How
neatly she said it to herself with her mind's tongue. She turned the
first page.
She turned the second page. Her eyes moved over it and over it and her
fingers unknown to her slipped under the next page and flickered it in
preparation for turning, and the watch ticked on her wrist, and time
passed and she sat turning pages, turning pages, hungrily seeing the
framed people in the pictures, people who lived in another land in
another world where neons bravely held off the night with crimson bars
and the smells were home smells and the people talked good fine words
and here she was turning the pages, and all the lines went across and
down and the pages flew under her hands, making a fan. She threw down
the first Post, seized on and riffled through the second in half an
hour, threw that down, took up the third, threw that down a good fifteen
minutes later and found herself breathing, breathing stiffly and swiftly
in her body and out of her mouth. She put her hand up to the back of her
neck.
Somewhere, a soft breeze was blowing.
The hairs along the back of her neck slowly stood upright.
She touched them with one pale hand as one touches the nape of a
dandelion.
Outside, in the plaza, the street lights rocked like crazy flashlights
on a wind. Papers ran through the gutters in sheep flocks. Shadows
penciled and slashed under the bucketing lamps now this way, now that,
here a shadow one instant, there a shadow next, now no shadows, all cold
light, now no light, all cold blue-black shadow. The lamps creaked on
their high metal hasps.
In the room her hands began to tremble. She saw them tremble. Her body
began to tremble. Under the bright bright print of the brightest,
loudest skirt she could find to put on especially for tonight, in which
she had whirled and cavorted feverishly before the coffin-sized mirror,
beneath the rayon skirt the body was all wire and tendon and excitation.
Her teeth chattered and fused and chattered. Her lipstick smeared, one
lip crushing another.
Joseph knocked on the door.
They got ready for bed. He had returned with the news that something had
been done to the car and it would take time, he'd go watch them
tomorrow.
"But don't knock on the door," she said, standing before the mirror as
she undressed.
"Leave it unlocked then," he said.
"I want it locked. But don't rap. Call."
"What's wrong with rapping?" he said.
"It sounds funny," she said.
"What do you mean, funny?"
She wouldn't say. She was looking at herself in the mirror and she was
naked, with her hands at her sides, and there were her breasts and her
hips and her entire body, and it moved, it felt the floor under it and
the walls and air around it, and the breasts could know hands if hands
were put there, and the stomach would make no hollow echo if touched.
"For God's sake," he said, "don't stand there admiring yourself." He was
in bed. "What are you doing?" he said. "What're you putting your hands
up that way for, over your face?"
He put the lights out.
She could not speak to him for she knew no words that he knew and he
said nothing to her that she understood, and she walked to her bed and
slipped into it and he lay with his back to her in his bed and he was
like one of these brown-baked people of this faraway town upon the moon,
and the real earth was off somewhere where it would take a starflight to
reach it. If only he could speak with her and she to him tonight, how
good the night might be, and how easy to breathe and how lax the vessels
of blood in her ankles and in her wrists and the under-arms, but there
was no speaking and the night was ten thousand tickings and ten thousand
twistings of the blankets, and the pillow was like a tiny white warm
stove under-cheek, and the blackness of the room was a mosquito netting
draped all about so that a turn entangled her in it. If only there was
one word, one word between them. But there was no word and the veins did
not rest easy in the wrists and the heart was a bellows forever blowing
upon a little coal of fear, forever illumining and making it into a
cherry light, again, pulse, and again, an ingrown light which her inner
eyes stared upon with unwanting fascination. The lungs did not rest but
were exercised as if she were a drowned person and she herself
performing artificial respiration to keep the last life going. And all
of these things were lubricated by the sweat of her glowing body, and
she was glued fast between the heavy blankets like something pressed,
smashed, redolently moist between the white pages of a heavy book.
And as she lay this way the long hours of midnight came when again she
was a child. She lay, now and again thumping her heart in tambourine
hysteria, then, quieting, the slow sad thoughts of bronze childhood when
everything was sun on green trees and sun on water and sun on blond
child hair. Faces flowed by on merry-go-rounds of memory, a face rushing
to meet her, facing her, and away to the right; another, whirling in
from the left, a quick fragment of lost conversation, and out to the
right. Around and round. Oh, the night was very long. She consoled
herself by thinking of the car starting tomorrow, the throttling sound
and the power sound and the road moving under, and she smiled in the
dark with pleasure. But then, suppose the car did not start? She
crumpled in the dark, like a burning, withering paper. All the folds and
corners of her clenched in about her and tick tick tick went the
wristwatch, tick tick tick and another tick to wither on.
Morning. She looked at her husband lying straight and easy on his bed.
She let her hand laze down at the cool space between the beds. All night
her hand had hung in that cold empty interval between. Once she had put
her hand out toward him, stretching, but the space was just a little too
long, she couldn't reach him. She had snapped her hand back, hoping he
hadn't heard the movement of her silent reaching.
There he lay now. His eyes gently closed, the lashes softly interlocked
like clasped fingers. Breathing so quietly you could scarce see his ribs
move. As usual, by this time of morning, he had worked out of his
pajamas. His naked chest was revealed from the waist up. The rest of him
lay under cover. His head lay on the pillow, in thoughtful profile.
There was a beard stubble on his chin.
The morning light showed the white of her eyes. They were the only
things in the room in motion, in slow starts and stops, tracing the
anatomy of the man across from her.
Each little hair was perfect on the chin and cheeks. A tiny hole of
sunlight from the window-shade lay on his chin and picked out, like the
spikes of a music-box cylinder, each little hair on his face.
His wrists on either side of him had little curly black hairs, each
perfect, each separate and shiny and glittering.
The hair on his head was intact, strand by dark strand, down to the
roots. The ears were beautifully carved. The teeth were intact behind
the lips.
"Joseph!" she screamed.
"Joseph!" she screamed again, flailing up in terror.
Bong! Bong! Bong! went the bell thunder across the street, from the
great tiled cathedral!
Pigeons rose in a papery white whirl, like so many magazines fluttered
past the window! The pigeons circled the plaza, spiraling up. Bong! went
the bells! Honk went a taxi horn! Far away down an alley a music box
played "Cielito Lindo."
All these faded into the dripping of the faucet in the bath sink.
Joseph opened his eyes.
His wife sat on her bed, staring at him.
"I thought--" he said. He blinked. "No." He shut his eyes and shook his
head. "Just the bells." A sigh. "What time is it?"
"I don't know. Yes, I do. Eight o'clock."
"Good God," he murmured, turning over. "We can sleep three more hours."
"You've got to get up!" she cried.
"Nobody's up. They won't be to work at the garage until ten, you know
that, you can't rush these people; keep quiet now."
"But you've got to get up," she said.
He half-turned. Sunlight prickled black hairs into bronze on his upper
lip. "Why? Why, in Christ's name, do I have to get up?"
"You need a shave!" she almost screamed.
He moaned. "So I have to get up and lather myself at eight in the
morning because I need a shave."
"Well, you do need one."
"I'm not shaving again till we reach Texas."
"You can't go around looking like a tramp!"
"I can and will. I've shaved every morning for thirty god-damn mornings
and put on a tie and had a crease in my pants. From now on, no pants, no
ties, no shaving, no nothing."
He yanked the covers over his ears so violently that he pulled the
blankets off one of his naked legs.
The leg hung upon the rim of the bed, warm white in the sunlight, each
little black hair--perfect.
Her eyes widened, focused, stared upon it.
She put her hand over her mouth, tight.
He went in and out of the hotel all day. He did not shave. He walked
along the plaza tiles below. He walked so slowly she wanted to throw a
lightning bolt out of the window and hit him. He paused and talked to
the hotel manager below, under a drum-cut tree, shifting his shoes on
the pale blue plaza tiles. He looked at birds on trees and saw how the
State Theatre statues were dressed in fresh morning gilt, and stood on
the corner, watching the traffic carefully. There was no traffic! He was
standing there on purpose, taking his time, not looking back at her. Why
didn't he run, lope down the alley, down the hill to the garage, pound
on the doors, threaten the mechanics, lift them by their pants, shove
them into the car motor! He stood instead, watching the ridiculous
traffic pass. A hobbled swine, a man on a bike, a 1927 Ford, and three
half-nude children. Go, go, go, she screamed silently, and almost
smashed the window.
He sauntered across the street. He went around the corner. All the way
down to the garage he'd stop at windows, read signs, look at pictures,
handle pottery. Maybe he'd stop in for a beer. God, yes, a beer.
She walked in the plaza, took the sun, hunted for more magazines. She
cleaned her fingernails, burnished them, took a bath, walked again in
the plaza, ate very little, and returned to the room to feed upon her
magazines.
She did not lie down. She was afraid to. Each time she did she fell into
a half-dream, half-drowse in which all her childhood was revealed in a
helpless melancholy. Old friends, children she hadn't seen or thought of
in twenty years filled her mind. And she thought of things she wanted to
do and had never done. She had meant to call Lila Holdridge for the past
eight years since college, but somehow she never had. What friends they
had been! Dear Lila! She thought, when lying down, of all the books, the
fine new and old books, she had meant to buy and might never buy now and
read. How she loved books and the smell of books. She thought of a
thousand old sad things. She'd wanted to own the Oz books all her life,
yet had never bought them. Why not? while yet there was life! The first
thing she'd do would be to buy them when she got back to New York! And
she'd call Lila immediately! And she'd see Bert and Jimmy and Helen and
Louise, and go back to Illinois and walk around in her childhood place
and see the things to be seen there. If she got back to the States. If.
Her heart beat painfully in her, paused, held on to itself, and beat
again. If she ever got back.
She lay listening to her heart, critically.
Thud and a thud and a thud. Pause. Thud and a thud and a thud. Pause.
What if it should stop while she was listening?
There!
Silence inside her.
"Joseph!"
She leaped up. She grabbed at her breasts as if to squeeze, to pump to
start the silent heart again!
It opened in her, closed, rattled and beat nervously, twenty rapid,
shot-like times!
She sank on to the bed. What if it should stop again and not start? What
would she think? What would there be to do? She'd die of fright, that's
what. A joke; it was very humorous. Die of fright if you heard your
heart stop. She would have to listen to it, keep it beating. She wanted
to go home and see Lila and buy the books and dance again and walk in
Central Park and--listen----
Thud and a thud and a thud. Pause.
Joseph knocked on the door. Joseph knocked on the door and the car was
not repaired and there would be another night; and Joseph did not shave
and each little hair was perfect on his chin, and the magazine shops
were closed and there were no more magazines, and they ate supper, a
little bit anyway for her, and he went out in the evening to walk in the
town.
She sat once more in the chair and slow erections of hair rose as if a
magnet were passed over her neck. She was very weak and could not move
from the chair, and she had no body, she was only a heart-beat, a huge
pulsation of warmth and ache between four walls of the room. Her eyes
were hot and pregnant, swollen with child of terror behind the bellied,
tautened lips.
Deeply inside herself, she felt the first little cog slip. Another
night, another night, another night, she thought. And this will be
longer than the last. The first little cog slipped, the pendulum missed
a stroke. Followed by the second and third interrelated cogs. The cogs
interlocked, a small with a little larger one, the little larger one
with a bit larger one, the bit larger one with a large one, the large
one with a huge one, the huge one with an immense one, the immense one
with a titanic one. . . .
A red ganglion, no bigger than a scarlet thread, snapped and quivered; a
nerve, no greater than a red linen fiber twisted. Deep in her one little
mech was gone and the entire machine, imbalanced, was about to steadily
shake itself to bits.
She didn't fight it. She let it quake and terrorize her and knock the
sweat off her brow and jolt down her spine and flood her mouth with
horrible wine. She felt as if a broken gyro tilted now this way, now
that and blundered and trembled and whined in her. The color fell from
her face like light leaving a clicked-off bulb, the crystal cheeks of
the bulb vessel showing veins and filaments all colorless. . . .
Joseph was in the room, he had come in, but she didn't even hear him. He
was in the room but it made no difference, he changed nothing with his
coming. He was getting ready for bed and said nothing as he moved about
and she said nothing but fell into the bed while he moved around in a
smoke-filled space beyond her and once he spoke but she didn't hear him.
She timed it. Every five minutes she looked at her watch and the watch
shook and time shook and the five fingers were fifteen moving,
reassembling into five. The shaking never stopped. She called for water.
She turned and turned upon the bed. The wind blew outside, cocking the
lights and spilling bursts of illumination that hit buildings glancing
sidelong blows, causing windows to glitter like opened eyes and shut
swiftly as the light tilted in yet another direction. Downstairs, all
was quiet after the dinner, no sounds came up into their silent room. He
handed her a water glass.
"I'm cold Joseph," she said, lying deep in folds of cover.
"You're all right," he said.
"No, I'm not. I'm not well. I'm afraid."
"There's nothing to be afraid of."
"I want to get on the train for the United States."
"There's a train in Leon, but none here," he said, lighting a new
cigarette.
"Let's drive there."
"In these taxis, with these drivers, and leave our car here?"
"Yes. I want to go."
"You'll be all right in the morning."
"I know I won't be. I'm not well."
He said, "It would cost hundreds of dollars to have the car shipped
home."
"I don't care. I have two hundred dollars in the bank home. I'll pay for
it. But, please, let's go home."
"When the sun shines tomorrow you'll feel better, it's just that the
sun's gone now."
"Yes, the sun's gone and the wind's blowing," she whispered, closing her
eyes, turning her head, listening. "Oh, what a lonely wind. Mexico's a
strange land. All the jungles and deserts and lonely stretches, and here
and there a little town, like this, with a few lights burning you could
put out with a snap of your fingers . . ."
"It's pretty big country," he said.
"Don't these people ever get lonely?"
"They're used to it this way."
"Don't they get afraid, then?"
"They have a religion for that."
"I wish I had a religion."
"The minute you get a religion you stop thinking," he said. "Believe in
one thing too much and you have no room for new ideas."
"Tonight," she said, faintly. "I'd like nothing more than to have no
more room for new ideas, to stop thinking, to believe in one thing so
much it leaves me no time to be afraid."
"You're not afraid," he said.
"If I had a religion," she said, ignoring him, "I'd have a lever with
which to lift myself. But I haven't a lever now and I don't know how to
lift myself."
"Oh, for God's--" he mumbled to himself, sitting down.
"I used to have a religion," she said.
"Baptist."
"No, that was when I was twelve. I got over that. I mean--later."
"You never told me."
"You should have known," she said.
"What religion? Plaster saints in the sacristy? Any special saint you
liked to tell your beads to?"
"Yes."
"And did he answer your prayers?"
"For a little while. Lately, no, never. Never any more. Not for years
now. But I keep praying."
"Which saint is this?"
"Saint Joseph."
"Saint Joseph." He got up and poured himself a glass of water from the
glass pitcher, and it was a lonely trickling sound in the room. "My
name."
"Coincidence," she said.
They looked at one another for a few moments.
He looked away. "Plaster saints," he said, drinking the water down.
After a while she said, "Joseph?" He said, "Yes?" and she said, "Come
hold my hand, will you?" "Women," he sighed. He came and held her hand.
After a minute she drew her hand away, hid it under the blanket, leaving
his hand empty behind. With her eyes closed she trembled the words,
"Never mind. It's not as nice as I can imagine it. It's really nice the
way I can make you hold my hand in my mind." "Gods," he said, and went
into the bathroom. She turned off the light. Only the small crack of
light under the bathroom door showed. She listened to her heart. It beat
one hundred and fifty times a minute, steadily, and the little whining
tremor was still in her marrow, as if each bone of her body had a
blue-bottle fly imprisoned in it, hovering, buzzing, shaking, quivering
deep, deep, deep. Her eyes reversed into herself, to watch the secret
heart of herself pounding itself to pieces against the side of her
chest.
Water ran in the bathroom. She heard him washing his teeth.
"Joseph!"
"Yes," he said, behind the shut door.
"Come here."
"What do you want?"
"I want you to promise me something, please, oh, please."
"What is it?"
"Open the door, first."
"What is it?" he demanded, behind the closed door.
"Promise me," she said, and stopped.
"Promise you what?" he asked, after a long pause.
"Promise me," she said, and couldn't go on. She lay there. He said
nothing. She heard the watch and her heart pounding together. A lantern
creaked on the hotel exterior. "Promise me, if anything-- happens," she
heard herself say, muffled and paralyzed, as if she were on one of the
surrounding hills talking at him from the distance, "--if anything
happens to me, you won't let me be buried here in the graveyard over
those terrible catacombs!"
"Don't be foolish," he said, behind the door.
"Promise me?" she said, eyes wide in the dark.
"Of all the foolish things to talk about."
"Promise, please promise?"
"You'll be all right in the morning," he said.
"Promise so I can sleep. I can sleep if only you'd say you wouldn't let
me be put there. I don't want to be put there."
"Honestly," he said, out of patience.
"Please," she said.
"Why should I promise anything so ridiculous?" he said. "You'll be fine
tomorrow. And besides, if you died, you'd look very pretty in the
catacomb standing between Mr. Grimace and Mr. Gape, with a sprig of
morning-glory in your hair." And he laughed sincerely.
Silence. She lay there in the dark.
"Don't you think you'll look pretty there?" he asked, laughingly, behind
the door.
She said nothing in the dark room.
"Don't you?" he said.
Somebody walked down below in the plaza, faintly, fading away.
"Eh?" he asked her, brushing his teeth.
She lay there, staring up at the ceiling, her breast rising and falling
faster, faster, faster, the air going in and out, in and out her
nostrils, a little trickle of blood coming from her clenched lips. Her
eyes were very wide, her hands blindly constricted the bedclothes.
"Eh?" he said again behind the door.
She said nothing.
"Sure," he talked to himself. "Pretty as hell," he murmured, under the
flow of tap water. He rinsed his mouth. "Sure," he said.
Nothing from her in the bed.
"Women are funny," he said to himself in the mirror.
She lay in the bed.
"Sure," he said. He gargled with some antiseptic, spat it down the
drain. "You'll be all right in the morning," he said.
Not a word from her.
"We'll get the car fixed."
She didn't say anything.
"Be morning before you know it." He was screwing caps on things now,
putting freshener on his face. "And the car fixed tomorrow, maybe, at
the very latest the next day. You won't mind another night here, will
you?"
She didn't answer.
"Will you?" he asked.
No reply.
The light blinked out under the bathroom door.
"Marie?"
He opened the door.
"Asleep?"
She lay with eyes wide, breasts moving up and down.
"Asleep," he said. "Well, good night, lady."
He climbed into his bed. "Tired," he said.
No reply.
"Tired," he said.
The wind tossed the lights outside; the room was oblong and black and he
was in his bed dozing already.
She lay, eyes wide, the watch ticking on her wrist, breasts moving up
and down.
It was a fine day coming through the Tropic of Cancer. The automobile
pushed along the turning road leaving the jungle country behind, heading
for the United States, roaring between the green hills, taking every
turn, leaving behind a faint vanishing trail of exhaust smoke. And
inside the shiny automobile sat Joseph with his pink, healthy face and
his Panama hat, and a little camera cradled on his lap as he drove; a
swathe of black silk pinned around the left upper arm of his tan coat.
He watched the country slide by and absent-mindedly made a gesture to
the seat beside him, and stopped. He broke into a little sheepish smile
and turned once more to the window of his car, humming a tuneless tune,
his right hand slowly reaching over to touch the seat beside him . . .
Which was empty.

The Watchful Poker Chip of H. Matisse
When first we meet George Garvey he is nothing at all. Later he'll wear
a white poker chip monocle, with a blue eye painted on it by Matisse
himself. Later, a golden bird cage might trill within George Garvey's
false leg, and his good left hand might possibly be fashioned of
shimmering copper and jade.
But at the beginning--gaze upon a terrifyingly ordinary man.
"Financial section, dear?"
The newspapers rattle in his evening apartment.
"Weatherman says 'rain tomorrow.'"
The tiny black hairs in his nostrils breathe in, breathe out, softly,
softly, hour after hour.
"Time for bed."
By his look, quite obviously born of several 1907 wax window dummies.
And with the trick, much admired by magicians, of sitting in a green
velour chair and--vanishing! Turn your head and you forgot his face.
Vanilla pudding.
Yet the merest accident made him the nucleus for the wildest avant-garde
literary movement in history!
Garvey and his wife had lived enormously alone for twenty years. She was
a lovely carnation, but the hazard of meeting him pretty well kept
visitors off. Neither husband nor wife suspected Garvey's talent for
mummifying people instantaneously. Both claimed they were satisfied
sitting alone nights after a brisk day at the office. Both worked at
anonymous jobs. And sometimes even they could not recall the name of the
colorless company which used them like white paint on white paint.
Enter the avant-garde! Enter The Cellar Septet!
These odd souls had flourished in Parisian basements listening to a
rather sluggish variety of jazz, preserved a highly volatile
relationship six months or more, and, returning to the United States on
the point of clamorous disintegration, stumbled into Mr. George Garvey.
"My God!" cried Alexander Pape, erstwhile potentate of the clique. "I
met the most astounding bore. You simply must see him! At Bill Timmins'
apartment house last night, a note said he'd return in an hour. In the
hall this Garvey chap asked if I'd like to wait in his apartment. There
we sat, Garvey, his wife, myself! Incredible! He's a monstrous Ennui,
produced by our materialistic society. He knows a billion ways to
paralyze you! Absolutely rococo with the talent to induce stupor, deep
slumber, or stoppage of the heart. What a case study. Let's all go
visit!"
They swarmed like vultures! Life flowed to Garvey's door, life sat in
his parlor. The Cellar Septet perched on his fringed sofa, eyeing their
prey.
Garvey fidgeted.
"Anyone wants to smoke--" He smiled faintly. "Why--go right
ahead--smoke."
Silence.
The instructions were: "Mum's the word. Put him on the spot. That's the
only way to see what a colossal norm he is. American culture at absolute
zero!"
After three minutes of unblinking quiet, Mr. Garvey leaned forward.
"Eh," he said, "what's your business. Mr. . . . ?"
"Crabtree. The poet."
Garvey mused over this.
"How's," he said, "business?"
Not a sound.
Here lay a typical Garvey silence. Here sat the largest manufacturer and
deliverer of silences in the world; name one, he could provide it
packaged and tied with throat-clearings and whispers. Embarrassed,
pained, calm, serene, indifferent, blessed, golden, or nervous silences;
Garvey was in there.
Well, The Cellar Septet simply wallowed in this particular evening's
silence. Later, in their cold-water flat, over a bottle of "adequate
little red wine" (they were experiencing a phase which led them to
contact real reality) they tore this silence to bits and worried it.
"Did you see how he fingered his collar! Ho!"
"By God, though, I must admit he's almost 'cool.' Mention Muggsy Spanier
and Bix Beiderbecke. Notice his expression. Very cool. I wish I could
look so uncaring, so unemotional."
Ready for bed, George Garvey, reflecting upon this extraordinary
evening, realized that when situations got out of hand, when strange
books or music were discussed, he panicked, he froze.
This hadn't seemed to cause undue concern among his rather oblique
guests. In fact, on the way out, they had shaken his hand vigorously,
thanked him for a splendid time!
"What a really expert A-number-1 bore!" cried Alexander Pape, across
town.
"Perhaps he's secretly laughing at us," said Smith, the minor poet, who
never agreed with Pape if he was awake.
"Let's fetch Minnie and Tom; they'd love Garvey. A rare night. We'll
talk of it for months!"
"Did you notice?" asked Smith, the minor poet, eyes closed smugly. "When
you turn the taps in their bathroom?" He paused dramatically. "Hot
water."
Everyone stared irritably at Smith.
They hadn't thought to try.
The clique, an incredible yeast, soon burst doors and windows, growing.
"You haven't met the Garveys? My God! lie back down in your coffin!
Garvey must rehearse. No one's that boorish without Stanislavsky!" Here
the speaker, Alexander Pape, who depressed the entire group because he
did perfect imitations, now aped Garvey's slow, self-conscious delivery:
"'Ulysses? Wasn't that the book about the Greek, the ship, and the
one-eyed monster! Beg pardon?'" A pause. "'Oh.'" Another pause. "'I
see.'" A sitting back. "'Ulysses was written by James ce? Odd. I could
swear I remember, years ago, in school. . .'"
In spite of everyone hating Alexander Pape for his brilliant imitations,
they roared as he went on:
"'Tennessee Williams? Is he the man who wrote that hillbilly "Waltz?"
"Quick! What's Garvey's home address?" everyone cried.
"My," observed Mr. Garvey to his wife, "life is fun these days."
"It's you," replied his wife. "Notice, they hang on your every word."
"Their attention is rapt," said Mr. Garvey, "to the point of hysteria.
The least thing I say absolutely explodes them. Odd. My jokes at the
office always met a stony wall. Tonight, for instance, I wasn't trying
to be funny at all. I suppose it's an unconscious little stream of wit
that flows quietly under everything I do or say. Nice to know I have it
in reserve. Ah, there's the bell. Here we go!"
"He's especially rare if you get him out of bed at four A.M.," said
Alexander Pape. "The combination of exhaustion and fin de siècle
morality is a regular salad!"
Everyone was pretty miffed at Pape for being first to think of seeing
Garvey at dawn. Nevertheless, interest ran high after midnight in late
October.
Mr. Garvey's subconscious told him in utmost secrecy that he was the
opener of a theatrical season, his success dependent upon the staying
power of the ennui he inspired in others. Enjoying himself, he
nevertheless guessed why these lemmings thronged to his private sea.
Underneath, Garvey was a surprisingly brilliant man, but his
unimaginative parents had crushed him in the Terribly Strange Bed of
their environment. From there he had been thrown to a larger
lemon-squeezer: his Office, his Factory, his Wife. The result: a man
whose potentialities were a time bomb in his own parlor. The Garvey's
repressed subconscious half recognized that the avant-gardists had never
met anyone like him, or rather had met millions like him but had never
considered studying one before.
So here he was, the first of autumn's celebrities. Next month it might
be some abstractionist from Allentown who worked on a twelve-foot ladder
shooting house-paint, in two colors only, blue and cloud-gray, from
cake-decorators and insecticide-sprayers on canvas covered with layers
of mucilage and coffee grounds, who simply needed appreciation to grow!
or a Chicago tin-cutter of mobiles, aged fifteen, already ancient with
knowledge. Mr. Garvey's shrewd subconscious grew even more suspicious
when he made the terrible mistake of reading the avant-garde's favorite
magazine, Nucleus.
"This article on Dante, now," said Garvey. "Fascinating. Especially
where it discusses the spatial metaphors conveyed in the foothills of
the Antipurgatorio and the Paradiso Terrestre on top of the Mountain.
The bit about Cantos XV--XVIII, the so-called 'doctrinal cantos' is
brilliant!"
How did The Cellar Septet react?
Stunned, all of them!
There was a noticeable chill.
They departed in short order when instead of being a delightfully
mass-minded, keep-up-with-the-Joneses, machine-dominated chap leading a
wishywashy life of quiet desperation, Garvey enraged them with opinions
on Does Existentialism Still Exist, or Is Kraft-Ebbing? They didn't want
opinions on alchemy and symbolism given in a piccolo voice, Garvey's
subconscious warned him. They only wanted Garvey's good old-fashioned
plain white bread and churned country butter, to be chewed on later at a
dim bar, exclaiming how priceless!
Garvey retreated.
Next night he was his old precious self. Dale Carnegie? Splendid
religious leader! Hart Schaffner & Marx? Better than Bond Street! Member
of the After-Shave Club? That was Garvey! Latest Book-of-the-Month? Here
on the table! Had they ever tried Elinor Glyn?
The Cellar Septet was horrified, delighted. They let themselves be
bludgeoned into watching Milton Berle. Garvey laughed at everything
Berle said. It was arranged for neighbors to tape-record various daytime
soap operas which Garvey replayed evenings with religious awe, while the
Cellar Septet analyzed his face and his complete devotion to Ma Perkins
and John's Other Wife.
Oh, Garvey was getting sly. His inner self observed: You're on top. Stay
there! Please your public! Tomorrow, play the Two Black Crows records!
Mind your step! Bonnie Baker, now . . . that's it! They'll shudder,
incredulous that you really like her singing. What about Guy Lombardo?
That's the ticket!
The mob-mind, said his subconscious. You're symbolic of the crowd. They
came to study the dreadful vulgarity of this imaginary Mass Man they
pretend to hate. But they're fascinated with the snake-pit.
Guessing his thought, his wife objected. "They like you."
"In a frightening sort of way," he said. "I've lain awake figuring why
they should come see me! Always hated and bored myself. Stupid,
tattletale-gray man. Not an original thought in my mind. All I know now
is: I love company. I've always wanted to be gregarious, never had the
chance. It's been a ball these last months! But their interest is dying.
I want company forever! What shall Ido?"
His subconscious provided shopping lists.
Beer. It's unimaginative.
Pretzels. Delightfully "passé."
Stop by Mother's. Pick up Max field Parrish painting, the flyspecked,
sunburnt one. Lecture on same tonight.
By December Mr. Garvey was really frightened.
The Cellar Septet was now quite accustomed to Milton Berle and Guy
Lombardo. In fact, they had rationalized themselves into a position
where they acclaimed Berle as really too rare for the American public,
and Lombardo was twenty years ahead of his time; the nastiest people
liked him for the commonest reasons.
Garvey's empire trembled.
Suddenly he was just another person, no longer diverting the tastes of
friends, but frantically pursuing them as they seized at Nora Bayes, the
1917 Knickerbocker Quartette, Al Jolson singing "Where Did Robinson
Crusoe Go With Friday on Saturday Night," and Shep Fields and his
Rippling Rhythm. Maxfield Parrish's rediscovery left Mr. Garvey in the
north pasture. Overnight, everyone agreed, "Beer's intellectual. What a
shame so many idiots drink it."
In short, his friends vanished. Alexander Pape, it was rumored, for a
lark, was even considering hot water for his cold-water flat. This ugly
canard was quashed, but not before Alexander Pape suffered a comedown
among the cognoscenti.
Garvey sweated to anticipate the shifting taste! He increased the free
food output, foresaw the swing back to the Roaring Twenties by wearing
hairy knickers and displaying his wife in a tube dress and boyish bob
long before anyone else.
But, the vultures came, ate, and ran. Now that this frightful Giant, TV,
strode the world, they were busily re-embracing radio. Bootlegged 1935
transcriptions of Vic and Sade and Pepper Young's Family were fought
over at intellectual galas.
At long last, Garvey was forced to turn to a series of miraculous tours
de force, conceived and carried out by his panic-stricken inner self.
The first accident was a slammed car door.
Mr. Garvey's little fingertip was neatly cut off!
In the resultant chaos, hopping about, Garvey stepped on, then kicked
the fingertip into a street drain. By the time they fished it out, no
doctor would bother sewing it back on.
A happy accident! Next day, strolling by an oriental shop, Garvey spied
a beautiful objet d'art. His peppy old subconscious, considering his
steadily declining box office and his poor audiencerating among the
avant-garde, forced him into the shop and dragged out his wallet.
"Have you seen Garvey lately!" screamed Alexander Pape on the phone. "My
God, go see!"
"What's that?"
Everyone stared.
"Mandarin's finger-guard." Garvey waved his hand casually. "Oriental
antique. Mandarins used them to protect the five-inch nails they
cultivated." He drank his beer, the gold-thimbled little finger cocked.
"Everyone hates cripples, the sight of things missing. It was sad losing
my finger. But I'm happier with this gold thingamajig."
"It's a much nicer finger now than any of us can ever have." His wife
dished them all a little green salad. "And George has the right to use
it."
Garvey was shocked and charmed as his dwindling popularity returned. Ah,
art! Ah, life! The pendulum swinging back and forth, from complex to
simple, again to complex. From romantic to realistic, back to romantic.
The clever man could sense intellectual perihelions, and prepare for the
violent new orbits. Garvey's subconscious brilliance sat up, began to
eat a bit, and some days dared to walk about, trying its unused limbs.
It caught fire!
"How unimaginative the world is," his long-neglected other self said,
using his tongue. "If somehow my leg were severed accidentally I
wouldn't wear a wooden leg, no! I'd have a gold leg crusted with
precious stones made, and part of the leg would be a golden cage in
which a bluebird would sing as I walked or sat talking to friends. And
if my arm were cut off I'd have a new arm made of copper and jade, all
hollow inside, a section for dry ice in it. And five other compartments,
one for each finger. Drink, anyone? I'd cry. Sherry? Brandy? Dubonnet?
Then I'd twist each finger calmly over the glasses. From five fingers,
five cool streams, five liqueurs or wines. I'd tap the golden faucets
shut. 'Bottoms up!' I'd cry.
"But, most of all, one almost wishes that one's eye would offend one,
Pluck it out, the Bible says. It was the Bible, wasn't it? If that
happened to me, I'd use no grisly glass eyes, by God. None of those
black, pirate's patches. Know what I'd do? I'd mail a poker chip to your
friend in France, what's his name? Matisse! I'd say, 'Enclosed find
poker chip, and personal check. Please paint on this chip one beautiful
blue human eye. Yrs. sincerely, G. Garvey!'"
Well, Garvey had always abhorred his body, found his eyes pale, weak,
lacking character. So he was not surprised a month later (when his
Gallup ran low again) to see his right eye water, fester, and then pull
a complete blank!
Garvey was absolutely bombed!
But--equally--secretly pleased.
With the Cellar Septet smiling like a jury of gargoyles at his elbow, he
airmailed the poker chip to France with a check for fifty dollars.
The check returned, uncashed, a week later.
In the next mail came the poker chip.
H. Matisse had painted a rare, beautiful blue eye on it, delicately
lashed and browed. H. Matisse had tucked this chip in a greenplush
jeweler's box, quite obviously as delighted as was Garvey with the
entire enterprise.
Harper's Bazaar published a picture of Garvey, wearing the Matisse
poker-chip eye, and yet another of Matisse, himself, painting the
monocle after considerable experimentation with three dozen chips!
H. Matisse had had the uncommon good sense to summon a photographer to
Leica the affair for posterity. He was quoted. "After I had thrown away
twenty-seven eyes, I finally got the very one I wanted. It flies
posthaste to Monsieur Garvey!"
Reproduced in six colors, the eye rested balefully in its greenplush
box. Duplicates were struck off for sales by the Museum of Modern Art.
The Friends of the Cellar Septet played poker, using red chips with blue
eyes, white chips with red eyes, and blue chips with white eyes.
But there was only one man in New York who wore the original Matisse
monocle and that was Mr. Garvey.
"I'm still a nervewracking bore," he told his wife, "but now they'll
never know what a dreadful ox I am underneath the monocle and the
Mandarin's finger. And if their interest should happen to dwindle again,
one can always arrange to lose an arm or leg. No doubt of it. I've
thrown up a wondrous façade; no one will ever find the ancient boor
again."
And as his wife put it only the other afternoon: "I hardly think of him
as the old George Garvey any more. He's changed his name. Giulio, he
wants to be called. Sometimes, at night, I look over at him and call,
'George,' but there's no answer. There he is, that mandarin's thimble on
his little finger, the white and blue Matisse Poker-Chip monocle in his
eye. I wake up and look at him often. And do you know? Sometimes that
incredible Matisse Poker Chip seems to give out with a monstrous wink."

Skeleton
It was past time for him to see the doctor again. Mr. Harris turned
palely in at the stair well, and on his way up the flight saw Dr.
Burleigh's name gilded over a pointing arrow. Would Dr. Burleigh sigh
when he walked in? After all, this would make the tenth trip so far this
year. But Burleigh shouldn't complain; he was paid for the examinations!
The nurse looked Mr. Harris over and smiled, a bit amusedly, as she
tiptoed to the glazed glass door, opened it, and put her head in. Harris
thought he heard her say, "Guess who's here, Doctor." And didn't the
doctor's voice reply, faintly, "Oh, my God, again?" Harris swallowed
uneasily.
When Harris walked in, Dr. Burleigh snorted. "Aches in your bones again!
Ah! !" He scowled and adjusted his glasses. "My dear Harris, you've been
curried with the finest-tooth combs and bacteria-brushes known to
science. You're just nervous. Let's see your fingers. Too many
cigarettes. Let's smell your breath. Too much protein. Let's see your
eyes. Not enough sleep. My response? Go to bed, stop the protein, no
smoking. Ten dollars, please."
Harris stood sulking.
The doctor glanced up from his papers. "You still here? You're a
hypochondriac! That's eleven dollars, now."
"But why should my bones ache?" asked Harris.
Dr. Burleigh spoke as to a child. "You ever had a sore muscle, and kept
irritating it, fussing with it, rubbing it? It gets worse, the more you
bother it. Then you leave it alone and the pain vanishes. You realize
you caused most of the soreness, yourself. Well, son, that's what's with
you. Leave yourself alone. Take a dose of salts. Get out of here and
take that trip to Phoenix you've stewed about for months. Do you good to
travel!"
Five minutes later, Mr. Harris riffled through a classified phone
directory at the corner druggist's. A fine lot of sympathy one got from
blind fools like Burleigh! He passed his finger down a list of BONE
SPECIALISTS, found one named M. Munigant. Munigant lacked an M.D., or
any other academic lettering behind his name, but his office was
conveniently near. Three blocks down, one block over. . . .
M. Munigant, like his office, was small and dark. Like his office, he
smelled of iodoform, iodine, and other odd things. He was a good
listener, though, and listened with eager shiny moves of his eyes, and
when he talked to Harris, his accent was such that he softly whistled
each word; undoubtedly because of imperfect dentures.
Harris told all.
M. Munigant nodded. He had seen cases like this before. The bones of the
body. Man was not aware of his bones. Ah, yes, the bones. The skeleton.
Most difficult. Something concerning an imbalance, an unsympathetic
coordination between soul, flesh, and skeleton. Very complicated, softly
whistled M. Munigant. Harris listened, fascinated. Now, here was a
doctor who understood his illness! Psychological, said M. Munigant. He
moved swiftly, delicately to a dingy wall and slashed down half a dozen
X-rays to haunt the room with their look of things found floating in an
ancient tide. Here, here! The skeleton surprised! Here luminous
portraits of the long, the short, the large, the small bones. Mr. Harris
must be aware of his position, his problem! M. Munigant's hand tapped,
rattled, whispered, scratched at faint nebulae of flesh in which hung
ghosts of cranium, spinal-cord, pelvis, lime, calcium, marrow, here,
there, this, that, these, those, and others! Look!
Harris shuddered. The X-rays and the paintings blew in a green and
phosphorescent wind from a land peopled by the monsters of Dali and
Fuseli.
M. Munigant whistled quietly. Did Mr. Harris wish his bones--treated?
"That depends," said Harris.
Well, M. Munigant could not help Harris unless Harris was in the proper
mood. Psychologically, one had to need help, or the doctor was useless.
But (shrugging) M. Munigant would "try."
Harris lay on a table with his mouth open. The lights were switched off,
the shades drawn. M. Munigant approached his patient.
Something touched Harris's tongue.
He felt his jawbones forced out. They creaked and made faint cracking
noises. One of those skeleton charts on the dim wall seemed to quiver
and jump. A violent shudder seized Harris. Involuntarily, his mouth
snapped shut.
M. Munigant shouted. His nose had almost been bitten off! No use, no
use! Now was not the time! M. Munigant whispered the shades up,
dreadfully disappointed. When Mr. Harris felt he could cooperate
psychologically, when Mr. Harris really needed help and trusted M.
Munigant to help him, then maybe something could be done. M. Munigant
held out his little hand. In the meantime, the fee was only two dollars.
Mr. Harris must begin to think. Here was a sketch for Mr. Harris to take
home and study. It would acquaint him with his body. He must be
tremblingly aware of himself. He must be on guard. Skeletons were
strange, unwieldy things. M. Munigant's eyes glittered. Good day to Mr.
Harris. Oh, and would he care for a breadstick? M. Munigant proffered a
jar of long hard salty breadsticks to Harris, taking one himself, saying
that chewing breadsticks kept him in--ah--practice. Good day, good day,
to Mr. Harris! Mr. Harris went home.
The next day, Sunday, Mr. Harris discovered innumerable fresh aches and
pains in his body. He spent the morning, his eyes fixed staring with new
interest at the small, anatomically perfect painting of a skeleton M.
Munigant had given him.
His wife, Clarisse, startled him at dinner when she cracked her
exquisitely thin knuckles, one by one, until he clapped his hands to his
ears and cried, "Stop!"
The rest of the afternoon he quarantined himself in his room. Clarisse
played bridge in the parlor laughing and chatting with three other
ladies while Harris, hidden away, fingered and weighed the limbs of his
body with growing curiosity. After an hour he suddenly rose and called:
"Clarisse!"
She had a way of dancing into any room, her body doing all sorts of
soft, agreeable things to keep her feet from ever quite touching the nap
of a rug. She excused herself from her friends and came to see him now,
brightly. She found him re-seated in a far corner and she saw that he
was staring at the anatomical sketch. "Are you still brooding, sweet?"
she asked. "Please don't." She sat upon his knees.
Her beauty could not distract him now in his absorption. He juggled her
lightness, he touched her kneecap, suspiciously. It seemed to move under
her pale, glowing skin. "Is it supposed to do that?" he asked, sucking
in his breath.
"Is what supposed to do what?" she laughed. "You mean my kneecap?"
"Is it supposed to run around on top your knee that way?"
She experimented. "So it does," she marveled.
"I'm glad yours slithers, too," he sighed. "I was beginning to worry."
"About what?"
He patted his ribs. "My ribs don't go all the way down, they stop here.
And I found some confounded ones that dangle in midair!"
Beneath the curve of her small breasts, Clarisse clasped her hands.
"Of course, silly, everybody's ribs stop at a given point. And those
funny short ones are floating ribs."
"I hope they don't float around too much." The joke was most uneasy.
Now, above all, he wished to be alone. Further discoveries, newer and
stranger archaeological diggings, lay within reach of his trembling
hands, and he did not wish to be laughed at.
"Thanks for coming in, dear," he said.
"Any time." She rubbed her small nose softly against his.
"Wait! Here, now. . ." He put his finger to touch his nose and hers.
"Did you realize? The nose-bone grows down only this far. From there on
a lot of gristly tissue fills out the rest!"
She wrinkled hers. "Of course, darling!" And she danced from the room.
Now, sitting alone, he felt the perspiration rise from the pools and
hollows of his face, to flow in a thin tide down his cheeks. He licked
his lips and shut his eyes. Now. . . now. . . next on the agenda, what .
. .? The spinal cord, yes. Here. Slowly, he examined it, in the same way
he operated the many push-buttons in his office, thrusting them to
summon secretaries, messengers. But now, in these pushings of his spinal
column, fears and terrors answered, rushed from a million doors in his
mind to confront and shake him! His spine felt horribly--unfamiliar.
Like the brittle shards of a fish, freshly eaten, its bones left strewn
on a cold china platter. He seized the little rounded knobbins. "Lord!
Lord!"
His teeth began to chatter. God All-Mighty! he thought, why haven't I
realized it all these years? All these years I've gone around with
a--SKELETON--inside me! How is it we take ourselves for granted? How is
it we never question our bodies and our being?
A skeleton. One of those jointed, snowy, hard things, one of those foul,
dry, brittle, gouge-eyed, skull-faced, shake-fingered, rattling things
that sway from neck-chains in abandoned webbed closets, one of those
things found on the desert all long and scattered like dice!
He stood upright, because he could not bear to remain seated. Inside me
now, he grasped his stomach, his head, inside my head is a--skull. One
of those curved carapaces which holds my brain like an electrical jelly,
one of those cracked shells with the holes in front like two holes shot
through it by a double-barreled shotgun! With its grottoes and caverns
of bone, its revetments and placements for my flesh, my smelling, my
seeing, my hearing, my thinking! A skull, encompassing my brain,
allowing it exit through its brittle windows to see the outside world!
He wanted to dash into the bridge party, upset it, a fox in a
chickenyard, the cards fluttering all around like chicken feathers burst
upward in clouds! He stopped himself only with a violent, trembling
effort. Now, now, man, control yourself. This is a revelation, take it
for what it's worth, understand it, savor it. BUT A SKELETON! screamed
his subconscious. I won't stand for it. It's vulgar, it's terrible, it's
frightening. Skeletons are horrors; they clink and tinkle and rattle in
old castles, hung from oaken beams, making long, indolently rustling
pendulums on the wind. . . .
"Darling, will you come meet the ladies?" His wife's clear, sweet voice
called from far away.
Mr. Harris stood. His SKELETON held him up! This thing inside, this
invader, this horror, was supporting his arms, legs, and head! It was
like feeling someone just behind you who shouldn't be there. With every
step, he realized how dependent he was on this other Thing.
"Darling, I'll be with you in a moment," he called weakly. To himself he
said, Come on, brace up! You've got to go back to work tomorrow. Friday
you must make that trip to Phoenix. It's a long drive. Hundreds of
miles. Must be in shape for that trip or you won't get Mr. Creldon to
invest in your ceramics business. Chin up, now!
A moment later he stood among the ladies, being introduced to Mrs.
Withers, Mrs. Abblematt, and Miss Kirthy, all of whom had skeletons
inside them, but took it very calmly, because nature had carefully
clothed the bare nudity of clavicle, tibia, and femur with breasts,
thighs, calves, with coiffure and eyebrow satanic, with bee-stung lips
and--LORD! shouted Mr. Harris inwardly--when they talk or eat, part of
their skeleton shows--their teeth! I never thought of that. "Excuse me,"
he gasped, and ran from the room only in time to drop his lunch among
the petunias over the garden balustrade.
That night, seated on the bed as his wife undressed, he pared his
toenails and fingernails scrupulously. These parts, too, were where his
skeleton was shoving, indignantly growing out. He must have muttered
part of this theory, because next thing he knew his wife, in negligee,
was on the bed, her arms about his neck, yawning, "Oh, my darling,
fingernails are not bone, they're only hardened epidermis!"
He threw the scissors down. "Are you certain? I hope so. I'd feel
better." He looked at the curve of her body, marveling. "I hope all
people are made the same way."
"If you aren't the darndest hypochondriac!" She held him at arm's
length. "Come on. What's wrong? Tell mama."
"Something inside me," he said. "Something--I ate."
The next morning and all afternoon at his downtown office, Mr. Harris
sorted out the sizes, shapes, and construction of various bones in his
body with displeasure. At ten A.M. he asked to feel Mr. Smith's elbow
one moment. Mr. Smith obliged, but scowled suspiciously. And after lunch
Mr. Harris asked to touch Miss Laurel's shoulder blade and she
immediately pushed herself back against him, purring like a kitten and
shutting her eyes.
"Miss Laurel!" he snapped. "Stop that!"
Alone, he pondered his neuroses. The war was just over, the pressure of
his work, the uncertainty of the future, probably had much to do with
his mental outlook. He wanted to leave the office, get into business for
himself. He had more than a little talent for ceramics and sculpture. As
soon as possible he'd head for Arizona, borrow that money from Mr.
Creldon, build a kiln and set up shop. It was a worry. What a case he
was. But luckily he had contacted M. Munigant, who seemed eager to
understand and help him. He would fight it out with himself, not go back
to either Munigant or Dr. Burleigh unless he was forced to. The alien
feeling would pass. He sat staring into space.
The alien feeling did not pass. It grew.
On Tuesday and Wednesday it bothered him terrifically that his
epidermis, hair and other appendages were of a high disorder, while his
integumented skeleton of himself was a slick clean structure of
efficient organization. Sometimes, in certain lights with his lips drawn
morosely down, weighted with melancholy, he imagined he saw his skull
grinning at him behind the flesh.
Let go! he cried. Let go of me! My lungs! Stop!
He gasped convulsively, as if his ribs were crushing the breath from
him.
My brain--stop squeezing it!
And terrifying headaches burnt his brain to a blind cinder.
My insides, let them be, for God's sake! Stay away from my heart!
His heart cringed from the fanning motion of ribs like pale spiders
crouched and fiddling with their prey.
Drenched with sweat, he lay upon the bed one night while Clarisse was
out attending a Red Cross meeting. He tried to gather his wits but only
grew more aware of the conflict between his dirty exterior and this
beautiful cool clean calciumed thing inside.
His complexion: wasn't it oily and lined with worry?
Observe the flawless, snow-white perfection of the skull.
His nose: wasn't it too large?
Then observe the tiny bones of the skull's nose before that monstrous
nasal cartilage begins forming the lopsided proboscis.
His body: wasn't it plump?
Well, consider the skeleton; slender, svelte, economical of line and
contour. Exquisitely carved oriental ivory! Perfect, thin as a white
praying mantis!
His eyes: weren't they protuberant, ordinary, numb-looking?
Be so kind as to note the eye-sockets of the skull; so deep and rounded,
somber, quiet pools, all-knowing, eternal. Gaze deep and you never touch
the bottom of their dark understanding. All irony, all life, all
everything is there in the cupped darkness.
Compare. Compare. Compare.
He raged for hours. And the skeleton, ever the frail and solemn
philosopher, hung quietly inside, saying not a word, suspended like a
delicate insect within a chrysalis, waiting and waiting.
Harris sat slowly up.
"Wait a minute. Hold on!" he exclaimed. "You're helpless, too. I've got
you, too. I can make you do anything I want! You can't prevent it! I say
move your carpales, metacarpales, and phalanges andsswttup they go, as I
wave to someone!" He laughed. "I order the fibula and femur to locomote
and Hunn two three four, Hunn two three four--we walk around the block.
There!"
Harris grinned.
"It's a fifty-fifty fight. Even-Stephen. And we'll fight it out, we two!
After all, I'm the part that thinks! Yes, by God! yes. Even if I didn't
have you, I could still think!"
Instantly, a tiger's jaw snapped shut, chewing his brain in half. Harris
screamed. The bones of his skull grabbed hold and gave him nightmares.
Then slowly, while he shrieked, nuzzled and ate the nightmares one by
one, until the last one was gone and the light went out.
At the end of the week he postponed the Phoenix trip because of his
health. Weighing himself on a penny scale he saw the slow gliding red
arrow point to: 165.
He groaned. Why, I've weighed 175 for years. I can't have lost ten
pounds! He examined his cheeks in the fly-dotted mirror. Cold, primitive
fear rushed over him in odd little shivers. You, you! I know what you're
about, you!
He shook his fist at his bony face, particularly addressing his remarks
to his superior maxillary, his inferior maxillary, to his cranium and to
his cervical vertebrae.
"You damn thing, you! Think you can starve me, make me lose weight, eh?
Peel the flesh off, leave nothing, but skin on bone. Trying to ditch me,
so you can be supreme, ah? No, no!"
He fled into a cafeteria.
Turkey, dressing, creamed potatoes, four vegetables, three desserts, he
could eat none of it, he was sick to his stomach. He forced himself. His
teeth began to ache. Bad teeth, is it? he thought angrily. I'll eat in
spite of every tooth clanging and banging and rattling so they fall in
my gravy.
His head blazed, his breath jerked in and out of a constricted chest,
his teeth raged with pain, but he knew one small victory. He was about
to drink milk when he stopped and poured it into a vase of nasturtiums.
No calcium for you, my boy, no calcium for you. Never again shall I eat
foods with calcium or other bonefortifying minerals. I'll eat for one of
us, not both, my lad.
"One hundred and fifty pounds," he said, the following week to his wife.
"Do you see how I've changed?"
"For the better," said Clarisse. "You were always a little plump for
your height, darling." She stroked his chin. "I like your face. It's so
much nicer; the lines of it are so firm and strong now."
"They're not my lines, they're his, damn him! You mean to say you like
him better than you like me?"
"Him? Who's 'him'?"
In the parlor mirror, beyond Clarisse, his skull smiled back at him
behind his fleshy grimace of hatred and despair.
Fuming, he popped malt tablets into his mouth. This was one way of
gaining weight when you couldn't keep other foods down. Clarisse noticed
the malt pellets.
"But, darling, really, you don't have to regain the weight for me," she
said.
Oh, shut up! he felt like saying.
She made him lie with his head in her lap. "Darling," she said, "I've
watched you lately. You're so--badly off. You don't say anything, but
you look--hunted. You toss in bed at night. Maybe you should go to a
psychiatrist. But I think I can tell you everything he would say. I've
put it all together from hints you've let escape you. I can tell you
that you and your skeleton are one and the same, 'one nation,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.' United you stand,
divided you fall. If you two fellows can't get along like an old married
couple in the future, go back and see Dr. Burleigh. But, first, relax.
You're in a vicious circle; the rnore you worry, the more your bones
stick out, the more you worry. After all, who picked this fight--you or
that anonymous entity you claim is lurking around behind your alimentary
canal?"
He closed his eyes. "I did. I guess I did. Go on Clarisse, keep
talking."
"You rest now," she said softly. "Rest and forget."
Mr. Harris felt buoyed up for half a day, then he began to sag. It was
all very well to blame his imagination, but this particular skeleton, by
God, was fighting back.
Harris set out for M. Munigant's office late in the day. Walking for
half an hour until he found the address, he caught sight of the name "M.
Munigant" initialed in ancient, flaking gold on a glass plate outside
the building. Then, his bones seemed to explode from their moorings,
blasted and erupted with pain. Blinded, he staggered away. When he
opened his eyes again he had rounded a corner. M. Munigant's office was
out of sight.
The pains ceased.
M. Munigant was the man to help him. If the sight of his name could
cause so titanic a reaction of course M. Munigant must be just the man.
But, not today. Each time he tried to return to that office, the
terrible pains took hold. Perspiring, he had to give up and swayed into
a cocktail bar.
Moving across the dim lounge, he wondered briefly if a lot of blame
couldn't be put on M. Munigant's shoulders. After all, it was Munigant
who'd first drawn specific attention to his skeleton, and let the
psychological impact of it slam home! Could M. Munigant be using him for
some nefarious purpose? But what purpose? Silly to suspect him. Just a
little doctor. Trying to be helpful. Munigant and his jar of
breadsticks. Ridiculous. M. Munigant was okay, okay . . .
There was a sight within the cocktail lounge to give him hope. A large,
fat man, round as a butterball, stood drinking consecutive beers at the
bar. Now there was a successful man. Harris repressed a desire to go up,
clap the fat man's shoulder, and inquire as to how he'd gone about
impounding his bones. Yes, the fat man's skeleton was luxuriously
closeted. There were pillows of fat here, resilient bulges of it there,
with several round chandeliers of fat under his chin. The poor skeleton
was lost; it could never fight clear of that blubber. It might have
tried once--but not now, overwhelmed, not a bony echo of the fat man's
supporter remained.
Not without envy, Harris approached the fat man as one might cut across
the bow of an ocean liner. Harris ordered a drink, drank it, and then
dared to address the fat man:
"Glands?"
"You talking to me?" asked the fat man.
"Or is there a special diet?" wondered Harris. "I beg your pardon, but,
as you see, I'm down. Can't seem to put on any weight. I'd like a
stomach like that one of yours. Did you grow it because you were afraid
of something?"
"You," announced the fat man, "are drunk. But--I like drunkards." He
ordered more drinks. "Listen close, I'll tell you. Layer by layer," said
the fat man, "twenty years, man and boy, I built this." He held his vast
stomach like a globe of the world, teaching his audience its
gastronomical geography. "It was no overnight circus. The tent was not
raised before dawn on the wonders installed within. I have cultivated my
inner organs as if they were thoroughbred dogs, cats, and other animals.
My stomach is a fat pink Persian torn slumbering, rousing at intervals
to purr, mew, growl, and cry for chocolate titbits. I feed it well, it
will 'most sit up for me. And, my dear fellow, my intestines are the
rarest purebred Indian anacondas you ever viewed in the sleekest,
coiled, fine and ruddy health. Keep 'em in prime, I do, all my pets. For
fear of something? Perhaps."
This called for another drink for everyone.
"Gain weight?" The fat man savored the words on his tongue. "Here's what
you do: get yourself a quarreling bird of a wife, a baker's dozen of
relatives who can flush a covey of troubles out from behind the veriest
molehill. Add to these a sprinkling of business associates whose prime
motivation is snatching your last lonely quid, and you are well on your
way to getting fat. How so? In no time you'll begin subconsciously
building fat betwixt yourself and them. A buffer epidermal state, a
cellular wall. You'll soon find that eating is the only fun on earth.
But one needs to be bothered by outside sources. Too many people in this
world haven't enough to worry about, then they begin picking on
themselves, and they lose weight. Meet all of the vile, terrible people
you can possibly meet, and pretty soon you'll be adding the good old
fat!"
And with that advice, the fat man launched himself out into the dark
tide of night, swaying mightily and wheezing.
"That's exactly what Dr. Burleigh told me, slightly changed," said
Harris thoughtfully. "Perhaps that trip to Phoenix, now, at this time--"
The trip from Los Angeles to Phoenix was a sweltering one, crossing, as
it did, the Mojave desert on a broiling yellow day. Traffic was thin and
inconstant, and for long stretches there would not be a car on the road
for miles ahead or behind. Harris twitched his fingers on the steering
wheel. Whether or not Creldon, in Phoenix, lent him the money he needed
to start his business, it was still a good thing to get away, to put
distance behind.
The car moved in the hot sluice of desert wind. The one Mr. H. sat
inside the other Mr. H. Perhaps both perspired. Perhaps both were
miserable.
On a curve, the inside Mr. H. suddenly constricted the outer flesh,
causing him to jerk forward on the hot steering wheel.
The car plunged off the road into boiling sand and turned half over.
Night came, a wind rose, the road was lonely and silent. The few cars
that passed went swiftly on their way, their view obstructed. Mr. Harris
lay unconscious, until very late he heard a wind rising out of the
desert, felt the sting of little sand needles on his cheeks, and opened
his eyes.
Morning found him gritty-eyed and wandering in thoughtless senseless
circles, having, in his delirium, got away from the road. At noon he
sprawled in the poor shade of a bush. The sun struck him with a keen
sword edge, cutting through to his--bones. A vulture circled.
Harris' parched lips cracked open. "So that's it?" he whispered,
red-eyed, bristle-cheeked. "One way or another you'll walk me, starve
me, thirst me, kill me." He swallowed dry burrs of dust. "Sun cook off
my flesh so you can peek out. Vultures lunch off me, and there you'll
lie, grinning. Grinning with victory. Like a bleached xylophone strewn
and played by vultures with an ear for odd music. You'd like that.
Freedom."
He walked on through a landscape that shivered and bubbled in the direct
pour of sunlight; stumbling, falling flat, lying to feed himself little
mouths of fire. The air was blue alcohol flame, and vultures roasted and
steamed and glittered as they flew in glides and circles. Phoenix. The
road. Car. Water. Safety.
"Hey!"
Someone called from way off in the blue alcohol flame.
Mr. Harris propped himself up.
"Hey!"
The call was repeated. A crunching of footsteps, quick.
With a cry of unbelievable relief, Harris rose, only to collapse again
into the arms of someone in a uniform with a badge.
The car tediously hauled, repaired, Phoenix reached, Harris found
himself in such an unholy state of mind that the business transaction
was a numb pantomime. Even when he got the loan and held the money in
his hand, it meant nothing. This Thing within him like a hard white
sword in a scabbard tainted his business, his eating, colored his love
for Clarisse, made it unsafe to trust an automobile; all in all this
Thing had to be put in its place. The desert incident had brushed too
close. Too near the bone, one might say with an ironic twist of one's
mouth. Harris heard himself thanking Mr. Creldon, dimly, for the money.
Then he turned his car and motored back across the long miles, this time
cutting across to San Diego, so he would miss that desert stretch
between El Centro and Beaumont. He drove north along the coast. He
didn't trust that desert. But--careful! Salt waves boomed, hissing on
the beach outside Laguna. Sand, fish and crustacea would cleanse his
bones as swiftly as vultures. Slow down on the curves over the surf.
Damn, he was sick!
Where to turn? Clarisse? Burleigh? Munigant? Bone specialist. Munigant.
Well?
"Darling!" Clarisse kissed him. He winced at the solidness of the teeth
and jaw behind the passionate exchange.
"Darling," he said, slowly, wiping his lips with his wrist, trembling.
"You look thinner; oh, darling, the business deal--?"
"It went through. I guess. Yes, it did."
She kissed him again. They ate a slow, falsely cheerful dinner, with
Clarisse laughing and encouraging him. He studied the phone; several
times he picked it up indecisively, then laid it down.
His wife walked in, putting on her coat and hat. "Well, sorry, but I
have to leave." She pinched him on the cheek. "Come on now, cheer up!
I'll be back from Red Cross in three hours. You lie around and snooze. I
simply have to go."
When Clarisse was gone, Harris dialed the phone, nervously.
"M. Munigant?"
The explosions and the sickness in his body after he set the phone down
were unbelievable. His bones were racked with every kind of pain, cold
and hot, he had ever thought of or experienced in wildest nightmare. He
swallowed all the aspirin he could find, in an effort to stave off the
assault; but when the doorbell finally rang an hour later, he could not
move; he lay weak and exhausted, panting, tears streaming down his
cheeks.
"Come in! Come in, for God's sake!"
M. Munigant came in. Thank God the door was unlocked.
Oh, but Mr. Harris looked terrible. M. Munigant stood in the center of
the living room, small and dark. Harris nodded. The pains rushed through
him, hitting him with large iron hammers and hooks. M. Munigant's eyes
glittered as he saw Harris' protuberant bones. Ah, he saw that Mr.
Harris was now psychologically prepared for aid. Was it not so? Harris
nodded again, feebly, sobbing. M. Munigant still whistled when he
talked; something about his tongue and the whistling. No matter. Through
his shimmering eyes Harris seemed to see M. Munigant shrink, get
smaller. Imagination, of course. Harris sobbed out his story of the
Phoenix trip. M. Munigant sympathized. This skeleton was a--a traitor!
They would fix him for once and for all!
"Mr. Munigant," sighed Harris, faintly, "I--I never noticed before. Your
tongue. Round, tube-like. Hollow? My eyes. Delirious. What do I do?"
M. Munigant whistled softly, appreciatively, coming closer. If Mr.
Harris would relax in his chair, and open his mouth? The lights were
switched off. M. Munigant peered into Harris' dropped jaw. Wider,
please? It had been so hard, that first visit, to help Harris, with both
body and bone in revolt. Now, he had cooperation from the flesh of the
man, anyway, even if the skeleton protested. In the darkness, M.
Munigant's voice got small, small, tiny, tiny. The whistling became high
and shrill. Now. Relax, Mr. Harris. NOW!
Harris felt his jaw pressed violently in all directions, his tongue
depressed as with a spoon, his throat clogged. He gasped for breath.
Whistle. He couldn't breathe! Something squirmed, corkscrewed his cheeks
out, bursting his jaws. Like a hot-water douche, something squirted into
his sinuses, his ears clanged! "Ahhhh!" shrieked Harris, gagging. His
head, its carapaces riven, shattered, hung loose. Agony shot fire
through his lungs.
Harris could breathe again, momentarily. His watery eyes sprang wide. He
shouted. His ribs, like sticks picked up and bundled, were loosened in
him. Pain! He fell to the floor, wheezing out his hot breath.
Lights flickered in his senseless eyeballs, he felt his limbs swiftly
cast loose and free. Through streaming eyes he saw the parlor.
The room was empty.
"M. Munigant? In God's name, where are you, M. Munigant? Come help me!"
M. Munigant was gone.
"Help!"
Then he heard it.
Deep down in the subterranean fissures of his body, the minute,
unbelievable noises; little smackings and twistings and little dry
chippings and grindings and nuzzling sounds--like a tiny hungry mouse
down in the red-blooded dimness, gnawing ever so earnestly and expertly
at what might have been, but was not, a submerged timber . . . !
Clarisse, walking along the sidewalk, held her head high and marched
straight toward her house on Saint James Place. She was thinking of the
Red Cross as she turned the corner and almost ran into this little dark
man who smelled of iodine.
Clarisse would have ignored him if it were not for the fact that as she
passed, he took something long, white and oddly familiar from his coat
and proceeded to chew on it, as on a peppermint stick. Its end devoured,
his extraordinary tongue darted within the white confection, sucking out
the filling, making contented noises. He was still crunching his goody
as she proceeded up the sidewalk to her house, turned the doorknob and
walked in.
"Darling?" she called, smiling around. "Darling, where are you?" She
shut the door, walked down the hall and into the living room. "Darling.
. ."
She stared at the floor for twenty seconds, trying to understand.
She screamed.
Outside in the sycamore darkness, the little man pierced a long white
stick with intermittent holes; then, softly, sighing, his lips puckered,
played a little sad tune upon the improvised instrument to accompany the
shrill and awful singing of Clarisse's voice as she stood in the living
room.
Many times as a little girl Clarisse had run on the beach sands, stepped
on a jellyfish and screamed. It was not so bad, finding an intact,
gelatin-skinned jellyfish in one's living room. One could step back from
it.
It was when the jellyfish called you by name . . .

The Jar
It was one of those things they keep in a jar in the tent of a sideshow
on the outskirts of a little, drowsy town. One of those pale things
drifting in alcohol plasma, forever dreaming and circling, with its
peeled, dead eyes staring out at you and never seeing you. It went with
the noiselessness of late night, and only the crickets chirping, the
frogs sobbing off in the moist swampland. One of those things in a big
jar that makes your stomach jump as it does when you see a preserved arm
in a laboratory vat.
Charlie stared back at it for a long time.
A long time, his big, raw hands, hairy on the roofs of them, clenching
the rope that kept back curious people. He had paid his dime and now he
stared.
It was getting late. The merry-go-round drowsed down to a lazy
mechanical tinkle. Tent-peggers back of a canvas smoked and cursed over
a poker game. Lights switched out, putting a summer gloom over the
carnival. People streamed homeward in cliques and queues. Somewhere, a
radio flared up, then cut, leaving Louisiana sky wide and silent with
stars.
There was nothing in the world for Charlie but that pale thing sealed in
its universe of serum. Charlie's loose mouth hung open in a pink weal,
teeth showing; his eyes were puzzled, admiring, wondering.
Someone walked in the shadows behind him, small beside Charlie's gaunt
tallness. "Oh," said the shadow, coming into the light-bulb glare. "You
still here, bud?"
"Yeah," said Charlie, like a man in his sleep.
The carny-boss appreciated Charlie's curiosity. He nodded at his old
acquaintance in the jar. "Everybody likes it; in a peculiar kinda way, I
mean."
Charlie rubbed his long jaw-bone. "You--uh--ever consider selling it?"
The carny-boss's eyes dilated, then closed. He snorted. "Naw. It brings
customers. They like seeing stuff like that. Sure."
Charlie made a disappointed, "Oh."
"Well," considered the carny-boss, "if a guy had money, maybe--"
"How much money?"
"If a guy had--" the carny-boss estimated, counting fingers, watching
Charlie as he tacked it out one finger after another. "If a guy had
three, four, say, maybe seven or eight--"
Charlie nodded with each motion, expectantly. Seeing this, the
carny-boss raised his total, "--maybe ten dollars or maybe fifteen--"
Charlie scowled, worried. The carnyboss retreated. "Say a guy has twelve
dollars--" Charlie grinned. "Why he could buy that thing in that jar,"
concluded the carny-boss.
"Funny thing," said Charlie, "I got just twelve bucks in my denims. And
I been reckoning how looked-up-to I'd be back down at Wilder's Hollow if
I brung home something like this to set on my shelf over the table. The
folks would sure look up to me then, I bet."
"Well, now, listen here--" said the carny-boss.
The sale was completed with the jar put on the back seat of Charlie's
wagon. The horse skittered his hoofs when he saw the jar, and whinnied.
The carny-boss glanced up with an expression of, almost, relief. "I was
tired of seeing that damn thing around, anyway. Don't thank me. Lately I
been thinking things about it, funny things--but, hell, I'm a
big-mouthed so-and-so. S'long, farmer!"
Charlie drove off. The naked blue light bulbs withdrew like dying stars,
the open, dark country night of Louisiana swept in around wagon and
horse. There was just Charlie, the horse timing his gray hoofs, and the
crickets.
And the jar behind the high seat.
It sloshed back and forth, back and forth. Sloshed wet. And the cold
gray thing drowsily slumped against the glass, looking out, looking out,
but seeing nothing, nothing.
Charlie leaned back to pet the lid. Smelling of strange liquor his hand
returned, changed and cold and trembling, excited. Yes, sir! he thought
to himself, Yes, sir!
Slosh, slosh, slosh. . . .
In the Hollow, numerous grass-green and blood-red lanterns tossed dusty
light over men huddled, murmuring, spitting, sitting on General Store
property.
They knew the creak-bumble of Charlie's wagon and did not shift their
raw, drab-haired skulls as he rocked to a halt. Their cigars were
glowworms, their voices were frog mutterings on summer nights.
Charlie leaned down eagerly. "Hi, Clem! Hi, Milt!"
"Lo, Charlie. Lo, Charlie," they murmured. The political conflict
continued. Charlie cut it down the seam:
"I got somethin' here. I got somethin' you might wanna see!"
Tom Carmody's eyes glinted, green in the lamplight, from the General
Store porch. It seemed to Charlie that Tom Carmody was forever installed
under porches in shadow, or under trees in shadow, or if in a room, then
in the farthest niche shining his eyes out at you from the dark. You
never knew what his face was doing, and his eyes were always funning
you. And every time they looked at you they laughed a different way.
"You ain't got nothin' we wants to see, baby-doll."
Charlie made a fist and looked at it. "Somethin' in a jar," he went on.
"Looks kine a like a brain, kine a like a pickled jellyfish, kine a
like--well, come see yourself!"
Someone snicked a cigar into a fall of pink ash and ambled over to look.
Charlie grandly elevated the jar lid, and in the uncertain lantern light
the man's face changed. "Hey, now, what in hell is this--?"
It was the first thaw of the evening. Others shifted lazily upright,
leaned forward; gravity pulled them into walking. They made no effort,
except to put one shoe before the other to keep from collapsing upon
their unusual faces. They circled the jar and contents. And Charlie, for
the first time in his life, seized on some hidden strategy and crashed
the glass lid shut.
"You want to see more, drop aroun' my house! It'll be there," he
declared, generously.
Tom Carmody spat from out his porch eyrie. "Ha!"
"Lemme see that again!" cried Gramps Medknowe. "Is it a octopus?"
Charlie flapped the reins; the horse stumbled into action.
"Come on aroun'! You're welcome!"
"What'll your wife say?"
"She'll kick the tar off'n our heels!"
But Charlie and wagon were gone over the hill. The men stood, all of
them, chewing their tongues, squinting up the road in the dark. Tom
Carmody swore softly from the porch. . . .
Charlie climbed the steps of his shack and carried the jar to its throne
in the living room, thinking that from now on this lean-to would be a
palace, with an "emperor"--that was the word! "emperor"--all cold and
white and quiet drifting in his private pool, raised, elevated upon a
shelf over a ramshackle table.
The jar, as he watched, burnt off the cold mist that hung over this
place on the rim of the swamp.
"What you got there?"
Thedy's thin soprano turned him from his awe. She stood in the bedroom
door glaring out, her thin body clothed in faded blue gingham, her hair
drawn to a drab knot behind red ears. Her eyes were faded like the
gingham. "Well," she repeated. "What is it?"
"What's it look like to you, Thedy?"
She took a thin step forward, making a slow, indolent pendulum of hips,
her eyes intent upon the jar, her lips drawn back to show feline milk
teeth.
The dead pale thing hung in its serum.
Thedy snapped a dull-blue glance at Charlie, then back to the jar, once
more at Charlie, once more to the jar, then she whirled quickly.
"It--it looks--looks just like you, Charlie!" she cried.
The bedroom door slammed.
The reverberation did not disturb the jar's contents. But Charlie stood
there, longing after his wife, heart pounding frantically. Much later,
when his heart slowed, he talked to the thing in the jar.
"I work the bottom land to the butt-bone every year, and she grabs the
money and runs off down home visitin' her folks nine weeks at a stretch.
I can't keep hold of her. Her and the men from the store, they make fun
of me. I can't help it if I don't know a way to hold onto her! Damn, but
I try!"
Philosophically, the contents of the jar gave no advice.
"Charlie?"
Someone stood in the front-yard door.
Charlie turned, startled, then broke out a grin.
It was some of the men from the General Store.
"Uh--Charlie---we--we thought--well--we came up to have a look at
that--stuff--you got in that there jar--"
July passed warm and it was August.
For the first time in years, Charlie was happy as tall corn growing
after a drought. It was gratifying of an evening to hear boots shushing
through the tall grass, the sound of men spitting into the ditch prior
to setting foot on the porch, the sound of heavy bodies creaking the
boards, and the groan of the house as yet another shoulder leaned
against its frame door and another voice said, as a hairy wrist wiped a
mouth clean:
"Kin I come in?"
With elaborate casualness, Charlie'd invite the arrivals in. There'd be
chairs, soapboxes for all, or at least carpets to squat on. And by the
time crickets were itching their legs into a summertime humming and
frogs were throat-swollen like ladies with goiters shouting in the great
night, the room would be full to bursting with people from all the
bottom lands.
At first nobody would say anything. The first half-hour of such an
evening, while people came in and got settled, was spent in carefully
rolling cigarettes. Putting tobacco neatly into the rut of brown paper,
loading it, tamping it, as they loaded and tamped and rolled their
thoughts and fears and amazement for the evening. It gave them time to
think. You could see their brains working behind their eyes as they
fingered the cigarettes into smoking order.
It was kind of a rude church gathering. They sat, squatted, leaned on
plaster walls, and one by one, with reverent awe, they stared at the jar
upon its shelf.
They wouldn't stare sudden-like. No, they kind of did it slow, casual,
as if they were glancing around the room--letting their eyes fumble over
just any old object that happened into their consciousness.
And--just by accident, of course--the focus of their wandering eyes
would occur always at the same place. After a while all eyes in the room
would be fastened to it, like pins stuck in some incredible pincushion.
And the only sound would be someone sucking a corncob. Or the children's
barefooted scurry on the porch planks outside. Maybe some woman's voice
would come, "You kids git away, now! Git!" And with a giggle like soft,
quick water, the bare feet would rush off to scare the bullfrogs.
Charlie would be up front, naturally, on his rocking chair, a plaid
pillow under his lean rump, rocking slow, enjoying the fame and
looked-up-to-ness that came with keeping the jar.
Thedy, she'd be seen way back of the room with the womenfolk in a bunch,
all gray and quiet, abiding their men.
Thedy looked like she was ripe for jealous screaming. But she said
nothing, just watched men tromp into her living room and sit at the feet
of Charlie, staring at this here Holy Grail-like thing, and her lips
were set cold and hard and she spoke not a civil word to anybody.
After a period of proper silence, someone, maybe old Gramps Medknowe
from Crick Road, would clear the phlegm from a deep cave somewhere
inside himself, lean forward, blinking, wet his lips, maybe, and there'd
be a curious tremble in his calloused fingers.
This would cue everyone to get ready for the talking to come. Ears were
primed. People settled like sows in the warm mud after a rain.
Gramps looked a long while, measured his lips with a lizard tongue, then
settled back and said, like always, in a high, thin oldman's tenor:
"Wonder what it is? Wonder if it's a he or a she or just a plain old it?
Sometimes I wake up nights, twist on my corn-matting, think about that
jar settin' here in the long dark. Think about it hangin' in liquid,
peaceful and pale like an animal oyster. Sometimes I wake Maw and we
both think on it. . . ."
While talking, Gramps moved his fingers in a quavering pantomime.
Everybody watched his thick thumb weave, and the other heavy-nailed
fingers undulate.
". . . we both lay there, thinkin'. And we shivers. Maybe a hot night,
trees sweatin', mosquitoes too hot to fly, but we shivers jest the same,
and turn over, trying to sleep. . . ."
Gramps lapsed back into silence, as if his speech was enough from him,
let some other voice talk the wonder, awe, and strangeness.
Juke Marmer, from Willow Sump, wiped sweat off his palms on the round of
his knees and softly said:
"I remember when I was a runnel-nosed kid. We had a cat who was all the
time makin' kittens. Lordamighty, she'd a litter any time she jumped
around and skipped a fence--" Juke spoke in a kind of holy softness,
benevolent. "Well, we give the kittens away, but when this one
particular litter busted out, everybody within walkin' distance had
one-two our cats by gift, already.
"So Ma busied on the back porch with a big two-gallon glass jar, fillin'
it to the top with water. Ma said, 'Juke, you drown them kittens!' I
'member I stood there; the kittens mewed, runnin' 'round, blind, small,
helpless, and funnyjust beginnin' to get their eyes open. I looked at
Ma, I said, 'Not me, Ma! You do it!' But Ma turned pale and said it had
to be done and I was the only one handy. And she went off to stir gravy
and fix chicken. I--I picked up one--kitten. I held it. It was warm. It
made a mewin' sound, I felt like runnin' away, not ever comin' back."
Juke nodded his head now, eyes bright, young, seeing into the past,
making it new, shaping it with words, smoothing it with his tongue.
"I dropped the kitten in the water. The kitten closed his eyes, opened
his mouth, tryin' for air. I 'member how the little white fangs showed,
the pink tongue came out, and bubbles with it, in a line to the top of
the water!
"I know to this day the way that kitten floated after it was all over,
driftin' aroun', slow and not worryin', lookin' out at me, not
condemnin' me for what I done. But not likin' me, neither. Ahhhh. . . ."
Hearts jumped quick. Eyes swiveled from Juke to the shelved jar, back
down, up again apprehensively.
A pause.
Jahdoo, the black man from Heron Swamp, tossed his ivory eyeballs, like
a dusky juggler, in his head. His dark knuckles knotted and
flexed--grasshoppers alive.
"You know what that is? You know, you know? I tells you. That be the
center of Life, sure 'nuff! Lord believe me, it so!"
Swaying in a tree-like rhythm, Jahdoo was blown by a swamp wind no one
could see, hear or feel, save himself. His eyeballs went around again,
as if cut free to wander. His voice needled a dark thread pattern,
picking up each person by the lobes of their ears and sewing them into
one unbreathing design:
"From that, lyin' back in the Middibamboo Sump, all sort o' thing crawl.
It put out hand, it put out feet, it put out tongue an' horn an' it
grow. Little bitty amoeba, perhap. Then a frog with a bulgethroat fit ta
bust! Yah!" He cracked knuckles. "It slobber on up to its gummy joints
and it--it AM HUMAN! That am the center of creation! That am Middibamboo
Mama, from which we all come ten thousand year ago. Believe it!"
"Ten thousand year ago!" whispered Granny Carnation.
"It am old! Looky it! It donn worra no more. It know betta. It hang like
pork chop in fryin' fat. It got eye to see with, but it donn blink 'em,
they donn look fretted, does they? No, man! It know betta. It know that
we done come from it, and we is goin' back to it."
"What color eyes it got?"
"Gray."
"Naw, green!"
"What color hair? Brown?"
"Black!"
"Red!"
"No, gray!"
Then Charlie would give his drawling opinion. Some nights he'd say the
same thing, some nights not. It didn't matter. When you said the same
thing night after night in the deep summer, it always sounded different.
The crickets changed it. The frogs changed it. The thing in the jar
changed it. Charlie said:
"What if an old man went back into the swamp, or maybe a young kid, and
wandered aroun' for years and years lost in all that drippin', on the
trails and gullies, in them old wet ravines in the nights, skin a
turnin' pale, and makin' cold and shrivelin' up. Bein' away from the sun
he'd keep witherin' away up and up and finally sink into a muck-hole and
lay in a kind of--scum--like the maggot 'skeeters sleepin' in
sump-water. Why, why--for all we can tell, this might be someone we
know! Someone we passed words with once on a time. For all we know--"
A hissing from among the womenfolk back in the shadow. One woman
standing, eyes shining black, fumbled for words. Her name was Mrs.
Tridden, and she murmured:
"Lots of little kids run stark naked to the swamp ever' year. They runs
around and never comes back. I almost got lost maseif. I--I lost my
little boy, Foley, that way. You--you DON'T SUPPOSE! ! !"
Breath was snatched through nostrils, constricted, tightened. Mouths
turned down at corners, bent by hard, clinching muscle. Heads turned on
celery-stalk necks, and eyes read her horror and hope. It was in Mrs.
Tridden's body, wire-taut, holding to the wall back of her with straight
fingers stiff.
"My baby," she whispered. She breathed it out. "My baby. My Foley.
Foley! Foley, is that you? Foley! Foley, tell me, baby, is that YOU!"
Everybody held their breath, turning to see the jar.
The thing in the jar said nothing. It just stared blind-white out upon
the multitude. And deep in rawboned bodies a secret fear juice ran like
a spring thaw, and their resolute calmness and belief and easy
humbleness was gnawed and eaten by that juice and melted away in a
torrent! Someone screamed.
"It moved!"
"No, no, it didn' move. Just your eyes playin' tricks!"
"Hones' ta God!" cried Juke. "I saw it shift slow like a dead kitten!"
"Hush up, now. It's been dead a long, long time. Maybe since before you
was born!"
"He made a sign!" screamed Mrs. Tridden. "That's my Foley! My baby you
got there! Three-year-old he was! My baby lost and gone in the swamp!"
The sobbing broke from her.
"Now, Mrs. Tridden. There now. Set yourself down, stop shakin'. Ain't no
more your child'n mine. There, there."
One of the womenfolk held her and faded out the sobbing into jerked
breathing and a fluttering of her lips in butterfly quickness as the
breath stroked over them, afraid.
When all was quiet again, Granny Carnation, with a withered pink flower
in her shoulder-length gray hair, sucked the pipe in her trap mouth and
talked around it, shaking her head to make the hair dance in the light:
"All this talkin' and shovin' words. Like as not we'll never find out,
never know what it is. Like as not if we found out we wouldn't want to
know. It's like magic tricks magicians do at shows. Once you find the
fake, ain't no more fun'n the innards of a jackbob. We come collectin'
around here every ten nights or so, talkin', social-like, with
somethin', always somethin', to talk about. Stands to reason if we spied
out what the damn thing is there'd be nothin' to chew about, so there!"
"Well, damn it to hell!" rumbled a bull voice. "I don't think it's
nothin'!"
Tom Carmody.
Tom Carmody standing, as always, in shadow. Out on the porch, just his
eyes staring in, his lips laughing at you dimly, mocking. His laughter
got inside Charlie like a hornet sting. Thedy had put him up to it.
Thedy was trying to kill Charlie's new life, she was!
"Nothin'," repeated Carmody, harshly, "in that jar but a hunch of old
jellyfish from Sea Cove, a rottin' and stinkin' fit to whelp!"
"You mightn't be jealous, Cousin Carmody?" asked Charlie, slow.
"Haw!" snorted Carmody. "I just come aroun' ta watch you dumb fools jaw
about nuthin'. You notice I never set foot inside or took part. I'm
goin' home right now. Anybody wanna come along with me?"
He got no offer of company. He laughed again, as if this were a bigger
joke, how so many people could be so far gone, and Thedy was raking her
palms with her fingernails away back in a corner of the room. Charlie
saw her mouth twitch and was cold and could not speak.
Carmody, still laughing, rapped off the porch with his highheeled boots
and the sound of crickets took him away.
Granny Carnation gummed her pipe. "Like I was sayin' before the storm:
that thing on the shelf, why couldn't it be sort of--all things? Lots of
things. All kinds of life--death--I don't know. Mix rain and sun and
muck and jelly, all that together. Grass and snakes and children and
mist and all the nights and days in the dead canebrake. Why's it have to
be one thing? Maybe it's lots."
And the talking ran soft for another hour, and Thedy slipped away into
the night on the track of Tom Carmody, and Charlie began to sweat. They
were up to something, those two. They were planning something. Charlie
sweated warm all the rest of the evening. . . .
The meeting broke up late, and Charlie bedded down with mixed emotions.
The meeting had gone off well, but what about Thedy and Tom?
Very late, with certain star coveys shuttled down the sky marking the
time as after midnight, Charlie heard the slushing of the tall grass
parted by her penduluming hips. Her heels tacked soft across the porch,
into the house, into the bedroom.
She lay soundlessly in bed, cat eyes staring at him. He couldn't see
them, but he could feel them staring.
"Charlie?"
He waited.
Then he said, "I'm awake."
Then she waited.
"Charlie?"
"What?"
"Bet you don't know where I been; bet you don't know where I been." It
was a faint, derisive singsong in the night.
He waited.
She waited again. She couldn't bear waiting long, though, and continued:
"I been to the carnival over in Cape City. Tom Carmody drove me. We--we
talked to the carny-boss, Charlie, we did, we did, we sure did!" And she
sort of giggled to herself, secretly.
Charlie was ice-cold. He stirred upright on an elbow.
She said, "We found out what it is in your jar, Charlie--"
insinuatingly.
Charlie flumped over, hands to ears. "I don't wanna hear!"
"Oh, but you gotta hear, Charlie. It's a good joke. Oh, it's rare,
Charlie," she hissed.
"Go away," he said.
"Unh-unh! No, no, sir, Charlie. Why, no, Charlie--Honey. Not until I
tell!"
"Git!" he said.
"Let me tell! We talked to that carny-boss, and he--he liked to die
laughin'. He said he sold that jar and what was in it to some,
some--hick--for twelve bucks. And it ain't worth more'n two bucks at
most!"
Laughter bloomed in the dark, right out of her mouth, an awful kind of
laughter.
She finished it, quick:
"It's just junk, Charlie! Rubber, papier-maché, silk, cotton,
boric-acid! That's all! Got a metal frame inside! That's all it is,
Charlie. That's all!" she shrilled.
"No, no!"
He sat up swiftly, ripping sheets apart in big fingers, roaring.
"I don't wanna hear! Don't wanna hear!" he bellowed over and over.
She said, "Wait'll everyone hears how fake it is! Won't they laugh!
Won't they flap their lungs!"
He caught her wrists. "You ain't gonna tell them?"
"Wouldn't wan me known as a liar, would you, Charlie?"
He flung her off and away.
"Whyncha leave me alone? You dirty! Dirty jealous mean of ever'thing I
do. I took shine off your nose when I brung the jar home. You didn'
sleep right 'til you ruined things!"
She laughed. "Then I won't tell anybody," she said.
He stared at her. "You spoiled my fun. That's all that counted. It don't
matter if you tell the rest. I know. And I'll never have no more fun.
You and that Tom Carmody. I wish I could stop him laughin'. He's been
laughin' for years at me! Well, you just go tell the rest, the other
people, now--might as well have your fun--!"
He strode angrily, grabbed the jar so it sloshed, and would have flung
it on the floor, but he stopped trembling, and let it down softly on the
spindly table. He leaned over it, sobbing. If he lost this, the world
was gone. And he was losing Thedy, too. Every month that passed she
danced further away, sneering at him, funning him. For too many years
her hips had been the pendulum by which he reckoned the time of his
living. But other men, Tom Carmody, for one, were reckoning time from
the same source.
Thedy stood waiting for him to smash the jar. Instead, he petted and
stroked and gradually quieted himself over it. He thought of the long,
good evenings in the past month, those rich evenings of friends and
talk, moving about the room. That, at least, was good, if nothing else.
He turned slowly to Thedy. She was lost forever to him.
"Thedy, you didn't go to the carnival."
"Yes, I did."
"You're lyin'," he said, quietly.
"No, I'm not!"
"This--this jar has to have somethin' in it. Somethin' besides the junk
you say. Too many people believe there's somethin' in it, Thedy. You
can't change that. The carny-boss, if you talked with him, he lied."
Charlie took a deep breath and then said, "Come here, Thedy."
"What you want?" she asked, sullenly.
"Come over here."
He took a step toward her. "Come here."
"Keep away from me, Charlie."
"Just want to show you something, Thedy." His voice was soft, low, and
insistent. "Here, kittie. Here, kittie, kittie, kittie-- HERE KITTIE!"
It was another night, about a week later. Gramps Medknowe and Granny
Carnation came, followed by young Juke and Mrs. Tridden and Jahdoo, the
colored man. Followed by all the others, young and old, sweet and sour,
creaking into chairs, each with his or her thought, hope, fear, and
wonder in mind. Each not looking at the shrine, but saying hello softly
to Charlie.
They waited for the others to gather. From the shine of their eyes one
could see that each saw something different in the jar, something of the
life and the pale life after life, and the life in death and the death
in life, each with his story, his cue, his lines, familiar, old but new.
Charlie sat alone.
"Hello, Charlie." Somebody peered into the empty bedroom. "Your wife
gone off again to visit her folks?"
"Yeah, she run for Tennessee. Be back in a couple weeks. She's the
darndest one for runnin'. You know Thedy."
"Great one for jumpin' around, that woman."
Soft voices talking, getting settled, and then, quite suddenly, walking
on the dark porch and shining his eyes in at the people--Tom Carmody.
Tom Carmody standing outside the door, knees sagging and trembling, arms
hanging and shaking at his side, staring into the room. Tom Carmody not
daring to enter. Tom Carmody with his mouth open, but not smiling. His
lips wet and slack, not smiling. His face pale as chalk, as if it had
been sick for a long time.
Gramps looked up at the jar, cleared his throat and said, "Why, I never
noticed so definite before. It's got blue eyes."
"It always had blue eyes," said Granny Carnation.
"No," whined Gramps. "No, it didn't. They was brown last time we was
here." He blinked upward. "And another thing--it's got brown hair.
Didn't have brown hair before!"
"Yes, yes, it did," sighed Mrs. Tridden.
"No, it didn't!"
"Yes, it did!"
Tom Carmody, shivering in the summer night, staring in at the jar.
Charlie, glancing up at it, rolling a cigarette, casually, all peace and
calm, very certain of his life and thoughts. Tom Carmody, alone, seeing
things about the jar he never saw before. Everybody seeing what he
wanted to see; all thoughts running in a fall of quick rain:
"My baby. My little baby," thought Mrs. Tridden.
"A brain!" thought Gramps.
The colored man jigged his fingers. "Middibamboo Mama!"
A fisherman pursed his lips. "Jellyfish!"
"Kitten! Here kittie, kittie, kittie!" the thoughts drowned clawing in
Juke's eyes. "Kitten!"
"Everything and anything!" shrilled Granny's weazened thought. "The
night, the swamp, death, the pale things, the wet things from the sea!"
Silence. And then Gramps whispered, "I wonder. Wonder if it's a he--or a
she--or just a plain old it?"
Charlie glanced up, satisfied, tamping his cigarette, shaping it to his
mouth. Then he looked at Tom Carmody, who would never smile again, in
the door. "I reckon we'll never know. Yeah, I reckon we won't." Charlie
shook his head slowly and settled down with his guests, looking,
looking.
It was just one of those things they keep in a jar in the tent of a
sideshow on the outskirts of a little, drowsy town. One of those pale
things drifting in alcohol plasma, forever dreaming and circling, with
its peeled dead eyes staring out at you and never seeing you. . . .

The Lake
The wave shut me off from the world, from the birds in the sky, the
children on the beach, my mother on the shore. There was a moment of
green silence. Then the wave gave me back to the sky, the sand, the
children yelling. I came out of the lake and the world was waiting for
me, having hardly moved since I went away.
I ran up on the beach.
Mama swabbed me with a furry towel. "Stand there and dry," she said.
I stood there, watching the sun take away the water beads on my arms. I
replaced them with goose-pimples.
"My, there's a wind," said Mama. "Put on your sweater."
"Wait'll I watch my goose-bumps," I said.
"Harold," said Mama.
I put the sweater on and watched the waves come up and fall down on the
beach. But not clumsily. On purpose, with a green sort of elegance. Even
a drunken man could not collapse with such elegance as those waves.
It was September. In the last days when things are getting sad for no
reason. The beach was so long and lonely with only about six people on
it. The kids quit bouncing the ball because somehow the wind made them
sad, too, whistling the way it did, and the kids sat down and felt
autumn come along the endless shore.
All of the hot-dog stands were boarded up with strips of golden
planking, sealing in all the mustard, onion, meat odors of the long,
joyful summer. It was like nailing summer into a series of coffins. One
by one the places slammed their covers down, padlocked their doors, and
the wind came and touched the sand, blowing away all of the million
footprints of July and August. It got so that now, in September, there
was nothing but the mark of my rubber tennis shoes and Donald and Delaus
Arnold's feet, down by the water curve.
Sand blew up in curtains on the sidewalks, and the merry-goround was
hidden with canvas, all of the horses frozen in mid-air on their brass
poles, showing teeth, galloping on. With only the wind for music,
slipping through canvas.
I stood there. Everyone else was in school. I was not. Tomorrow I would
be on my way west across the United States on a train. Mom and I had
come to the beach for one last brief moment.
There was something about the loneliness that made me want to get away
by myself. "Mama, I want to run up the beach aways," I said.
"All right, but hurry back, and don't go near the water."
I ran. Sand spun under me and the wind lifted me. You know how it is,
running, arms out so you feel veils from your fingers, caused by wind.
Like wings.
Mama withdrew into the distance, sitting. Soon she was only a brown
speck and I was all alone.
Being alone is a newness to a twelve-year-old child. He is so used to
people about. The only way he can be alone is in his mind. There are so
many real people around, telling children what and how to do, that a boy
has to run off down a beach, even if it's only in his head, to get by
himself in his own world.
So now I was really alone.
I went down to the water and let it cool up to my stomach. Always
before, with the crowd, I hadn't dared to look, to come to this spot and
search around in the water and call a certain name. But now--.
Water is like a magician. Sawing you in half. It feels as if you were
cut in two, part of you, the lower part, sugar, melting, dissolving
away. Cool water, and once in a while a very elegantly stumbling wave
that fell with a flourish of lace.
I called her name. A dozen times I called it.
"Tally! Tally! Oh, Tally!"
You really expect answers to your calling when you are young. You feel
that whatever you may think can be real. And sometimes maybe that is not
so wrong.
I thought of Tally, swimming out into the water last May, with her
pigtails trailing, blond. She went laughing, and the sun was on her
small twelve-year-old shoulders. I thought of the water settling quiet,
of the life guard leaping into it, of Tally's mother screaming, and of
how Tally never came out. . . .
The life guard tried to persuade her to come out, but she did not. He
came back with only bits of water-weed in his bigknuckled fingers, and
Tally was gone. She would not sit across from me at school any longer,
or chase indoor balls on the brick streets on summer nights. She had
gone too far out, and the lake would not let her return.
And now in the lonely autumn when the sky was huge and the water was
huge and the beach was so very long, I had come down for the last time,
alone.
I called her name again and again. Tally, oh, Tally!
The wind blew so very softly over my ears, the way wind blows over the
mouths of sea-shells to set them whispering. The water rose, embracing
my chest, then my knees, up and down, one way and another, sucking under
my heels.
"Tally! Come back, Tally!"
I was only twelve. But I know how much I loved her. It was that love
that comes before all significance of body and morals. It was that love
that is no more bad than wind and sea and sand lying side by side
forever. It was made of all the warm long days together at the beach,
and the humming quiet days of droning education at the school. All the
long autumn days of the years past when I had carried her books home
from school.
Tally!
I called her name for the last time. I shivered. I felt water on my face
and did not know how it got there. The waves had not splashed that high.
Turning, I retreated to the sand and stood there for half an hour,
hoping for one glimpse, one sign, one little bit of Tally to remember.
Then, I knelt and built a sand castle, shaping it fine, building it as
Tally and I had often built so many of them. But this time, I only built
half of it. Then I got up.
"Tally, if you hear me, come in and build the rest."
I walked off toward that far-away speck that was Mama. The water came
in, blended the sand-castle circle by circle, mashing it down little by
little into the original smoothness.
Silently, I walked along the shore.
Far away, a merry-go-round jangled, but it was only the wind.
The next day, I went away on the train.
A train has a poor memory; it soon puts all behind it. It forgets the
cornlands of Illinois, the rivers of childhood, the bridges, the lakes,
the valleys, the cottages, the hurts and the joys. It spreads them out
behind and they drop back of a horizon.
I lengthened my bones, put flesh on them, changed my young mind for an
older one, threw away clothes as they no longer fitted, shifted from
grammar to high-school, to college. And then there was a young woman in
Sacramento. I knew her for a time, and we were married. By the time I
was twenty-two, I had almost forgotten what the East was like.
Margaret suggested that our delayed honeymoon be taken back in that
direction.
Like a memory, a train works both ways. A train can bring rushing back
all those things you left behind so many years before.
Lake Bluff, population io,ooo, came up over the sky. Margaret looked so
handsome in her fine new clothes. She watched me as I felt my old world
gather me back into its living. She held my arm as the train slid into
Bluff Station and our baggage was escorted out.
So many years, and the things they do to people's faces and bodies. When
we walked through the town together I saw no one I recognized. There
were faces with echoes in them. Echoes of hikes on ravine trails. Faces
with small laughter in them from closed grammar schools and swinging on
metal-linked swings and going up and down on teeter-totters. But I
didn't speak. I walked and looked and filled up inside with all those
memories, like leaves stacked for autumn burning.
We stayed on two weeks in all, revisiting all the places together. The
days were happy. I thought I loved Margaret well. At least I thought I
did.
It was on one of the last days that we walked down by the shore. It was
not quite as late in the year as that day so many years before, but the
first evidences of desertion were coming upon the beach. People were
thinning out, several of the hot-dog stands had been shuttered and
nailed, and the wind, as always, waited there to sing for us.
I almost saw Mama sitting on the sand as she used to sit. I had that
feeling again of wanting to be alone. But I could not force myself to
speak of this to Margaret. I only held onto her and waited.
It got late in the day. Most of the children had gone home and only a
few men and women remained basking in the windy sun.
The life-guard boat pulled up on the shore. The life guard stepped out
of it, slowly, with something in his arms.
I froze there. I held my breath and I felt small, only twelve years old,
very little, very infinitesimal and afraid. The wind howled. I could not
see Margaret. I could see only the beach, the life guard slowly emerging
from the boat with a gray sack in his hands, not very heavy, and his
face almost as gray and lined.
"Stay here, Margaret," I said. I don't know why I said it.
"But, why?"
"Just stay here, that's all--"
I walked slowly down the sand to where the life guard stood. He looked
at me.
"What is it?"I asked.
The life guard kept looking at me for a long time and he couldn't speak.
He put the gray sack on the sand, and water whispered wet up around it
and went back.
"What is it?" I insisted.
"Strange," said the life guard, quietly.
I waited.
"Strange," he said, softly. "Strangest thing I ever saw. She's been dead
a long time."
I repeated his words.
He nodded. "Ten years, I'd say. There haven't been any children drowned
here this year. There were twelve children drowned here since 1933, but
we found all of them before a few hours had passed. All except one, I
remember. This body here, why it must be ten years in the water. It's
not--pleasant."
I stared at the gray sack in his arms. "Open it," I said. I don't know
why I said it. The wind was louder.
He fumbled with the sack.
"Hurry, man, open it!" I cried.
"I better not do that," he said. Then perhaps he saw the way my face
must have looked. "She was such a little girl--"
He opened it only part way. That was enough.
The beach was deserted. There was only the sky and the wind and the
water and the autumn coming on lonely. I looked down at her there.
I said something over and over. A name. The life guard looked at me.
"Where did you find her?" I asked.
"Down the beach, that way, in the shallow water. It's a long, long time
for her, isn't it?"
I shook my head.
"Yes, it is. Oh God, yes it is."
I thought: people grow. I have grown. But she has not changed. She is
still small. She is still young. Death does not permit growth or change.
She still has golden hair. She will be forever young and and I will love
her forever, oh God, I will love her forever.
The life guard tied up the sack again.
Down the beach, a few moments later, I walked by myself. I stopped, and
looked down at something. This is where the life guard found her, I said
to myself.
There, at the water's edge, lay a sand castle, only half-built. Just
like Tally and I used to build them. She half and I half.
I looked at it. I knelt beside the sand castle and saw the small prints
of feet coming in from the lake and going back out to the lake again and
not returning.
Then--I knew.
"I'll help you finish it," I said.
I did. I built the rest of it up very slowly, then I arose and turned
away and walked off, so as not to watch it crumble in the waves, as all
things crumble.
I walked back up the beach to where a strange woman named Margaret was
waiting for me, smiling. . .

The Emissary
Martin knew it was autumn again, for Dog ran into the house bringing
wind and frost and a smell of apples turned to cider under trees. In
dark clock-springs of hair, Dog fetched goldenrod, dust of
farewell-summer, acornhusk, hair of squirrel, feather of departed robin,
sawdust from fresh-cut cordwood, and leaves like charcoals shaken from a
blaze of maple trees. Dog jumped. Showers of brittle fern, blackberry
vine, marsh-grass sprang over the bed where Martin shouted. No doubt, no
doubt of it at all, this incredible beast was October!
"Here, boy, here!"
And Dog settled to warm Martin's body with all the bonfires and subtle
burnings of the season, to fill the room with soft or heavy, wet or dry
odors of far-traveling. In spring, he smelled of lilac, iris,
lawn-mowered grass; in Summer, ice-cream-mustached, he came pungent with
firecracker, Roman candle, pinwheel, baked by the sun. But autumn!
Autumn!
"Dog, what's it like outside?"
And lying there, Dog told as he always told. Lying there, Martin found
autumn as in the old days before sickness bleached him white on his bed.
Here was his contact, his carry-all, the quick-moving part of himself he
sent with a yell to run and return, circle and scent, collect and
deliver the time and texture of worlds in town, country, by creek,
river, lake, down-cellar, upattic, in closet or coal-bin. Ten dozen
times a day he was gifted with sunflower seed, cinder-path, milkweed,
horse-chestnut, or full flame-smell of pumpkin. Through the loomings of
the universe Dog shuttled; the design was hid in his pelt. Put out your
hand, it was there. . . .
"And where did you go this morning?"
But he knew without hearing where Dog had rattled down hills where
autumn lay in cereal crispness, where children lay in funeral pyres, in
rustling heaps, the leaf-buried but watchful dead, as Dog and the world
blew by. Martin trembled as his fingers searched the thick fur, read the
long journey. Through stubbled fields, over glitters of ravine creek,
down marbled spread of cemetery yard, into woods. In the great season of
spices and rare incense, now Martin ran through his emissary, around,
about, and home!
The bedroom door opened.
"That dog of yours is in trouble again."
Mother brought in a tray of fruit salad, cocoa, and toast, her blue eyes
snapping.
"Mother . . ."
"Always digging places. Dug a hole in Miss Tarkin's garden this morning.
She's spittin' mad. That's the fourth hole he's dug there this week."
"Maybe he's looking for something."
"Fiddlesticks, he's too darned curious. If he doesn't behave he'll be
locked up."
Martin looked at this woman as if she were a stranger. "Oh, you wouldn't
do that! How would I learn anything? How would I find things out if Dog
didn't tell me?"
Mom's voice was quieter. "Is that what he does--tell you things?"
"There's nothing I don't know when he goes out and around and back,
nothing I can't find out from him!"
They both sat looking at Dog and the dry strewings of mold and seed over
the quilt.
"Well, if he'll just stop digging where he shouldn't, he can run all he
wants," said Mother.
"Here, boy, here!"
And Martin snapped a tin note to the dog's collar:
MY OWNER IS MARTIN SMITH--TEN YEARS OLD--SICK IN BED-- VISITORS WELCOME.
Dog barked. Mother opened the downstairs door and let him out.
Martin sat listening.
Far off and away you could hear Dog run in the quiet autumn rain that
was falling now. You could hear the barkingjingling fade, rise, fade
again as he cut down alley, over lawn, to fetch back Mr. Holloway and
the oiled metallic smell of the delicate snowflake-interiored watches he
repaired in his home shop. Or maybe he would bring Mr. Jacobs, the
grocer, whose clothes were rich with lettuce, celery, tomatoes, and the
secret tinned and hidden smell of the red demons stamped on cans of
deviled ham. Mr. Jacobs and his unseen pink-meat devils waved often from
the yard below. Or Dog brought Mr. Jackson, Mrs. Gillespie, Mr. Smith,
Mrs. Holmes, any friend or near-friend, encountered, cornered, begged,
worried, and at last shepherded home for lunch, or tea-and-biscuits.
Now, listening, Martin heard Dog below, with footsteps moving in a light
rain behind him. The downstairs bell rang, Mom opened the door, light
voices murmured. Martin sat forward, face shining. The stair treads
creaked. A young woman's voice laughed quietly. Miss Haight, of course,
his teacher from school!
The bedroom door sprang open.
Martin had company.
Morning, afternoon, evening, dawn and dusk, sun and moon circled with
Dog, who faithfully reported temperatures of turf and air, color of
earth and tree, consistency of mist or rain, but--most important of
all--brought back again and again and again-- Miss Haight.
On Saturday, Sunday and Monday she baked Martin orange-iced cupcakes,
brought him library books about dinosaurs and cavemen. On Tuesday,
Wednesday and Thursday somehow he beat her at dominoes, somehow she lost
at checkers, and soon, she cried, he'd defeat her handsomely at chess.
On Friday, Saturday and Sunday they talked and never stopped talking,
and she was so young and laughing and handsome and her hair was a soft,
shining brown like the season outside the window, and she walked clear,
clean and quick, a heartbeat warm in the bitter afternoon when he heard
it. Above all, she had the secret of signs, and could read and interpret
Dog and the symbols she searched out and plucked forth from his coat
with her miraculous fingers. Eyes shut, softly laughing, in a gypsy's
voice, she divined the world from the treasures in her hands.
And on Monday afternoon, Miss Haight was dead.
Martin sat up in bed, slowly.
"Dead?" he whispered.
Dead, said his mother, yes, dead, killed in an auto accident a mile out
of town. Dead, yes, dead, which meant cold to Martin, which meant
silence and whiteness and winter come long before its time. Dead,
silent, cold, white. The thoughts circled round, blew down, and settled
in whispers.
Martin held Dog, thinking; turned to the wall. The lady with the
autumn-colored hair. The lady with the laughter that was very gentle and
never made fun and the eyes that watched your mouth to see everything
you ever said. The-other-half-of-autumn-lady, who told what was left
untold by Dog, about the world. The heartbeat at the still center of
gray afternoon. The heartbeat fading .
"Mom? What do they do in the graveyard, Mom, under the ground? Just lay
there?"
"Lie there."
"Lie there? Is that all they do? It doesn't sound like much fun."
"For goodness sake, it's not made out to be fun."
"Why don't they jump up and run around once in a while if they get tired
lying there? God's pretty silly--"
"Martin!"
"Well, you'd think He'd treat people better than to tell them to lie
still for keeps. That's impossible. Nobody can do it! I tried once. Dog
tries. I tell him, 'dead Dog!' He plays dead awhile, then gets sick and
tired and wags his tail or opens one eye and looks at me, bored. Boy, I
bet sometimes those graveyard people do the same, huh, Dog?"
Dog barked.
"Be still with that kind of talk!" said Mother.
Martin looked off into space.
"Bet that's exactly what they do," he said.
Autumn burnt the trees bare and ran Dog still farther around, fording
creek, prowling graveyard as was his custom, and back in the dusk to
fire off volleys of barking that shook windows wherever he turned.
In the late last days of October, Dog began to act as if the wind had
changed and blew from a strange country. He stood quivering on the porch
below. He whined, his eyes fixed at the empty land beyond town. He
brought no visitors for Martin. He stood for hours each day, as if
leashed, trembling, then shot away straight, as if Someone had called.
Each night he returned later, with no one following. Each night, Martin
sank deeper and deeper in his pillow.
"Well, people are busy," said Mother. "They haven't time to notice the
tag Dog carries. Or they mean to come visit, but forget."
But there was more to it than that. There was the fevered shining in
Dog's eyes, and his whimpering tic late at night, in some private dream.
His shivering in the dark, under the bed. The way he Sometimes stood
half the night, looking at Martin as if some great and impossible secret
was his and he knew no way to tell it save by savagely thumping his
tail, or turning in endless circles, never to lie down, spinning and
spinning again.
On October thirtieth, Dog ran out and didn't come back at all, even when
after supper Martin heard his parents call and call. The hour grew late,
the streets and sidewalks stood empty, the air moved cold about the
house and there was nothing, nothing.
Long after midnight, Martin lay watching the world beyond the cool,
clear glass windows. Now there was not even autumn, for there was no Dog
to fetch it in. There would be no winter, for who could bring the snow
to melt in your hands? Father, Mother? No, not the same. They couldn't
play the game with its special secrets and rules, its sounds and
pantomimes. No more seasons. No more time. The go-between, the emissary,
was lost to the wild throngings of civilization, poisoned, stolen, hit
by a car, left somewhere in a culvert. . . .
Sobbing, Martin turned his face to his pillow. The world was a picture
under glass, untouchable. The world was dead.
Martin twisted in bed and in three days the last Hallowe'en pumpkins
were rotting in trash cans, papier-maché skulls and witches were burnt
on bonfires, and ghosts were stacked on shelves with other linens until
next year.
To Martin, Hallowe'en had been nothing more than one evening when tin
horns cried off in the cold autumn stars, children blew like goblin
leaves along the flinty walks, flinging their heads, or cabbages, at
porches, soap-writing names or similar magic symbols on on icy windows.
All of it as distant, unfathomable, and nightmarish as a puppet show
seen from so many miles away that there is no sound or meaning.
For three days in November, Martin watched alternate light and shadow
sift across his ceiling. The fire-pageant was over forever; autumn lay
in cold ashes. Martin sank deeper, yet deeper in white marble layers of
bed, motionless, listening always listening. . . .
Friday evening, his parents kissed him good-night and walked out of the
house into the hushed cathedral weather toward a motion-picture show.
Miss Tarkins from next door stayed on in the parlor below until Martin
called down he was sleepy, then took her knitting off home.
In silence, Martin lay following the great move of stars down a clear
and moonlit sky, remembering nights such as this when he'd spanned the
town with Dog ahead, behind, around about, tracking the green-plush
ravine, lapping slumbrous streams gone milky with the fullness of the
moon, leaping cemetery tombstones while whispering the marble names; on,
quickly on, through shaved meadows where the only motion was the off-on
quivering of stars, to streets where shadows would not stand aside for
you but crowded all the sidewalks for mile on mile. Run now run!
chasing, being chased by bitter smoke, fog, mist, wind, ghost of mind,
fright of memory; home, safe, sound, snug-warm, asleep. . . .
Nine o'clock.
Chime. The drowsy clock in the deep stairwell below. Chime.
Dog, come home, and run the world with you. Dog, bring a thistle with
frost on it, or bring nothing else but the wind. Dog, where are you? Oh,
listen, now, I'll call.
Martin held his breath.
Way off somewhere--a sound.
Martin rose up, trembling.
There, again--the sound.
So small a sound, like a sharp needle-point brushing the sky long miles
and many miles away.
The dreamy echo of a dog--barking.
The sound of a dog crossing fields and farms, dirt roads and rabbit
paths, running, running, letting out great barks of steam, cracking the
night. The sound of a circling dog which came and went, lifted and
faded, opened up, shut in, moved forward, went back, as if the animal
were kept by someone on a fantastically long chain. As if the dog were
running and someone whistled under the chestnut trees, in mold-shadow,
tar-shadow, moon-shadow, walking, and the dog circled back and sprang
out again toward home.
Dog! Martin thought, oh Dog, come home, boy! Listen, oh, listen, where
you been? Come on, boy, make tracks!
Five, ten, fifteen minutes; near, very near, the bark, the sound. Martin
cried out, thrust his feet from the bed, leaned to the window. Dog!
Listen, boy! Dog! Dog! He said it over and over. Dog! Dog! Wicked Dog,
run off and gone all these days! Bad Dog, good Dog, home, boy, hurry,
and bring what you can!
Near now, near, up the street, barking, to knock clapboard housefronts
with sound, whirl iron cocks on rooftops in the moon, firing off
volleys--Dog! now at the door below. . . .
Martin shivered.
Should he run--let Dog in, or wait for Mom and Dad? Wait? Oh, God, wait?
But what if Dog ran off again? No, he'd go down, snatch the door wide,
yell, grab Dog in, and run upstairs so fast, laughing, crying, holding
tight, that . . .
Dog stopped barking.
Hey! Martin almost broke the window, jerking to it.
Silence. As if someone had told Dog to hush now, hush, hush.
A full minute passed. Martin clenched his fists.
Below, a faint whimpering.
Then, slowly, the downstairs front door opened. Someone was kind enough
to have opened the door for Dog. Of course! Dog had brought Mr. Jacobs
or Mr. Gillespie or Miss Tarkins, or . . .
The downstairs door shut.
Dog raced upstairs, whining, flung himself on the bed.
"Dog, Dog, where've you been, what've you done! Dog, Dog!"
And he crushed Dog hard and long to himself, weeping. Dog, Dog. He
laughed and shouted. Dog! But after a moment he stopped laughing and
crying, suddenly.
He pulled back away. He held the animal and looked at him, eyes
widening.
The odor coming from Dog was different.
It was a smell of strange earth. It was a smell of night within night,
the smell of digging down deep in shadow through earth that had lain
cheek by jowl with things that were long hidden and decayed. A stinking
and rancid soil fell away in clods of dissolution from Dog's muzzle and
paws. He had dug deep. He had dug very deep indeed. That was it, wasn't
it? wasn't it? wasn't it!
What kind of message was this from Dog? What could such a message mean?
The stench--the ripe and awful cemetery earth.
Dog was a bad dog, digging where he shouldn't. Dog was a good dog,
always making friends. Dog loved people. Dog brought them home.
And now, moving up the dark hall stairs, at intervals, came the sound of
feet, one foot dragged after the other, painfully, slowly, slowly,
slowly.
Dog shivered. A rain of strange night earth fell seething on the bed.
Dog turned.
The bedroom door whispered in.
Martin had company.

Touched with Fire
They stood in the blazing sunlight for a long while, looking at the
bright faces of their old-fashioned railroad watches, while the shadows
tilted beneath them, swaying, and the perspiration ran out under their
porous summer hats. When they uncovered their heads to mop their lined
and pinkened brows, their hair was white and soaked through, like
something that had been out of the light for years. One of the men
commented that his shoes felt like two loaves of baked bread and then,
sighing warmly, added:
"Are you positive this is the right tenement?"
The second old man, Foxe by name, nodded, as if any quick motion might
make him catch fire by friction alone. "I saw this woman every day for
three days. She'll show up. If she's still alive, that is. Wait till you
see her, Shaw. Lord! what a case."
"Such an odd business," said Shaw. "If people knew they'd think us
Peeping Toms, doddering old fools. Lord, I feel self-conscious standing
here."
Foxe leaned on his cane. "Let me do all the talking if--hold on! There
she is!" He lowered his voice. "Take a slow look as she comes out."
The tenement front door slammed viciously. A dumpy woman stood at the
top of the thirteen porch steps glancing this way and that with angry
jerkings of her eyes. Jamming a plump hand in her purse, she seized some
crumpled dollar bills, plunged down the steps brutally, and set off down
the street in a charge. Behind her, several heads peered from apartment
windows above, summoned by her crashing of the door.
"Come on," whispered Foxe. "Here we go to the butcher's."
The woman flung open a butchershop door, rushed in. The two old men had
a glimpse of a mouth sticky with raw lipstick. Her eyebrows were like
mustaches over her squinting, always suspicious eyes. Abreast of the
butchershop, they heard her voice already screaming inside.
"I want a good cut of meat. Let's see what you got hidden to take home
for yourself!"
The butcher stood silently in his bloody-fingerprinted frock, his hands
empty. The two old men entered behind the woman and pretended to admire
a pink loaf of fresh-ground sirloin.
"Them lambchops look sickly!" cried the woman. "What's the price on
brains?"
The butcher told her in a low dry voice.
"Well, weigh me a pound of liver!" said the woman. "Keep your thumbs
off!"
The butcher weighed it out, slowly.
"Hurry up!" snapped the woman.
The butcher now stood with his hands out of sight below the counter.
"Look," whispered Foxe. Shaw leaned back a trifle to peer below the
case.
In one of the butcher's bloody hands, empty before, a silvery meat ax
was now clenched tightly, relaxed, clenched tightly, relaxed. The
butcher's eyes were blue and dangerously serene above the white
porcelain counter while the woman yelled into those eyes and that pink
self-contained face.
"Now do you believe?" whispered Foxe. "She really needs our help."
They stared at the raw red cube-steaks for a long time, noticing all the
little dents and marks where it had been hit, ten dozen times, by a
steel mallet.
The braying continued at the grocer's and the dime store, with the two
old men following at a respectful distance.
"Mrs. Death-Wish," said Mr. Foxe quietly. "It's like watching a
two-year-old run out on a battlefield. Any moment, you say, she'll hit a
mine; bang! Get the temperature just right, too much humidity, everyone
itching, sweating, irritable. Along'll come this fine lady, whining,
shrieking. And so good-by. Well, Shaw, do we start business?"
"You mean just walk up to her?" Shaw was stunned by his own suggestion.
"Oh, but we're not really going to do this, are we? I thought it was
sort of a hobby. People, habits, customs, et cetera. It's been fun. But
actually mixing in--? We've better things to do."
"Have we?" Foxe nodded down the street to where the woman ran out in
front of cars, making them stop with a great squall of brakes,
horn-blowing, and cursing. "Are we Christians? Do we let her feed
herself subconsciously to the lions? Or do we convert her?"
"Convert her?"
"To love, to serenity, to. a longer life. Look at her. Doesn't want to
live any more. Deliberately aggravates people. One day soon, someone'll
favor her, with a hammer, or strychnine. She's been going down for the
third time a long while now. When you're drowning, you get nasty, grab
at people, scream. Let's have lunch and lend a hand, eh? Otherwise, our
victim will run on until she finds her murderer."
Shaw stood with the sun driving him into the boiling white sidewalk, and
it seemed for a moment the street tilted vertically, became a cliff down
which the woman fell toward a blazing sky. At last he shook his head.
"You're right," he said. "I wouldn't want her on my conscience."
The sun burnt the paint from the tenement fronts, bleached the air raw
and turned the gutter-waters to vapor by midafternoon when the old men,
numbed and evaporated, stood in the inner passageways of a house that
funneled bakery air from front to back in a searing torrent. When they
spoke it was the submerged, muffled talk of men in steam rooms,
preposterously tired and remote.
The front door opened. Foxe stopped a boy who carried a wellmangled loaf
of bread. "Son, we're looking for the woman who gives the door an awful
slam when she goes out."
"Oh, her?" The boy ran upstairs, calling back. "Mrs. Shrike!"
Foxe grabbed Shaw's arm. "Lord, Lord! It can't be true!"
"I want to go home," said Shaw.
"But there it is!" said Foxe, incredulous, tapping his cane on the
room-index in the lobby. "Mr. and Mrs. Alfred Shrike, 331 upstairs!
Husband's a longshoreman, big hulking brute, comes home dirty. Saw them
out on Sunday, her jabbering, him never speaking, never looking at her.
Oh, come on, Shaw."
"It's no use," said Shaw. "You can't help people like her unless they
want to be helped. That's the first law of mental health. You know it, I
know it. If you get in her way, she'll trample you. Don't be a fool."
"But who's to speak for her--and people like her? Her husband? Her
friends? The grocer, the butcher? They'd sing at her wake! Will they
tell her she needs a psychiatrist? Does she know it? No. Who knows it?
We do. Well, then, you don't keep vital information like that from the
victim, do you?"
Shaw took off his sopping hat and gazed bleakly into it. "Once, in
biology class, long ago, our teacher asked if we thought we could remove
a frog's nervous system, intact, with a scalpel. Take out the whole
delicate antennalike structure, with all its little pink thistles and
half-invisible ganglions. Impossible, of course. The nervous system's so
much a part of the frog there's no way to pull it like a hand from a
green glove. You'd destroy the frog, doing it. Well, that's Mrs. Shrike.
There's no way to operate on a souring ganglion. Bile is in the vitreous
humor of her mad little elephant eyes. You might as well try to get all
the saliva out of her mouth forever. It's very sad. But I think we've
gone too far already."
"True," said Foxe patiently, earnestly, nodding. "But all I want to do
is post a warning. Drop a little seed in her subconscious. Tell her,
'You're a murderee, a victim looking for a place to happen.' One tiny
seed I want to plant in her head and hope it'll sprout and flower. A
very faint, very poor hope that before it's too late, she'll gather her
courage and go see a psychiatrist!"
"It's too hot to talk."
"All the more reason to act! More murders are committed at ninety-two
degrees Fahrenheit than any other temperature. Over one hundred, it's
too hot to move. Under ninety, cool enough to survive. But right at
ninety-two degrees lies the apex of irritability, everything is itches
and hair and sweat and cooked pork. The brain becomes a rat rushing
around a red-hot maze. The least thing, a word, a look, a sound, the
drop of a hair and--irritable murder. irritable murder, there's a pretty
and terrifying phrase for you. Look at that hall thermometer,
eighty-nine degrees. Crawling up toward ninety, itching up toward
ninety-one, sweating toward ninety-two an hour, two hours from now.
Here's the first flight of stairs. We can rest on each landing. Up we
go!"
The two old men moved in the third-floor darkness.
"Don't check the numbers," said Foxe. "Let's guess which apartment is
hers."
Behind the last door a radio exploded, the ancient paint shuddered and
flaked softly onto the worn carpet at their feet. The men watched the
entire door jitter with vibration in its grooves.
They looked at each other and nodded grimly.
Another sound cut like an ax through the paneling; a woman, shrieking to
someone across town on a telephone.
"No phone necessary. She should just open her window and yell."
Foxe rapped.
The radio blasted out the rest of its song, the voice bellowed. Foxe
rapped again, and tested the knob. To his horror the door got free of
his grasp and floated swiftly inward, leaving them like actors trapped
on-stage when a curtain rises too soon.
"Oh, no!" cried Shaw.
They were buried in a flood of sound. It was like standing in the
spiliway of a dam and pulling the gate-lever. Instinctively, the old men
raised their hands, wincing as if the sound were pure blazing sunlight
that burnt their eyes.
The woman (it was indeed Mrs. Shrike!) stood at a wall phone, saliva
flying from her mouth at an incredible rate. She showed all of her large
white teeth, chunking off her monologue, nostrils flared, a vein in her
wet forehead ridged up, pumping, her free hand flexing and unflexing
itself. Her eyes were clenched shut as she yelled:
"Tell that damned son-in-law of mine I won't see him, he's a lazy hum!"
Suddenly the woman snapped her eyes wide, some animal instinct having
felt rather than heard or seen an intrusion. She continued yelling into
the phone, meanwhile piercing her visitors with a glance forged of the
coldest steel. She yelled for a full minute longer, then slammed down
the receiver and said, without taking a breath: "Well?"
The two men moved together for protection. Their lips moved.
"Speak up!" cried the woman.
"Would you mind," said Foxe, "turning the radio down?"
She caught the word "radio" by lip reading. Still glaring at them out of
her sunburnt face, she slapped the radio without looking at it, as one
slaps a child that cries all day every day and has become an unseen
pattern in life. The radio subsided.
"I'm not buyin' anything!"
She ripped a dog-eared packet of cheap cigarettes like it was a bone
with meat on it, snapped one of the cigarettes in her smeared mouth and
lit it, sucking greedily on the smoke, jetting it through her thin
nostrils until she was a feverish dragon confronting them in a
fire-clouded room. "I got work to do. Make your pitch!"
They looked at the magazines spilled like great catches of brightcolored
fish on the linoleum floor, the unwashed coffee cup near the broken
rocking chair, the tilted, greasy thumb-marked lamps, the smudged
windowpanes, the dishes piled in the sink under a steadily dripping,
dripping faucet, the cobwebs floating like dead skin in the ceiling
corners, and over all of it the thickened smell of life lived too much,
too long, with the window down.
They saw the wall thermometer.
Temperature: ninety degrees Fahrenheit.
They gave each other a half-startled look.
"I'm Mr. Foxe, this is Mr. Shaw. We're retired insurance salesmen. We
still sell occasionally, to supplement our retirement fund. Most of the
time, however, we're taking it easy and--"
"You tryin' to sell me insurance!" She cocked her head at them through
the cigarette smoke.
"There's no money connected with this, no."
"Keep talking," she said.
"I hardly know how to begin. May we sit down?" He looked about and
decided there wasn't a thing in the room he would trust himself to sit
on. "Never mind." He saw she was about to bellow again, so went on
swiftly. "We retired after forty years of seeing people from nursery to
cemetery gate, you might say. In that time we'd formulated certain
opinions. Last year, sitting in the park talking, we put two and two
together. We realized that many people didn't have to die so young. With
the correct investigation, a new type of Customer's Information might be
provided as a sideline by insurance companies . . ."
"I'm not sick," said the woman.
"Oh, hut you are!" cried Mr. Foxe, and then put two fingers to his mouth
in dismay.
"Don't tell me what I am!" she cried.
Foxe plunged headlong. "Let me make it clear. People die every day,
psychologically speaking. Some part of them gets tired. And that small
part tries to kill off the entire person. For example--" He looked about
and seized on his first evidence with what amounted to a vast relief.
"There! That light bulb in your bathroom, hung right over the tub on
frayed wire. Someday you'll slip, make a grab and--pfft!"
Mrs. Albert J. Shrike squinted at the light bulb in the bathroom. "So?"
"People," Mr. Foxe warmed to his subject, while Mr. Shaw fidgeted, his
face now flushed, now dreadfully pale, edged toward the door, "people,
like cars, need their brakes checked; their emotional brakes, do you
see? Their lights, their batteries, their approaches and responses to
life."
Mrs. Shrike snorted. "Your two minutes are up. I haven't learned a
damned thing."
Mr. Foxe blinked, first at her, then at the sun burning mercilessly
through the dusty windowpanes. Perspiration was running in the soft
lines of his face. He chanced a look at the wall thermometer.
"Ninety-one," he said.
"What's eating you, pop?" asked Mrs. Shrike.
"I beg your pardon." He stared in fascination at the red-hot line of
mercury firing up the small glass vent across the room.
"Sometimes--sometimes we all make wrong turnings. Our choice of marriage
partners. A wrong job. No money. Illness. Migraine headaches. Glandular
deficiencies. Dozens of little prickly, irritable things. Before you
know it, you're taking it out on everyone everywhere."
She was watching his mouth as if he were talking a foreign language; she
scowled, she squinted, she tilted her head, her cigarette smoldering in
one plump hand.
"We run about screaming, making enemies." Foxe swallowed and glanced
away from her. "We make people want to see us-- gone--sick--dead, even.
People want to hit us, knock us down, shoot us. It's all unconscious,
though. You see?"
God, it's hot in here, he thought. If there were only one window open.
Just one. Just one window open.
Mrs. Shrike's eyes were widening, as if to allow in everything he said.
"Some people are not only accident-prones, which means they want to
punish themselves physically, for some crime, usually a petty immorality
they think they've long forgotten. But their subconscious puts them in
dangerous situations, makes them jaywalk, makes them--" He hesitated and
the sweat dripped from his chin. "Makes them ignore frayed electric
cords over bathtubs-- they're potential victims. It is marked on their
faces, hidden like-- like tattoos, you might say, on the inner rather
than the outer skin. A murderer passing one of these accident-prones,
these wishersafter-death, would see the invisible markings, turn, and
follow them, instinctively, to the nearest alley. With luck, a potential
victim might not happen to cross the tracks of a potential murderer for
fifty years. Then--one afternoon--fate! These people, these
death-prones, touch all the wrong nerves in passing strangers; they
brush the murder in all our breasts."
Mrs. Shrike mashed her cigarette in a dirty saucer, very slowly.
Foxe shifted his cane from one trembling hand to the other. "So it was
that a year ago we decided to try to find people who needed help. These
are always the people who don't even know they need help, who'd never
dream of going to a psychiatrist. At first, I said, we'll make dry-runs.
Shaw was always against it, save as a hobby, a harmless little quiet
thing between ourselves. I suppose you'd say I'm a fool. Well, we've
just completed a year of dry-runs. We watched two men, studied their
environmental factors, their work, marriages, at a discreet distance.
None of our business, you say? But each time, the men came to a bad end.
One killed in a bar-room. Another pushed out a window. A woman we
studied, run down by a streetcar. Coincidence? What about that old man
accidentally poisoned? Didn't turn on the bathroom light one night. What
was there in his mind that wouldn't let him turn the light on? What made
him move in the dark and drink medicine in the dark and die in the
hospital next day, protesting he wanted nothing but to live? Evidence,
evidence, we have it, we have it. Two dozen cases. Coffins nailed to a
good half of them in that little time. No more dry-runs; it's time for
action, preventative use of data. Time to work with people, make friends
before the undertaker slips in the side door."
Mrs. Shrike stood as if he had struck her on the head, quite suddenly,
with a large weight. Then just her blurred lips moved. "And you came
here?"
"Well--"
"You've been watching me?"
"We only--"
"Following me?"
"In order to--"
"Get out!" she said.
"We can--"
"Get out!" she said.
"If you'll only listen--"
"Oh, I said this would happen," whispered Shaw, shutting his eyes.
"Dirty old men, get out!" she shouted.
"There's no money involved."
"I'll throw you out, I'll throw you out!" she shrieked, clenching her
fists, gritting her teeth. Her face colored insanely. "Who are you,
dirty old grandmas, coming here, spying, you old cranks!" she yelled.
She seized the straw hat from Mr. Foxe's head; he cried out; she tore
the lining from it, cursing. "Get out, get out, get out, get out!" She
hurled it to the floor. She crunched one heel through the middle. She
kicked it. "Get out, get out!"
"Oh, but you need us!" Foxe stared in dismay at the hat as she swore at
him in a language that turned corners, blazing, that flew in the air
like great searing torches. The woman knew every language and every word
in every language. She spoke with fire and alcohol and smoke.
"Who do you think you are? God? God and the Holy Ghost, passing on
people, snooping, prying, you old jerks, you old dirtyminded grandmas!
You, you--" She gave them further names, names that forced them toward
the door in shock, recoiling. She gave them a long vile list of names
without pausing for breath. Then she stopped, gasped, trembled, heaved
in a great suction of air, and started a further list of ten dozen even
viler names.
"See here!" said Foxe, stiffening.
Shaw was out the door, pleading with his partner to come along, it was
over and done, it was as he expected, they were fools, they were
everything she said they were, oh, how embarrassing!
"Old maid!" shouted the woman.
"I'll thank you to keep a civil tongue."
"Old maid, old maid!"
Somehow this was worse than all the really vile names.
Foxe swayed, his mouth clapped open, shut, open, shut.
"Old woman!" she cried. "Woman, woman, woman!"
He was in a blazing yellow jungle. The room was drowned in fire, it
clenched upon him, the furniture seemed to shift and whirl about, the
sunlight shot through the rammed-shut windows, firing the dust, which
leaped up from the rug in angry sparks when a fly buzzed a crazy spiral
from nowhere; her mouth, a feral red thing, licked the air with all the
obscenities collected just behind it in a lifetime, and beyond her on
the baked brown wallpaper the thermometer said ninety-two, and he looked
again and it said ninety-two, and still the woman screamed like the
wheels of a train scraping around a vast iron curve of track;
fingernails down a blackboard, and steel across marble. "Old maid! Old
maid! Old maid!"
Foxe drew his arm back, cane clenched in fist, very high, and struck.
"No!" cried Shaw in the doorway.
But the woman had slipped and fallen aside, gibbering, clawing the
floor. Foxe stood over her with a look of positive disbelief on his
face. He looked at his arm and his wrist and his hand and his fingers,
each in turn, through a great invisible glaring hot wall of crystal that
enclosed him. He looked at the cane as if it was an easily seen and
incredible exclamation point come out of nowhere to the center of the
room. His mouth stayed open, the dust fell in silent embers, dead. He
felt the blood drop from his face as if a small door had banged wide
into his stomach. "I--"
She frothed.
Scrabbling about, every part of her seemed a separate animal. Her arms
and legs, her hands, her head, each was a lopped-off bit of some
creature wild to return to itself, but blind to the proper way of making
that return. Her mouth still gushed out her sickness with words and
sounds that were not even faintly words. It had been in her a long time,
a long long time. Foxe looked upon her, in a state of shock, himself.
Before today, she had spat her venom out, here, there, another place.
Now he had loosed the flood of a lifetime and he felt in danger of
drowning here. He sensed someone pulling him by his coat. He saw the
door sills pass on either side. He heard the cane fall and rattle like a
thin bone far away from his hand, which seemed to have been stung by
some terrible unseen wasp. And then he was out, walking mechanically,
down through the burning tenement, between the scorched walls. Her voice
crashed like a guillotine down the stair. "Get out! Get out! Get out!"
Fading like the wail of a person dropped down an open well into
darkness.
At the bottom of the last flight, near the street door, Foxe turned
himself loose from this other man here, and for a long moment leaned
against the wall, his eyes wet, able to do nothing but moan. His hands,
while he did this, moved in the air to find the lost cane, moved on his
head, touched at his moist eyelids, amazed, and fluttered away. They sat
on the bottom hall step for ten minutes in silence, drawing sanity into
their lungs with every shuddering breath. Finally Mr. Foxe looked over
at Mr. Shaw, who had been staring at him in wonder and fright for the
full ten minutes.
"Did you see what I did? Oh, oh, that was close. Close. Close." He shook
his head. "I'm a fool. That poor, poor woman. She was right."
"There's nothing to be done."
"I see that now. It had to fall on me."
"Here, wipe your face. That's better."
"Do you think she'll tell Mr. Shrike about us?"
"No, no."
"Do you think we could--"
"Talk to him?"
They considered this and shook their heads. They opened the front door
to a gush of furnace heat and were almost knocked down by a huge man who
strode between them.
"Look where you're going!" he cried.
They turned and watched the man move ponderously, in fiery darkness, one
step at a time, up into the tenement house, a creature with the ribs of
a mastodon and the head of an unshorn lion, with great beefed arms,
irritably hairy, painfully sunburnt. The face they had seen briefly as
he shouldered past was a sweating, raw, sunblistered pork face, salt
droplets under the red eyes, dripping from the chin; great smears of
perspiration stained the man's armpits, coloring his tee-shirt to the
waist.
They shut the tenement door gently.
"That's him," said Mr. Foxe. "That's the husband."
They stood in the little store across from the tenement. It was
five-thirty, the sun tilting down the sky, the shadows the color of hot
summer grapes under the rare few trees and in the alleys.
"What was it, hanging out of the husband's back pocket?"
"Longshoreman's hook. Steel. Sharp, heavy-looking. Like those claws
one-armed men used to wear on the end of their stumps, years ago."
Mr. Foxe did not speak.
"What's the temperature?" asked Mr. Foxe, a minute later, as if he were
too tired to turn his head to look.
"Store thermometer still reads ninety-two. Ninety-two right on the
nose."
Foxe sat on a packing crate, making the least motion to hold an orange
soda bottle in his fingers. "Cool off," he said. "Yes, I need an orange
pop very much, right now."
They sat there in the furnace, looking up at one special tenement window
for a long time, waiting, waiting . . .

The Small Assassin
Just when the idea occurred to her that she was being murdered she could
not tell. There had been little subtle signs, little suspicions for the
past month; things as deep as sea tides in her, like looking at a
perfectly calm stretch of tropic water, wanting to bathe in it and
finding, just as the tide takes your body, that monsters dwell just
under the surface, things unseen, bloated, many-armed, sharp-finned,
malignant and inescapable.
A room floated around her in an effiuvium of hysteria. Sharp instruments
hovered and there were voices, and people in sterile white masks.
My name, she thought, what is it?
Alice Leiber. It came to her. David Leiber's wife. But it gave her no
comfort. She was alone with these silent, whispering white people and
there was great pain and nausea and death-fear in her.
I am being murdered before their eyes. These doctors, these nurses don't
realize what hidden thing has happened to me. David doesn't know. Nobody
knows except me and--the killer, the little murderer, the small
assassin.
I am dying and I can't tell them now. They'd laugh and call me one in
delirium. They'll see the murderer and hold him and never think him
responsible for my death. But here I am, in front of God and man, dying,
no one to believe my story, everyone to doubt me, comfort me with lies,
bury me in ignorance, mourn me and salvage my destroyer.
Where is David? she wondered. In the waiting room, smoking one cigarette
after another, listening to the long tickings of the very slow clock?
Sweat exploded from all of her body at once, and with it an agonized
cry. Now. Now! Try and kill me, she screamed. Try, try, but I won't die!
I won't!
There was a hollowness. A vacuum. Suddenly the pain fell away.
Exhaustion, and dusk came around. It was over. Oh, God! She plummeted
down and struck a black nothingness which gave way to nothingness and
nothingness and another and still another. . . .
Footsteps. Gentle, approaching footsteps.
Far away, a voice said, "She's asleep. Don't disturb her."
An odor of tweeds, a pipe, a certain shaving lotion. David was standing
over her. And beyond him the immaculate smell of Dr. J effers.
She did not open her eyes. "I'm awake," she said, quietly. It was a
surprise, a relief to be able to speak, to not be dead.
"Alice," someone said, and it was David beyond her closed eyes, holding
her tired hands.
Would you like to meet the murderer, David? she thought. I hear your
voice asking to see him, so there's nothing but for me to point him out
to you.
David stood over her. She opened her eyes. The room came into focus.
Moving a weak hand, she pulled aside a coverlet.
The murderer looked up at David Leiber with a small, redfaced, blue-eyed
calm. Its eyes were deep and sparkling.
"Why!" cried David Leiber, smiling. "He's a fine baby!"
Dr. Jeffers was waiting for David Leiber the day he came to take his
wife and new child home. He motioned Leiber to a chair in his office,
gave him a cigar, lit one for himself, sat on the edge of his desk,
puffing solemnly for a long moment. Then he cleared his throat, looked
David Leiber straight on and said, "Your wife doesn't like her child,
Dave."
"What!"
"It's been a hard thing for her. She'll need a lot of love this next
year. I didn't say much at the time, but she was hysterical in the
delivery room. The strange things she said--I won't repeat them. All
I'll say is that she feels alien to the child. Now, this may simply be a
thing we can clear up with one or two questions." He sucked on his cigar
another moment, then said, "Is this child a 'wanted' child, Dave?"
"Why do you ask?"
"It's vital."
"Yes. Yes, it is a 'wanted' child. We planned it together. Alice was so
happy, a year ago, when--"
"Mmmm--that makes it more difficult. Because if the child was unplanned,
it would be a simple case of a woman hating the idea of motherhood. That
doesn't fit Alice." Dr. Jeffers took his cigar from his lips, rubbed his
hand across his jaw. "It must be something else, then. Perhaps something
buried in her childhood that's coming out now. Or it might be the simple
temporary doubt and distrust of any mother who's gone through the
unusual pain and near-death that Alice has. If so, then a little time
should heal that. I thought I'd tell you, though, Dave. It'll help you
be easy and tolerant with her if she says anything about--well--about
wishing the child had been born dead. And if things don't go well, the
three of you drop in on me. I'm always glad to see old friends, eh?
Here, take another cigar along for--ah--for the baby."
It was a bright spring afternoon. Their car hummed along wide,
tree-lined boulevards. Blue sky, flowers, a warm wind. Dave talked a
lot, lit his cigar, talked some more. Alice answered directly, softly,
relaxing a bit more as the trip progressed. But she held the baby not
tightly or warmly or motherly enough to satisfy the queer ache in Dave's
mind. She seemed to be merely carrying a porcelain figurine.
"Well," he said, at last, smiling. "What'll we name him?"
Alice Leiber watched green trees slide by. "Let's not decide yet. I'd
rather wait until we get an exceptional name for him. Don't blow smoke
in his face." Her sentences ran together with no change of tone. The
last statement held no motherly reproof, no interest, no irritation. She
just mouthed it and it was said.
The husband, disquieted, dropped the cigar from the window. "Sorry," he
said.
The baby rested in the crook of his mother's arm, shadows of sun and
tree changing his face. His blue eyes opened like fresh blue spring
flowers. Moist noises came from the tiny, pink, elastic mouth.
Alice gave her baby a quick glance. Her husband felt her shiver against
him.
"Cold?" he asked.
"A chill. Better raise the window, David."
It was more than a chill. He rolled the window slowly up.
Suppertime.
Dave had brought the child from the nursery, propped him at a tiny,
bewildered angle, supported by many pillows, in a newly purchased high
chair.
Alice watched her knife and fork move. "He's not high-chair size," she
said.
"Fun having him here, anyway," said Dave, feeling fine. "Everything's
fun. At the office, too. Orders up to my nose. If I don't watch myself
I'll make another fifteen thousand this year. Hey, look at Junior, will
you? Drooling all down his chin!" He reached over to wipe the baby's
mouth with his napkin. From the corner of his eye he realized that Alice
wasn't even watching. He finished the job.
"I guess it wasn't very interesting," he said, back again at his food.
"But one would think a mother'd take some interest in her own child!"
Alice jerked her chin up. "Don't speak that way! Not in front of him!
Later, if you must."
"Later?" he cried. "In front of, in back of, what's the difference?" He
quieted suddenly, swallowed, was sorry. "All right. Okay. I know how it
is."
After dinner she let him carry the baby upstairs. She didn't tell him
to; she let him.
Coming down, he found her standing by the radio, listening to music she
didn't hear. Her eyes were closed, her whole attitude one of wondering,
self-questioning. She started when he appeared.
Suddenly, she was at him, against him, soft, quick; the same. Her lips
found him, kept him. He was stunned. Now that the baby was gone,
upstairs, out of the room, she began to breathe again, live again. She
was free. She was whispering, rapidly, endlessly.
"Thank you, thank you, darling. For being yourself, always. Dependable,
so very dependable!"
He had to laugh. "My father told me, 'Son, provide for your family!'
Wearily, she rested her dark, shining hair against his neck. "You've
overdone it. Sometimes I wish we were just the way we were when we were
first married. No responsibilities, nothing but ourselves. No--no
babies."
She crushed his hand in hers, a supernatural whiteness in her face.
"Oh, Dave, once it was just you and me. We protected each other, and now
we protect the baby, but get no protection from it. Do you understand?
Lying in the hospital I had time to think a lot of things. The world is
evil--"
"Is it?"
"Yes. It is. But laws protect us from it. And when there aren't laws,
then love does the protecting. You're protected from my hurting you, by
my love. You're vulnerable to me, of all people, hut love shields you. I
feel no fear of you, because love cushions all your irritations,
unnatural instincts, hatreds and immaturities. But--what about the baby?
It's too young to know love, or a law of love, or anything, until we
teach it. And in the meantime be vulnerable to it."
"Vulnerable to a baby?" He held her away and laughed gently.
"Does a baby know the difference between right and wrong?" she asked.
"No. But it'll learn."
"But a baby is so new, so amoral, so conscience-free." She stopped. Her
arms dropped from him and she turned swiftly. "That noise? What was it?"
Leiber looked around the room. "I didn't hear--"
She stared at the library door. "In there," she said, slowly.
Leiber crossed the room, opened the door and switched the library lights
on and off. "Not a thing." He came back to her. "You're worn out. To bed
with you--right now."
Turning out the lights together, they walked slowly up the soundless
hall stairs, not speaking. At the top she apologized. "My wild talk,
darling. Forgive me. I'm exhausted."
He understood, and said so.
She paused, undecided, by the nursery door. Then she fingered the brass
knob sharply, walked in. He watched her approach the crib much too
carefully, look down, and stiffen as if she'd been struck in the face.
"David!"
Leiber stepped forward, reached the crib.
The baby's face was bright red and very moist; his small pink mouth
opened and shut, opened and shut; his eyes were a fiery blue. His hands
leapt about on the air.
"Oh," said Dave, "he's just been crying."
"Has he?" Alice Leiber seized the crib-railing to balance herself. "I
didn't hear him."
"The door was closed."
"Is that why he breathes so hard, why his face is red?"
"Sure. Poor little guy. Crying all alone in the dark. He can sleep in
our room tonight, just in case he cries."
"You'll spoil him," his wife said.
Leiber felt her eyes follow as he rolled the crib into their bedroom. He
undressed silently, sat on the edge of the bed. Suddenly he lifted his
head, swore under his breath, snapped his fingers. "Damn it! Forgot to
tell you. I must fly to Chicago Friday."
"Oh, David." Her voice was lost in the room.
"I've put this trip off for two months, and now it's so critical I just
have to go."
"I'm afraid to be alone."
"We'll have the new cook by Friday. She'll be here all the time. I'll
only be gone a few days."
"I'm afraid. I don't know of what. You wouldn't believe me if I told
you. I guess I'm crazy."
He was in bed now. She darkened the room; he heard her walk around the
bed, throw back the cover, slide in. He smelled the warm woman-smell of
her next to him. He said, "If you want me to wait a few days, perhaps I
could--"
"No," she said, unconvinced. "You go. I know it's important. It's just
that I keep thinking about what I told you. Laws and love and
protection. Love protects you from me. But, thebaby--" She took a
breath. "What protects you from him, David?"
Before he could answer, before he could tell her how silly it was,
speaking of infants, she switched on the bed light, abruptly.
"Look," she said, pointing.
The baby lay wide-awake in its crib, staring straight at him, with deep,
sharp blue eyes.
The lights went out again. She trembled against him.
"It's not nice being afraid of the thing you birthed." Her whisper
lowered, became harsh, fierce, swift. "He tried to kill me! He lies
there, listens to us talking, waiting for you to go away so he can try
to kill me again! I swear it!" Sobs broke from her.
"Please," he kept saying, soothing her. "Stop it, stop it. Please."
She cried in the dark for a long time. Very late she relaxed, shakingly,
against him. Her breathing came soft, warm, regular, her body twitched
its worn reflexes and she slept.
He drowsed.
And just before his eyes lidded wearily down, sinking him into deeper
and yet deeper tides, he heard a strange little sound of awareness and
awakeness in the room.
The sound of small, moist, pinkly elastic lips.
The baby.
And then--sleep.
In the morning, the sun blazed. Alice smiled.
David Leiber dangled his watch over the crib. "See, baby? Something
bright. Something pretty. Sure. Sure. Something bright. Something
pretty."
Alice smiled. She told him to go ahead, fly to Chicago, she'd be very
brave, no need to worry. She'd take care of baby. Oh, yes, she'd take
care of him, all right.
The airplane went east. There was a lot of sky, a lot of sun and clouds
and Chicago running over the horizon. Dave was dropped into the rush of
ordering, planning, banqueting, telephoning, arguing in conference. But
he wrote letters each day and sent telegrams to Alice and the baby.
On the evening of his sixth day away from home he received the
long-distance phone call. Los Angeles.
"Alice?"
"No, Dave. This is Jeff ers speaking."
"Doctor!"
"Hold onto yourself, son. Alice is sick. You'd better get the next plane
home. It's pneumonia. I'll do everything I can, boy. If only it wasn't
so soon after the baby. She needs strength."
Leiber dropped the phone into its cradle. He got up, with no feet under
him, and no hands and no body. The hotel room blurred and fell apart.
"Alice," he said, blindly, starting for the door.
The propellers spun about, whirled, fluttered, stopped; time and space
were put behind. Under his hand, David felt the doorknob turn; under his
feet the floor assumed reality, around him flowed the walls of a
bedroom, and in the late-afternoon sunlight Dr. Jeffers stood, turning
from a window, as Alice lay waiting in her bed, something carved from a
fall of winter snow. Then Dr. Jeffers was talking, talking continuously,
gently, the sound rising and falling through the lamplight, a soft
flutter, a white murmur of voice.
"Your wife's too good a mother, Dave. She worried more about the baby
than herself. . . ."
Somewhere in the paleness of Alice's face, there was a sudden
constriction which smoothed itself out before it was realized. Then,
slowly, half-smiling, she began to talk and she talked as a mother
should about this, that and the other thing, the telling detail, the
minute-by-minute and hour-by-hour report of a mother concerned with a
dollhouse world and the miniature life of that world. But she could not
stop; the spring was wound tight, and her voice rushed on to anger, fear
and the faintest touch of revulsion, which did not change Dr. Jeffers'
expression, but caused Dave's heart to match the rhythm of this talk
that quickened and could not stop:
"The baby wouldn't sleep. I thought he was sick. He just lay, staring,
in his crib, and late at night he'd cry. So loud, he'd cry, and he'd cry
all night and all night. I couldn't quiet him, and I couldn't rest."
Dr. Jeffers' head nodded slowly, slowly. "Tired herself right into
pneumonia. But she's full of sulfa now and on the safe side of the whole
damn thing."
David felt ill. "The baby, what about the baby?"
"Fit as a fiddle; cock of the walk!"
"Thanks, Doctor."
The doctor walked off away and down the stairs, opened the front door
faintly, and was gone.
"David!"
He turned to her frightened whisper.
"It was the baby again." She clutched his hand. "I try to lie to myself
and say that I'm a fool, but the baby knew I was weak from the hospital,
so he cried all night every night, and when he wasn't crying he'd be
much too quiet. I knew if I switched on the light he'd be there, staring
up at me."
David felt his body close in on itself like a fist. He remembered seeing
the baby, feeling the baby, awake in the dark, awake very late at night
when babies should be asleep. Awake and lying there, silent as thought,
not crying, but watching from its crib. He thrust the thought aside. It
was insane.
Alice went on. "I was going to kill the baby. Yes, I was. When you'd
been gone only a day on your trip I went to his room and put my hands
about his neck; and I stood there, for a long time, thinking, afraid.
Then I put the covers up over his face and turned him over on his face
and pressed him down and left him that way and ran out of the room."
He tried to stop her.
"No, let me finish," she said, hoarsely, looking at the wall. "When I
left his room I thought, It's simple. Babies smother every day. No
one'll ever know. But when I came back to see him dead, David, he was
alive! Yes, alive, turned over on his back, alive and smiling and
breathing. And I couldn't touch him again after that. I left him there
and I didn't come back, not to feed him or look at him or do anything.
Perhaps the cook tended to him. I don't know. All I know is that his
crying kept me awake, and I thought all through the night, and walked
around the rooms and now I'm sick." She was almost finished now. "The
baby lies there and thinks of ways to kill me. Simple ways. Because he
knows I know so much about him. I have no love for him; there is no
protection between us; there never will be."
She was through. She collapsed inward on herself and finally slept.
David Leiber stood for a long time over her, not able to move. His blood
was frozen in his body, not a cell stirred anywhere, anywhere at all.
The next morning there was only one thing to do. He did it. He walked
into Dr. Jeff ers' office and told him the whole thing, and listened to
Jeff ers' tolerant replies:
"Let's take this thing slowly, son. It's quite natural for mothers to
hate their children, sometimes. We have a label for it--ambivalence. The
ability to hate, while loving. Lovers hate each other, frequently.
Children detest their mothers--"
Leiber interrupted. "I never hated my mother."
"You won't admit it, naturally. People don't enjoy admitting hatred for
their loved ones."
"So Alice hates her baby."
"Better say she has an obsession. She's gone a step further than plain,
ordinary ambivalence. A Caesarian operation brought the child into the
world and almost took Alice out of it. She blames the child for her
near-death and her pneumonia. She's projecting her troubles, blaming
them on the handiest object she can use as a source of blame. We all do
it. We stumble into a chair and curse the furniture, not our own
clumsiness. We miss a golf-stroke and damn the turf or our club, or the
make of ball. If our business fails we blame the gods, the weather, our
luck. All I can tell you is what I told you before. Love her. Finest
medicine in the world. Find little ways of showing your affection, give
her security. Find ways of showing her how harmless and innocent the
child is. Make her feel that the baby was worth the risk. After awhile,
she'll settle down, forget about death, and begin to love the child. If
she doesn't come around in the next month or so, ask me. I'll recommend
a good psychiatrist. Go on along now, and take that look off your face."
When summer came, things seemed to settle, become easier. Dave worked,
immersed himself in office detail, but found much time for his wife.
She, in turn, took long walks, gained strength, played an occasional
light game of badminton. She rarely burst out any more. She seemed to
have rid herself of her fears.
Except on one certain midnight when a sudden summer wind swept around
the house, warm and swift, shaking the trees like so many shining
tambourines. Alice wakened, trembling, and slid over into her husband's
arms, and let him console her, and ask her what was wrong.
She said, "Something's here in the room, watching us."
He switched on the light. "Dreaming again," he said. "You're better,
though. Haven't been troubled for a long time."
She sighed as he clicked off the light again, and suddenly she slept. He
held her, considering what a sweet, weird creature she was, for about
half an hour.
He heard the bedroom door sway open a few inches.
There was nobody at the door. No reason for it to come open. The wind
had died.
He waited. It seemed like an hour he lay silently, in the dark.
Then, far away, wailing like some small meteor dying in the vast inky
gulf of space, the baby began to cry in his nursery.
It was a small, lonely sound in the middle of the stars and the dark and
the breathing of this woman in his arms and the wind beginning to sweep
through the trees again.
Leiber counted to one hundred, slowly. The crying continued.
Carefully disengaging Alice's arm he slipped from bed, put on his
slippers, robe, and moved quietly from the room.
He'd go downstairs, he thought, fix some warm milk, bring it up, and--.
The blackness dropped out from under him. His foot slipped and plunged.
Slipped on something soft. Plunged into nothingness.
He thrust his hands out, caught frantically at the railing. His body
stopped falling. He held. He cursed.
The "something soft" that had caused his feet to slip, rustled and
thumped down a few steps. His head rang. His heart hammered at the base
of his throat, thick and shot with pain.
Why do careless people leave things strewn about a house? He groped
carefully with his fingers for the object that had almost spilled him
headlong down the stairs.
His hand froze, startled. His breath went in. His heart held one or two
beats.
The thing he held in his hand was a toy. A large cumbersome, patchwork
doll he had bought as a joke, for--.
For the baby.
Alice drove him to work the next day.
She slowed the car halfway downtown; pulled to the curb and stopped it.
Then she turned on the seat and looked at her husband.
"I want to go away on a vacation. I don't know if you can make it now,
darling, but if not, please let me go alone. We can get someone to take
care of the baby, I'm sure. But I just have to get away. I thought I was
growing out of this--this feeling. But I haven't. I can't stand being in
the room with him. He looks up at me as if he hates me, too. I can't put
my finger on it; all I know is I want to get away before something
happens."
He got out on his side of the car, came around, motioned to her to move
over, got in. "The only thing you're going to do is see a good
psychiatrist. And if he suggests a vacation, well, okay. But this can't
go on; my stomach's in knots all the time." He started the car. "I'll
drive the rest of the way."
Her head was down; she was trying to keep back tears. She looked up when
they reached his office building. "All right. Make the appointment. I'll
go talk to anyone you want, David."
He kissed her. "Now, you're talking sense, lady. Think you can drive
home okay?"
"Of course, silly."
"See you at supper, then. Drive carefully."
"Don't I always? 'Bye."
He stood on the curb, watching her drive off, the wind taking hold of
her long, dark, shining hair. Upstairs, a minute later, he phoned
Jeffers and arranged an appointment with a reliable neuropsychiatrist.
The day's work went uneasily. Things fogged over; and in the fog he kept
seeing Alice lost and calling his name. So much of her fear had come
over to him. She actually had him convinced that the child was in some
ways not quite natural.
He dictated long, uninspired letters. He checked some shipments
downstairs. Assistants had to be questioned, and kept going. At the end
of the day he was exhausted, his head throbbed, and he was very glad to
go home.
On the way down in the elevator he wondered, What if I told Alice about
the top--that patchwork doll--I slipped on on the stairs last night?
Lord, wouldn't that back her off? No, I won't ever tell her. Accidents
are, after all, accidents.
Daylight lingered in the sky as he drove home in a taxi. In front of the
house he paid the driver and walked slowly up the cement walk, enjoying
the light that was still in the sky and the trees. The white colonial
front of the house looked unnaturally silent and uninhabited, and then,
quietly, he remembered this was Thursday, and the hired help they were
able to obtain from time to time were all gone for the day.
He took a deep breath of air. A bird sang behind the house. Traffic
moved on the boulevard a block away. He twisted the key in the door. The
knob turned under his fingers, oiled, silent.
The door opened. He stepped in, put his hat on the chair with his
briefcase, started to shrug out of his coat, when he looked up.
Late sunlight streamed down the stairwell from the window near the top
of the hall. Where the sunlight touched it took on the bright color of
the patchwork doll sprawled at the bottom of the stairs.
But he paid no attention to the toy.
He could only look, and not move, and look again at Alice.
Alice lay in a broken, grotesque, pallid gesturing and angling of her
thin body, at the bottom of the stairs, like a crumpled doll that
doesn't want to play any more, ever.
Alice was dead.
The house remained quiet, except for the sound of his heart.
She was dead.
He held her head in his hands, he felt her fingers. He held her body.
But she wouldn't live. She wouldn't even try to live. He said her name,
out loud, many times, and he tried, once again, by holding her to him,
to give her back some of the warmth she had lost, but that didn't help.
He stood up. He must have made a phone call. He didn't remember. He
found himself, suddenly, upstairs. He opened the nursery door and walked
inside and stared blankly at the crib. His stomach was sick. He couldn't
see very well.
The baby's eyes were closed, but his face was red, moist with
perspiration, as if he'd been crying long and hard.
"She's dead," said Leiber to the baby. "She's dead."
Then he started laughing low and soft and continuously for a long time
until Dr. Jeff ers walked in out of the night and slapped him again and
again across his face.
"Snap out of it! Pull yourself together!"
"She fell down the stairs, Doctor. She tripped on a patchwork doll and
fell. I almost slipped on it the other night, myself. And now--"
The doctor shook him.
"Doc, Doc, Doc," said Dave, hazily. "Funny thing. Funny. I--I finally
thought of a name for the baby."
The doctor said nothing.
Leiber put his head back in his trembling hands and spoke the words.
"I'm going to have him christened next Sunday. Know what name I'm giving
him? I'm going to call him Lucifer."
It was eleven at night. A lot of strange people had come and gone
through the house, taking the essential flame with them--Alice.
David Leiber sat across from the doctor in the library.
"Alice wasn't crazy," he said, slowly. "She had good reason to fear the
baby."
Jeffers exhaled. "Don't follow after her! She blamed the child for her
sickness, now you blame it for her death. She stumbled on a toy,
remember that. You can't blame the child."
"You mean Lucifer?"
"Stop calling him that!"
Leiber shook his head. "Alice heard things at night, moving in the
halls. You want to know what made those noises, Doctor? They were made
by the baby. Four months old, moving in the dark, listening to us talk.
Listening to every word!" He held to the sides of the chair. "And if I
turned the lights on, a baby is so small. It can hide behind furniture,
a door, against a wall--below eye-level."
"I want you to stop this!" said Jeffers.
"Let me say what I think or I'll go crazy. When I went to Chicago, who
was it kept Alice awake, tiring her into pneumonia? The baby! And when
Alice didn't die, then he tried killing me. It was simple; leave a toy
on the stairs, cry in the night until your father goes downstairs to
fetch your milk, and stumbles. A crude trick, but effective. It didn't
get me. But it killed Alice dead."
David Leiber stopped long enough to light a cigarette. "I should have
caught on. I'd turn on the lights in the middle of the night, many
nights, and the baby'd be lying there, eyes wide. Most babies sleep all
the time. Not this one. He stayed awake, thinking."
"Babies don't think."
"He stayed awake doing whatever he could do with his brain, then. What
in hell do we know about a baby's mind? He had every reason to hate
Alice; she suspected him for what he was--certainly not a normal child.
Something--different. What do you know of babies, Doctor? The general
run, yes. You know, of course, how babies kill their mothers at birth.
Why? Could it be resentment at being forced into a lousy world like this
one?"
Leiber leaned toward the doctor, tiredly. "It all ties up. Suppose that
a few babies out of all the millions born are instantaneously able to
move, see, hear, think, like many animals and insects can. Insects are
born self-sufficient. In a few weeks most mammals and birds adjust. But
children take years to speak and learn to stumble around on their weak
legs.
"But suppose one child in a billion is--strange? Born perfectly aware,
able to think, instinctively. Wouldn't it be a perfect setup, a perfect
blind for anything the baby might want to do? He could pretend to be
ordinary, weak, crying, ignorant. With just a little expenditure of
energy he could crawl about a darkened house, listening. And how easy to
place obstacles at the top of stairs. How easy to cry all night and tire
a mother into pneumonia. How easy, right at birth, to be so close to the
mother that a few deft maneuvers might cause peritonitis!"
"For God's sake!" Jeffers was on his feet. "That's a repulsive thing to
say!"
"It's a repulsive thing I'm speaking of. How many mothers have died at
the birth of their children? How many have suckled strange little
improbabilities who cause death one way or another? Strange, red little
creatures with brains that work in a bloody darkness we can't even guess
at. Elemental little brains, as warm with racial memory, hatred, and raw
cruelty, with no more thought than selfpreservation. And
self-preservation in this case consisted of eliminating a mother who
realized what a horror she had birthed. I ask you, doctor, what is there
in the world more selfish than a baby? Nothing!"
Jeffers scowled and shook his head, helplessly.
Leiber dropped his cigarette down. "I'm not claiming any great strength
for the child. Just enough to crawl around a little, a few months ahead
of schedule. Just enough to listen all the time. Just enough to cry late
at night. That's enough, more than enough."
Jeffers tried ridicule. "Call it murder, then. But murder must be
motivated. What motive had the child?"
Leiber was ready with the answer. "What is more at peace, more
dreamfully content, at ease, at rest, fed, comforted, unbothered, than
an unborn child? Nothing. It floats in a sleepy, timeless wonder of
nourishment and silence. Then, suddenly, it is asked to give up its
berth, is forced to vacate, rushed out into a noisy, uncaring, selfish
world where it is asked to shift for itself, to hunt, to feed from the
hunting, to seek after a vanishing love that once was its unquestionable
right, to meet confusion instead of inner silence and conservative
slumber! And the child resents it! Resents the cold air, the huge
spaces, the sudden departure from familiar things. And in the tiny
filament of brain the only thing the child knows is selfishness and
hatred because the spell has been rudely shattered. Who is responsible
for this disenchantment, this rude breaking of the spell? The mother. So
here the new child has someone to hate with all its unreasoning mind.
The mother has cast it out, rejected it. And the father is no better,
kill him, too! He's responsible in his way!"
Jeffers interrupted. "If what you say is true, then every woman in the
world would have to look on her baby as something to dread, something to
wonder about."
"And why not? Hasn't the child a perfect alibi? A thousand years of
accepted medical belief protects him. By all natural accounts he is
helpless, not responsible. The child is born hating. And things grow
worse, instead of better. At first the baby gets a certain amount of
attention and mothering. But then as time passes, things change. When
very new, a baby has the power to make parents do silly things when it
cries or sneezes, jump when it makes a noise. As the years pass, the
baby feels even that small power slip rapidly, forever away, never to
return. Why shouldn't it grasp all the power it can have? Why shouldn't
it jockey for position while it has all the advantages? In later years
it would be too late to express its hatred. Now would be the time to
strike."
Leiber's voice was very soft, very low.
"My little boy baby, lying in his crib nights, his face moist and red
and out of breath. From crying? No. From climbing slowly out of his
crib, from crawling long distances through darkened hallways. My little
boy baby. I want to kill him."
The doctor handed him a water glass and some pills. "You're not killing
anyone. You're going to sleep for twenty-four hours. Sleep'll change
your mind. Take this."
Leiber drank down the pills and let himself be led upstairs to his
bedroom, crying, and felt himself being put to bed. The doctor waited
until he was moving deep into sleep, then left the house.
Leiber, alone, drifted down, down.
He heard a noise. "What's--what's that?" he demanded, feebly.
Something moved in the hall.
David Leiber slept.
Very early the next morning, Dr. Jeffers drove up to the house. It was a
good morning, and he was here to drive Leiber to the country for a rest.
Leiber would still be asleep upstairs. Jeffers had given him enough
sedative to knock him out for at least fifteen hours.
He rang the doorbell. No answer. The servants were probably not up.
Jeffers tried the front door, found it open, stepped in. He put his
medical kit on the nearest chair.
Something white moved out of sight at the top of the stairs. Just a
suggestion of a movement. Jeff ers hardly noticed it.
The smell of gas was in the house.
Jeffers ran upstairs, crashed into Leiber's bedroom.
Leiber lay motionless on the bed, and the room billowed with gas, which
hissed from a released jet at the base of the wall near the door.
Jeffers twisted it off, then forced up all the windows and ran back to
Leiber's body.
The body was cold. It had been dead quite a few hours.
Coughing violently, the doctor hurried from the room, eyes watering.
Leiber hadn't turned on the gas himself. He couldn't have. Those
sedatives had knocked him out, he wouldn't have wakened until noon. It
wasn't suicide. Or was there the faintest possibility?
Jeffers stood in the hall for five minutes. Then he walked to the door
of the nursery. It was shut. He opened it. He walked inside and to the
crib.
The crib was empty.
He stood swaying by the crib for half a minute, then he said something
to nobody in particular.
"The nursery door blew shut. You couldn't get back into your crib where
it was safe. You didn't plan on the door blowing shut. A little thing
like a slammed door can ruin the best of plans. I'll find you somewhere
in the house, hiding, pretending to be something you are not." The
doctor looked dazed. He put his hand to his head and smiled palely. "Now
I'm talking like Alice and David talked. But, I can't take any chances.
I'm not sure of anything, but I can't take chances."
He walked downstairs, opened his medical bag on the chair, took
something out of it and held it in his hands.
Something rustled down the hall. Something very small and very quiet.
Jeffers turned rapidly.
I had to operate to bring you into this world, he thought. Now I guess I
can operate to take you out of it.
He took half-a-dozen slow, sure steps forward into the hail. He raised
his hand into the sunlight.
"See, baby! Something bright--something pretty!"
A scalpel.

The Crowd
Mr. Spallner put his hands over his face.
There was the feeling of movement in space, the beautifully tortured
scream, the impact and tumbling of the car with wall, through wall, over
and down like a toy, and him hurled out of it. Then--silence.
The crowd came running. Faintly, where he lay, he heard them running. He
could tell their ages and their sizes by the sound of their numerous
feet over the summer grass and on the lined pavement, and over the
asphalt street, and picking through the cluttered bricks to where his
car hung half into the night sky, still spinning its wheels with a
senseless centrifuge.
Where the crowd came from he didn't know. He struggled to remain aware
and then the crowd faces hemmed in upon him, hung over like the large
glowing leaves of down-bent trees. They were a ring of shifting,
compressing, changing faces over him, looking down, looking down,
reading the time of his life or death by his face, making his face into
a moon-dial, where the moon cast a shadow from his nose out upon his
cheek to tell the time of breathing or not breathing any more ever.
How swiftly a crowd comes, he thought, like the iris of an eye
compressing in out of nowhere.
A siren. A police voice. Movement. Blood trickled from his lips and he
was being moved into an ambulance. Someone said, "Is he dead?" And
someone else said, "No, he's not dead." And a third person said, "He
won't die, he's not going to die." And he saw the faces of the crowd
beyond him in the night, and he knew by their expressions that he
wouldn't die. And that was strange. He saw a man's face, thin, bright,
pale; the man swallowed and bit his lips. very sick. There was a small
woman, too, with red hair and too much red on her cheeks and lips. And a
little boy with a freckled face. Others' faces. An old man with a
wrinkled upper lip, an old woman, with a mole upon her chin. They had
all come from-- where? Houses, cars, alleys, from the immediate and the
accidentshocked world. Out of alleys and out of hotels and out of
streetcars and seemingly out of nothing they came.
The crowd looked at him and he looked back at them and did not like them
at all. There was a vast wrongness to them. He couldn't put his finger
on it. They were far worse than this machine-made thing that happened to
him now.
The ambulance doors slammed. Through the windows he saw the crowd
looking in, looking in. That crowd that always came so fast, so
strangely fast, to form a circle, to peer down, to probe, to gawk, to
question, to point, to disturb, to spoil the privacy of a man's agony by
their frank curiosity.
The ambulance drove off. He sank back and their faces still stared into
his face, even with his eyes shut.
The car wheels spun in his mind for days. One wheel, four wheels,
spinning, spinning, and whirring, around and around.
He knew it was wrong. Something wrong with the wheels and the whole
accident and the running of feet and the curiosity. The crowd faces
mixed and spun into the wild rotation of the wheels.
He awoke.
Sunlight, a hospital room, a hand taking his pulse.
"How do you feel?" asked the doctor.
The wheels faded away. Mr. Spallner looked around.
"Fine--I guess."
He tried to find words. About the accident. "Doctor?"
"Yes?"
"That crowd--was it last night?"
"Two days ago. You've been here since Thursday. You're all right,
though. You're doing fine. Don't try and get up."
"That crowd. Something about wheels, too. Do accidents make people,
well, a--little off?"
"Temporarily, sometimes."
He lay staring up at the doctor. "Does it hurt your time sense?"
"Panic sometimes does."
"Makes a minute seem like an hour, or maybe an hour seem like a minute?"
"Yes."
"Let me tell you then." He felt the bed under him, the sunlight on his
face. "You'll think I'm crazy. I was driving too fast, I know. I'm sorry
now. I jumped the curb and hit that wall. I was hurt and numb, I know,
but I still remember things. Mostly--the crowd." He waited a moment and
then decided to go on, for he suddenly knew what it was that bothered
him. "The crowd got there too quickly. Thirty seconds after the smash
they were all standing over me and staring at me . . . it's not right
they should run that fast, so late at night. . . ."
"You only think it was thirty seconds," said the doctor. "It was
probably three or four minutes. Your senses--"
"Yeah, I know--my senses, the accident. But I was conscious! I remember
one thing that puts it all together and makes it funny, God, so damned
funny. The wheels of my car, upside down. The wheels were still spinning
when the crowd got there!"
The doctor smiled.
The man in bed went on. "I'm positive! The wheels were spinfling and
spinning fast--the front wheels! Wheels don't spin very long, friction
cuts them down. And these were really spinning!"
"You're confused," said the doctor.
"I'm not confused. That street was empty. Not a soul in sight. And then
the accident and the wheels still spinning and all those faces over me,
quick, in no time. And the way they looked down at me, I knew I wouldn't
die. . . ."
"Simple shock," said the doctor, walking away into the sunlight.
They released him from the hospital two weeks later. He rode home in a
taxi. People had come to visit him during his two weeks on his back, and
to all of them he had told his story, the accident, the spinning wheels,
the crowd. They had all laughed with him concerning it, and passed it
off.
He leaned forward and tapped on the taxi window.
"What's wrong?"
The cabbie looked back. "Sorry, boss. This is one helluva town to drive
in. Got an accident up ahead. Want me to detour?"
"Yes. No. No! Wait. Go ahead. Let's--let's take a look."
The cab moved forward, honking.
"Funny damn thing," said the cabbie. "Hey, you! Get that fleatrap out
the way!" Quieter, "Funny thing--more damn people. Nosy people."
Mr. Spallner looked down and watched his fingers tremble on his knee.
"You noticed that, too?"
"Sure," said the cabbie. "All the time. There's always a crowd. You'd
think it was their own mother got killed."
"They come running awfully fast," said the man in the back of the cab.
"Same way with a fire or an explosion. Nobody around. Boom. Lotsa people
around. I dunno."
"Ever seen an accident--at night?"
The cabbie nodded. "Sure. Don't make no difference. There's always a
crowd."
The wreck came in view. A body lay on the pavement. You knew there was a
body even if you couldn't see it. Because of the crowd. The crowd with
its back toward him as he sat in the rear of the cab. With its back
toward him. He opened the window and almost started to yell. But he
didn't have the nerve. If he yelled they might turn around.
And he was afraid to see their faces.
"I seem to have a penchant for accidents," he said, in his office. It
was late afternoon. His friend sat across the desk from him, listening.
"I got out of the hospital this morning and first thing on the way home,
we detoured around a wreck."
"Things run in cycles," said Morgan.
"Let me tell you about my accident."
"I've heard it. Heard it all."
"But it was funny, you must admit."
"I must admit. Now how about a drink?"
They talked on for half an hour or more. All the while they talked, at
the back of Spallner's brain a small watch ticked, a watch that never
needed winding. It was the memory of a few little things. Wheels and
faces.
At about five-thirty there was a hard metal noise in the street. Morgan
nodded and looked out and down. "What'd I tell you? Cycles. A truck and
a cream-colored Cadillac. Yes, yes."
Spailner walked to the window. He was very cold and as he stood there,
he looked at his watch, at the small minute hand. One two three four
five secondspeople running--eight nine ten eleven twelve--from all over,
people came running--fifteen sixteen seventeen eighteen seconds--more
people, more cars, more horns blowing. Curiously distant, Spallner
looked upon the scene as an explosion in reverse, the fragments of the
detonation sucked back to the point of impulsion. Nineteen, twenty,
twenty-one seconds and the crowd was there. Spallner made a gesture down
at them, wordless.
The crowd had gathered so fast.
He saw a woman's body a moment before the crowd swallowed it up.
Morgan said. "You look lousy. Here. Finish your drink."
"I'm all right, I'm all right. Let me alone. I'm all right. Can you see
those people? Can you see any of them? I wish we could see them closer."
Morgan cried out, "Where in hell are you going?"
Spallner was out the door, Morgan after him, and down the stairs, as
rapidly as possible. "Come along, and hurry."
"Take it easy, you're not a well man!"
They walked out on to the street. Spaliner pushed his way forward. He
thought he saw a red-haired woman with too much red color on her cheeks
and lips.
"There!" He turned wildly to Morgan. "Did you see her?"
"See who?"
"Damn it; she's gone. The crowd closed in!"
The crowd was all around, breathing and looking and shuffling and mixing
and mumbling and getting in the way when he tried to shove through.
Evidently the red-haired woman had seen him coming and run off.
He saw another familiar face! A little freckled boy. But there are many
freckled boys in the world. And, anyway, it was no use, before Spallner
reached him, this little boy ran away and vanished among the people.
"Is she dead?" a voice asked. "Is she dead?"
"She's dying," someone else replied. "She'll be dead before the
ambulance arrives. They shouldn't have moved her. They shouldn't have
moved her."
All the crowd faces--familiar, yet unfamiliar, bending over, looking
down, looking down.
"Hey, mister, stop pushing."
"Who you shovin', buddy?"
Spailner came back out, and Morgan caught hold of him before he fell.
"You damned fool. You're still sick. Why in hell'd you have to come down
here?" Morgan demanded.
"I don't know, I really don't. They moved her, Morgan, someone moved
her. You should never move a traffic victim. It kills them. It kills
them."
"Yeah. That's the way with people. The idiots."
Spallner arranged the newspaper clippings carefully.
Morgan looked at them. "What's the idea? Ever since your accident you
think every traffic scramble is part of you. What are these?"
"Clippings of motor-car crackups, and photos. Look at them. Not at the
cars," said Spallner, "but at the crowds around the cars." He pointed.
"Here. Compare this photo of a wreck in the Wilshire District with one
in Westwood. No resemblance. But now take this Westwood picture and
align it with one taken in the Westwood District ten years ago." Again
he motioned. "This woman is in both pictures."
Coincidence. The woman happened to be there once in 1936, again in
1946."
"A coincidence once, maybe. But twelve times over a period of ten years,
when the accidents occurred as much as three miles from one another, no.
Here." He dealt out a dozen photographs. "She's in all of these!"
"Maybe she's perverted."
"She's more than that. How does she happen to be there so quickly after
each accident? And why does she wear the same clothes in pictures taken
over a period of a decade?"
"I'll be damned, so she does."
"And, last of all, why was she standing over me the night of my
accident, two weeks ago?"
They had a drink. Morgan went over the files. "What'd you do, hire a
clipping service while you were in the hospital to go back through the
newspapers for you?" Spallner nodded. Morgan sipped his drink. It was
getting late.The street lights were coming on in the streets below the
office. "What does all this add up to?"
"I don't know," said Spailner, "except that there's a universal law
about accidents. Crowds gather. They always gather. And like you and me,
people have wondered year after year, why they gathered so quickly, and
how? I know the answer. Here it is!"
He flung the clippings down. "It frightens me."
"These people--mightn't they be thrill-hunters, perverted
sensationalists with a carnal lust for blood and morbidity?"
Spallner shrugged. "Does that explain their being at all the accidents?
Notice, they stick to certain territories. A Brentwood accident will
bring out one group. A Huntington Park another. But there's a norm for
faces, a certain percentage appear at each wreck."
Morgan said, "They're not all the same faces, are they?"
"Naturally not. Accidents draw normal people, too, in the course of
time. But these, I find, are always the first ones there."
"Who are they? What do they want? You keep hinting and never telling.
Good Lord, you must have some idea. You've scared yourself and now
you've got me jumping."
"I've tried getting to them, but someone always trips me up, I'm always
too late. They slip into the crowd and vanish. The crowd seems to offer
protection to some of its members. They see me coming."
"Sounds like some sort of clique."
"They have one thing in common, they always show up together. At a fire
or an explosion or on the sidelines of a war, at any public
demonstration of this thing called death. Vultures, hyenas or saints, I
don't know which they are, I just don't know. But I'm going to the
police with it, this evening. It's gone on long enough. One of them
shifted that woman's body today. They shouldn't have touched her. It
killed her."
He placed the clippings in a briefcase. Morgan got up and slipped into
his coat. Spailner clicked the briefcase shut. "Or, I just happened to
think. . ."
"What?"
"Maybe they wanted her dead."
"Why?"
"Who knows. Come along?"
"Sorry. It's late. See you tomorrow. Luck." They went out together.
"Give my regards to the cops. Think they'll believe you?"
"Oh, they'll believe me all right. Good night."
Spallner took it slow driving downtown.
"I want to get there," he told himself, "alive."
He was rather shocked, but not surprised, somehow, when the truck came
rolling out of an alley straight at him. He was just congratulating
himself on his keen sense of observation and talking out what he would
say to the police in his mind, when the truck smashed into his car. It
wasn't really his car, that was the disheartening thing about it. In a
preoccupied mood he was tossed first this way and then that way, while
he thought, what a shame, Morgan has gone and lent me his extra car for
a few days until my other car is fixed, and now here I go again. The
windshield hammered back into his face. He was forced back and forth in
several lightning jerks. Then all motion stopped and all noise stopped
and only pain filled him up.
He heard their feet running and running and running. He fumbled with the
car door. It clicked. He fell out upon the pavement drunkenly and lay,
ear to the asphalt, listening to them coming. It was like a great
rainstorm, with many drops, heavy and light and medium, touching the
earth. He waited a few seconds and listened to their coming and their
arrival. Then, weakly, expectantly, he rolled his head up and looked.
The crowd was there.
He could smell their breaths, the mingled odors of many people sucking
and sucking on the air a man needs to live by. They crowded and jostled
and sucked and sucked all the air up from around his gasping face until
he tried to tell them to move back, they were making him live in a
vacuum. His head was bleeding very badly. He tried to move and he
realized something was wrong with his spine. He hadn't felt much at the
impact, but his spine was hurt. He didn't dare move.
He couldn't speak. Opening his mouth, nothing came out but a gagging.
Someone said, "Give me a hand. We'll roll him over and lift him into a
more comfortable position."
Spallner's brain burst apart.
No! Don't move me!
"We'll move him," said the voice, casually.
You idiots, you'll kill me, don't!
But he could not say any of this out loud. He could only think it.
Hands took hold of him. They started to lift him. He cried out and
nausea choked him up. They straightened him out into a ramrod of agony.
Two men did it. One of them was thin, bright, pale, alert, a young man.
The other man was very old and had a wrinkled upper lip.
He had seen their faces before.
A familiar voice said, "Is--is he dead?"
Another voice, a memorable voice, responded, "No. Not yet. But he will
be dead before the ambulance arrives."
It was all a very silly, mad plot. Like every accident. He squealed
hysterically at the solid wall of faces. They were all around him, these
judges and jurors with the faces he had seen before. Through his pain he
counted their faces.
The freckled boy. The old man with the wrinkled upper lip.
The red-haired, red-cheeked woman. An old woman with a mole on her chin.
I know what you're here for, he thought. You're here just as you're at
all accidents. To make certain the right ones live and the right ones
die. That's why you lifted me. You knew it would kill. You knew I'd live
if you left me alone.
And that's the way it's been since time began, when crowds gather. You
murder much easier, this way. Your alibi is very simple; you didn't know
it was dangerous to move a hurt man. You didn't mean to hurt him.
He looked at them, above him, and he was curious as a man under deep
water looking up at people on a bridge. Who are you? Where do you come
from and how do you get here so soon? You're the crowd that's always in
the way, using up good air that a dying man's lungs are in need of,
using up space he should be using to lie in, alone. Tramping on people
to make sure they die, that's you. I know all of you.
It was like a polite monologue. They said nothing. Faces. The old man.
The red-haired woman.
Someone picked up his briefcase. "Whose is this?"
It's mine! It's evidence against all of you!
Eyes, inverted over him. Shiny eyes under tousled hair or under hats.
Faces.
Somewhere--a siren. The ambulance was coming.
But, looking at the faces, the construction, the cast, the form of the
faces, Spallner saw it was too late. He read it in their faces. They
knew.
He tried to speak. A little bit got out:
"It--looks like I'll--be joining up with you. I--guess I'll be a member
of your--group--now."
He closed his eyes then, and waited for the coroner.

Jack-in-the-Box
He looked through the cold morning windows with the Jack-in-the-Box in
his hands, prying the rusted lid. But no matter how he struggled, the
Jack would not jump to the light with a cry, or slap its velvet mittens
on the air, or bob in a dozen directions with a wild and painted smile.
Crushed under the lid, in its jail, it stayed crammed tight coil on
coil. With your ear to the box, you felt pressure beneath, the fear and
panic of the trapped toy. It was like holding someone's heart in your
hand. Edwin could not tell if the box pulsed or if his own blood beat
against the lid.
He threw the box down and looked to the window. Outside the window the
trees surrounded the house which surrounded Edwin. He could not see
beyond the trees. If he tried to find another World beyond them, the
trees wove themselves thick with the wind, to still his curiosity, to
stop his eyes.
"Edwin!" Behind him, Mother's waiting, nervous breath as she drank her
breakfast coffee. "Stop staring. Come eat."
"No," he whispered.
"What?" A stiffened rustle. She must have turned. "Which is more
important, breakfast or that window?"
"The window. . ." he whispered and sent his gaze running the paths and
trails he had tried for thirteen years. Was it true that the trees
flowed on ten thousand miles to nothingness? He could not say. His sight
returned defeated, to the lawn, the steps, his hands trembling on the
pane.
He turned to eat his tasteless apricots, alone with his mother in the
vast and echoing breakfast room. Five thousand mornings at this table,
this window, and no movement beyond the trees.
The two of them ate silently.
She was the pale woman that no one but the birds saw in old country
houses in fourth-floor cupola windows, each morning at six, each
afternoon at four, each evening at nine, and also passing by one minute
after midnight, there she would be, in her tower, silent and white, high
and alone and quiet. It was like passing a deserted greenhouse in which
one last wild white blossom lifted its head to the moonlight.
And her child, Edwin, was the thistle that one breath of wind might
unpod in a season of thistles. His hair was silken and his eyes were of
a constant blue and feverish temperature. He had a haunted look, as if
he slept poorly. He might fly apart like a packet of ladyfinger
firecrackers if a certain door slammed.
His mother began to talk, slowly and with great caution, then more
rapidly, and then angrily, and then almost spitting at him.
"Why must you disobey every morning? I don't like your staring from the
window, do you hear? What do you want? Do you want to see them?" she
cried, her fingers twitching. She was blazingly lovely, like an angry
white flower. "Do you want to see the Beasts that run down paths and
crush people like strawberries?"
Yes, he thought, I'd like to see the Beasts, horrible as they are.
"Do you want to go out there," she cried, "like your father did before
you were born, and be killed as he was killed, struck down by one of
those Terrors on the road, would you like that?"
"No . . ."
"Isn't it enough they murdered your Father? Why should you even think of
those Beasts?" She motioned toward the forest. "Well, if you really want
to die that much, go ahead!"
She quieted, but her fingers kept opening and closing on the tablecloth.
"Edwin, Edwin, your Father built every part of this World, it was
beautiful for him, it should be for you. There's nothing, nothing,
beyond those trees but death; I won't have you near it! This is the
World. There's no other worth bothering with."
He nodded miserably.
"Smile now, and finish your toast," she said.
He ate slowly, with the window reflected in secret on his silver spoon.
"Mom . . .?" He couldn't say it. "What's . . . dying? You talk about it.
Is it a feeling?"
"To those who must live on after someone else, a bad feeling, yes." She
stood up suddenly. "You're late for school! Run!"
He kissed her as he grabbed his books. "Bye!"
"Say hello to Teacher!"
He fled from her like a bullet from gun. Up endless staircases, through
passages, halls, past windows that poured down dark gallery panels like
white waterfalls. Up, up through the layercake Worlds with the thick
frostings of Oriental rug between, and bright candles on top.
From the highest stair he gazed down through four intervals of Universe.
Lowlands of kitchen, dining room, parlor. Two Middle Countries of music,
games, pictures, and locked, forbidden rooms. And here--he whirled--the
Highlands of picnics, adventure, and learning. Here he roamed, idled, or
sat singing lonely child songs on the winding journey to school.
This, then, was the Universe. Father (or God, as Mother often called
him) had raised its mountains of wailpapered plaster long ago. This was
Father-God's creation, in which stars blazed at the flick of a switch.
And the sun was Mother, and Mother was the sun, about which all the
Worlds swung, turning. And Edwin, a small dark meteor, spun up around
through the dark carpets and shimmering tapestries of space. You saw him
rise to vanish on vast comet staircases, on hikes and explorations.
Sometimes he and Mother picnicked in the Highlands, spread cool snow
linens on red-tuffed, Persian lawns, on crimson meadows in a rarefied
plateau at the summit of the Worlds where flaking portraits of sallow
strangers looked meanly down on their eating and their revels. They drew
water from silver taps in hidden tiled niches, smashed the tumblers on
hearthstones, shrieking. Played hide-and-seek in enchanted Upper
Countries, in unknown, wild, and hidden lands, where she found him
rolled like a mummy in a velvet window drape or under sheeted furniture
like a rare plant protected from some wind. Once, lost, he wandered for
hours in insane foothills of dust and echoes, where the hooks and
hangers in closets were hung only with night. But she found him and
carried him weeping down through the leveling Universe to the Parlor
where dust motes, exact and familiar, fell in showers of sparks on the
sunlit air.
He ran up a stair.
Here he knocked a thousand thousand doors, all locked and forbidden.
Here Picasso ladies and Dali gentlemen screamed silently from canvas
asylums, their gold eyes burning when he dawdled.
"Those Things live out there," his mother had said, pointing to the
Dali-Picasso families.
Now running quickly past, he stuck out his tongue at them.
He stopped running.
One of the forbidden doors stood op en.
Sunlight slanted warm through it, exciting him.
Beyond the door, a spiral stair screwed around up in sun and silence.
He stood, gasping. Year after year he had tried the doors that were
always found locked. What would happen now if he shoved this one full
open and climbed the stair? Was some Monster hiding at the top?
"Hello!"
His voice leapt up around the spiraled sunlight. "Hello . . ." whispered
a faint, far lazy echo, high, high, and gone.
He moved through the door.
"Please, please, don't hurt me," he whispered to the high sunlit place.
He climbed, pausing with each step to wait for his punishment, eyes shut
like a penitent. Faster now, he leapt around and around and up until his
knees ached and his breath fountained in and out and his head banged
like a bell and at last he reached the terrible summit of the climb and
stood in an open, sun-drenched tower.
The sun struck his eyes a blow. Never, never so much sun! He stumbled to
the iron rail.
"It's there!" His mouth opened from one direction to another. "It's
there!" He ran in a circle. "There!"
He was above the somber tree barrier. For the first time he stood high
over the windy chestnuts and elms and as far as he could see was green
grass, green trees, and white ribbons on which beetles ran, and the
other half of the world was blue and endless, with the sun lost and
dropping away in an incredible deep blue room so vast he felt himself
fall with it, screamed, and clutched the tower ledge, and beyond the
trees, beyond the white ribbons where the beetles ran he saw things like
fingers sticking up, but he saw no Dali-Picasso terrors, he saw only
some small red-and-white-andblue handkerchiefs fluttering high on great
white poles.
He was suddenly sick; he was sick again.
Turning, he almost fell flat down the stairs.
He slammed the forbidden door, fell against it
"You'll go blind." He crushed his hands to his eyes. "You shouldn't have
seen, you shouldn't, you shouldn't!"
He fell to his knees, he lay on the floor twisted tight, covered up. He
need wait but a moment--the blindness would come.
Five minutes later he stood at an ordinary Highlands window, looking out
at his own familiar Garden World.
He saw once more the elms and hickory trees and the stone wall, and that
forest which he had taken to be an endless wall itself, beyond which lay
nothing but nightmare nothingness, mist, rain, and eternal night. Now it
was certain, the Universe did not end with the forest. There were other
worlds than those contained in Highland or Lowland.
He tried the forbidden door again. Locked.
Had he really gone up? Had he really discovered those halfgreen,
half-blue vastnesses? Had God seen him? Edwin trembled. God. God, who
smoked mysterious black pipes and wielded magical walking sticks. God
who might be watching even now!
Edwin murmured, touching his cold face.
"I can still see. Thank you, thank you. I can still see!"
At nine-thirty, half an hour late, he rapped on the school door.
"Good morning, Teacher!"
The door swung open. Teacher waited in her tall gray, thickclothed
monk's robe, the cowl hiding her face. She wore her usual silver
spectacles. Her gray-gloved hands beckoned.
"You're late."
Beyond her the land of books burned in bright colors from the hearth.
There were walls bricked with encyclopedias, and a fireplace in which
you could stand without bumping your head. A log blazed fiercely.
The door closed, and there was a warm quiet. Here was the desk, where
God had once sat, he'd walked this carpet, stuffing his pipe with rich
tobacco, and scowled out that vast, stained-glass window. The room
smelled of God, rubbed wood, tobacco, leather, and silver coins. Here,
Teacher's voice sang like a solemn harp, telling of God, the old days,
and the World when it had shaken with God's determination, trembled at
his wit, when the World was abuilding under God's hand, a blueprint, a
cry, and timber rising. God's fingerprints still lay like half-melted
snowflakes on a dozen sharpened pencils in a locked glass display. They
must never never be touched lest they melt away forever.
Here, here in the Highlands, to the soft sound of Teacher's voice
running on, Edwin learned what was expected of him and his body. He was
to grow into a Presence, he must fit the odors and the trumpet voice of
God. He must some day stand tall and burning with pale fire at this high
window to shout dust off the beams of the Worlds; he must be God
Himself! Nothing must prevent it. Not the sky or the trees or the Things
beyond the trees.
Teacher moved like a vapor in the room.
"Why are you late, Edwin?"
"I don't know."
"I'll ask you again. Edwin why are you late?"
"One--one of the forbidden doors was open. . . ."
He heard the hiss of Teacher's breath. He saw her slowly slide back and
sink into the large hand-carved chair, swallowed by darkness, her
glasses flashing light before they vanished. He felt her looking out at
him from shadow and her voice was numbed and so like a voice he heard at
night, his own voice crying just before he woke from some nightmare.
"Which door? Where?" she said. "Oh, it must be locked!"
"The door by the Dali-Picasso people," he said, in panic. He and Teacher
had always been friends. Was that finished now? Had he spoiled things?
"I climbed the stair. I had to, I had to! I'm sorry, I'm sorry. Please,
don't tell Mother!"
Teacher sat lost in the hollow chair, in the hollow cowl. Her glasses
made faint firefly glitters in the well where she moved alone. "And what
did you see up there?" she murmured.
"A big blue room!"
"Did you?"
"And a green one, and ribbons with bugs running on them, hut I didn't, I
didn't stay long, I swear, I swear!"
"Green room, ribbons, yes ribbons, and the little bugs running along
them, yes," she said, and her voice made him sad.
He reached out for her hand, but it fell away to her lap and groped
back, in darkness, to her breast. "I came right down, I locked the door,
I won't go look again, ever!" he cried.
Her voice was so faint he could hardly hear what she said. "But now
you've seen, and you'll want to see more, and you'll always he curious
now." The cowl moved slowly back and forth. Its deepness turned toward
him, questioning. "Did you--like what you saw?"
"I was scared. It was big."
"Big, yes, too big. Large, large, so large, Edwin. Not like our world.
Big, large, uncertain. Oh, why did you do this! You knew it was wrong!"
The fire bloomed and withered on the hearth while she waited for his
answer and finally when he could not answer she said, as if her lips
were barely moving, "Is it your Mother?"
"I don't know!"
"Is she nervous, is she mean, does she snap at you, does she hold too
tight, do you want time alone, is that it, is that it, is that it?"
"Yes, yes!" he sobbed, wildly.
"Is that why you ran off, she demands all your time, all your thoughts?"
Lost and sad, her voice. "Tell me . . ."
His hands had gone sticky with tears. "Yes!" He bit his fingers and the
backs of his hands. "Yes!" It was wrong to admit such things, but he
didn't have to say them now, she said them, she said them, and all he
must do is agree, shake his head, bite his knuckles, cry out between
sobs.
Teacher was a million years old.
"We learn," she said, wearily. Rousing from her chair, she moved with a
slow swaying of gray robes to the desk where her gloved hand searched a
long time to find pen and paper. "We learn, Oh God, but slowly, and with
pain, we learn. We think we do right, but all the time, all the time, we
kill the Plan. . . ." She hissed hef breath, jerked her head up
suddenly. The cowl looked completely empty, shivering.
She wrote words on the paper.
"Give this to your mother. It tells her you must have two full hours
every afternoon to yourself, to prowl where you wish. Anywhere. Except
out there. Are you listening, child?"
"Yes." He dried his face. "But--"
"Go on."
"Did Mother lie to me about out there, and the Beasts?"
"Look at me," she said. "I've been your friend, I've never beaten you,
as your mother sometimes must. We're both here to help you understand
and grow so you won't be destroyed as God was."
She arose, and in rising, turned the cowl such a way that color from the
hearth washed over her face. Swiftly, the firelight erased her many
wrinkles.
Edwin gasped. His heart gave a jolting thump. "The fire!"
Teacher froze.
"The fire!" Edwin looked at the fire and back to her face. The cowl
jerked away from his gaze, the face vanished in the deep well, gone.
"Your face," said Edwin numbly. "You look like Mother!"
She moved swiftly to the books, seized one down. She talked to the
shelves in her high, singing monotonous voice. "Women look alike, you
know that! Forget it! Here, here!" And she brought him the book. "Read
the first chapter! Read the diary!"
Edwin took the book but did not feel its weight in his hands. The fire
rumbled and sucked itself brilliantly up the flue as he began to read
and as he read Teacher sank back down and settled and quieted and the
more he read the more the gray cowl nodded and became serene, the hidden
face like a clapper gone solemn in its bell. Firelight ignited the gold
animal lettering of the shelved books as he read and he spoke the words
but was really thinking of these books from which pages had been
razored, and clipped, certain lines erased, certain pictures torn, the
leather jaws of some books glued tight, others like mad dogs, muzzled in
hard bronze straps to keep him away. All this he thought while his lips
moved through the fire-quiet:
"In the Beginning was God, Who created the Universe, and the Worlds
within the Universe, the Continents within the Worlds and the Lands
within the Continents, and shaped from His mind and hand His loving wife
and a child who in time would he God Himself . . ."
Teacher nodded slowly. The fire fell softly away to slumbering coals.
Edwin read on.
Down the banister, breathless, he slid into the Parlor. "Mom, Mom!"
She lay in a plump maroon chair, breathless, as if she, too, had run a
great way.
"Mom, Mom, you're soaking wet!"
"Am I?" she said, as if it was his fault she'd been rushing about. "So I
am, so I am." She took a deep breath and sighed. Then she took his hands
and kissed each one. She looked at him steadily, her eyes dilating.
"Well now, listen here, I've a surprise! Do you know what's coming
tomorrow? You can't guess! Your birthday!"
"But it's only been ten months!"
"Tomorrow it is! Do us wonders, I say. And anything I say is so is
really so, my dear."
She laughed.
"And we open another secret room?" He was dazed.
"The fourteenth room, yes! Fifteenth room next year, sixteenth,
seventeenth, and so on and on till your twenty-first birthday, Edwin!
Then, oh, then we'll open up the triple-locked doors to the most
important room and you'll be Man of the House, Father, God, Ruler of the
Universe!"
"Hey," he said. And, "Hey!" He tossed his books straight up in the air.
They exploded like a great burst of doves, whistling. He laughed. She
laughed. Their laughter flew and fell with the books. He ran to scream
down the banister again.
At the bottom of the stairs, she waited, arms wide, to catch him.
Edwin lay on his moonlit bed and his fingers pried at the
Jack-in-the-Box, but the lid stayed shut; he turned it in his hands,
blindly, but did not look down at it. Tomorrow, his birthday--but why?
Was he that good? No. Why then, should the birthday come so soon? Well,
simply because things had gotten, what word could you use? Nervous? Yes,
things had begun to shimmer by day as well as by night. He saw the white
tremor, the moonlight sifting down and down of an invisible snow in his
mother's face. It would take yet another of his birthdays to quiet her
again.
"My birthdays," he said to the ceiling, "will come quicker from now on.
I know, I know. Mom laughs so loud, so much, and her eyes are funny. . .
."
Would Teacher be invited to the party? No. Mother and Teacher had never
met. "Why not?" "Because," said Mom. "Don't you want to meet Mom,
Teacher?" "Some day," said Teacher, faintly, blowing off like cobwebs in
the hall. "Some . . . day. . . ."
And where did Teacher go at night? Did she drift through all those
secret mountain countries high up near the moon where the chandeliers
were skinned blind with dust, or did she wander out beyond the trees
that lay beyond the trees that lay beyond the trees? No, hardly that!
He twisted the toy in his sweating hands. Last year, when things began
to tremble and quiver, hadn't Mother advanced his birthday several
months, too? Yes, oh, yes, yes.
Think of something else. God. God building cold midnight cellar,
sun-baked attic, and all miracles between. Think of the hour of His
death, crushed by some monstrous beetle beyond the wall. Oh, how the
Worlds must have rocked with His passing!
Edwin moved the Jack-in-the-Box to his face, whispered against the lid.
"Hello! Hello! Hello, hello . . ."
No answer save the sprung-tight coiled-in tension there. I'll get you
out, thought Edwin. Just wait, just wait. It may hurt, but there's only
one way. Here, here . . .
And he moved from bed to window and leaned far out, looking down to the
marbled walk in the moonlight. He raised the box high, felt the sweat
trickle from his armpit, felt his fingers clench, felt his arm jerk. He
flung the box out, shouting. The box tumbled in the cold air, down. It
took a long time to strike the marble pavement.
Edwin bent still further over, gasping.
"Well?" he cried. "Well?" and again, "You there!" and "You!"
The echoes faded. The box lay in the forest shadows. He could not see if
the crash had broken it wide. He could not see if the Jack had risen,
smiling, from its hideous jail or if it bobbed upon the wind now this
way, that, this way, that, its silver bells jingling softly. He
listened. He stood by the window for an hour staring, listening, and at
last went back to bed.
Morning. Bright voices moved near and far, in and out the Kitchen World
and Edwin opened his eyes. Whose voices, now whose could they he? Some
of God's workmen? The Dali people? But Mother hated them; no. The voices
faded in a humming roar. Silence. And from a great distance, a running,
running grew louder and still louder until the door burst open.
"Happy Birthday!"
They danced, they ate frosted cookies, they bit lemon ices, they drank
pink wines, and there stood his name on a snow-powdered cake as Mother
chorded the piano into an avalanche of sound and opened her mouth to
sing, then whirled to seize him away to more strawberries, more wines,
more laughter that shook chandeliers into trembling rain. Then, a silver
key flourished, they raced to unlock the fourteenth forbidden door.
"Ready! Hold on!"
The door whispered into the wall.
"Oh," said Edwin.
For, disappointingly enough, this fourteenth room was nothing at all but
a dusty dull-brown closet. It promised nothing as had the rooms given
him on other anniversaries! His sixth birthday present, now, had been
the schoolroom in the Highlands. On his seventh birthday he had opened
the playroom in the Lowlands. Eighth, the music room; ninth, the
miraculous hell-fired kitchen! Tenth was the room where phonographs
hissed in a continuous exhalation of ghosts singing on a gentle wind.
Eleventh was the vast green diamond room of the Garden with a carpet
that had to be cut instead of swept!
"Oh, don't be disappointed; move!" Mother, laughing, pushed him in the
closet. "Wait till you see how magical! Shut the door!"
She thrust a red button flush with the wall.
Edwin shrieked. "No!"
For the room was quivering, working, like a mouth that held them in iron
jaws; the room moved, the wall slid away below.
"Oh, hush now, darling," she said. The door drifted down through the
floor, and a long insanely vacant wall slithered by like an endlessly
rustling snake to bring another door and another door with it that did
not stop but traveled on while Edwin screamed and clutched his mother's
waist. The room whined and cleared its throat somewhere; the trembling
ceased, the room stood still. Edwin stared at a strange new door and
heard his mother say go on, open it, there, now, there. And the new door
gaped upon still further mystery. Edwin blinked.
"The Highlands! This is the Highlands! How did we get here? Where's the
Parlor, Mom, where's the Parlor?"
She fetched him out through the door. "We jumped straight up, and we
flew. Once a week, you'll fly to school instead of running the long way
around!"
He still could not move, but only stood looking at the mystery of Land
exchanged for Land, of Country replaced by higher and further Country.
"Oh, Mother, Mother . . ." he said.
It was a sweet long time in the deep grass of the garden where they
idled most deliciously, sipped huge cupfuls of apple cider with their
elbows on crimson silk cushions, their shoes kicked off, their toes
bedded in sour dandelions, sweet clover. Mother jumped twice when she
heard Monsters roar beyond the forest. Edwin kissed her cheek. "It's all
right," he said, "I'll protect you."
"I know you will," she said, but she turned to gaze at the pattern of
trees, as if any moment the chaos out there might smash the forest with
a blow and stamp its Titan's foot down and grind them to dust.
Late in the long blue afternoon, they saw a chromium bird thing fly
through a bright rift in the trees, high and roaring. They ran for the
Parlor, heads bent as before a green storm of lightning and rain,
feeling the sound pour blinding showers to drench them.
Crackle, crackle--the birthday burnt away to cellophane nothingness. At
sunset, in the dim soft Parlor Country, Mother inhaled champagne with
her tiny seedling nostrils and her pale summerrose mouth, then, drowsy
wild, herded Edwin off to his room and shut him in.
He undressed in slow-pantomimed wonder, thinking, this year, next year,
and which room two years, three years, from today? What about the
Beasts, the Monsters? And being mashed and God killed? What was killed?
What was Death? Was Death a feeling? Did God enjoy it so much he never
came back? Was Death a journey then?
In the hail, on her way downstairs, Mother dropped a champagne bottle.
Edwin heard and was cold, for the thought that jumped through his head
was, that's how Mother'd sound. If she fell, if she broke, you'd find a
million fragments in the morning. Bright crystal and clear wine on the
parquet flooring, that's all you'd see at dawn.
Morning was the smell of vines and grapes and moss in his room, a smell
of shadowed coolness. Downstairs, breakfast was in all probability, at
this instant, manifesting itself in a fingersnap on the wintry tables.
Edwin got up to wash and dress and wait, feeling fine. Now things would
be fresh and new for at least a month. Today, like all days, there'd be
breakfast, school, lunch, songs in the music room, an hour or two at the
electrical games, then--tea in the Outlands, on the luminous grass. Then
up to school again for a late hour or so, where he and Teacher might
prowl the censored library together and he'd puzzle with words and
thoughts about that world out there that had been censored from his
eyes.
He had forgotten Teacher's note. Now, he must give it to Mother.
He opened the door. The hall was empty. Down through the deeps of the
Worlds, a soft mist floated, through a silence which no footsteps broke;
the hills were quiet; the silver fonts did not pulse in the first
sunlight, and the banister, coiling up from the mists was a prehistoric
monster peering into his room. He pulled away from this creature,
looking to find Mother, like a white boat, drifted by the dawn tides and
vapors below.
She was not there. He hurried down through the hushed lands, calling,
"Mother!"
He found her in the Parlor, collapsed on the floor in her shiny
green-gold party dress, a champagne goblet in one hand, the carpet
littered with broken glass.
She was obviously asleep, so he sat at the magical breakfast table. He
blinked at the empty white cloth and the gleaming plates. There was no
food. All his life wondrous foods had awaited him here. But not today.
"Mother, wake up!" He ran to her. "Shall I go to school? Where's the
food? Wake up!"
He ran up the stairs.
The Highlands were cold and shadowed, and the white glass suns no longer
glowed from the ceilings in this day of sullen fog. Down dark corridors,
through dim continents of silence, Edwin rushed. He rapped and rapped at
the school door. It drifted in, whining, by itself.
The school lay empty and dark. No fire roared on the hearth to toss
shadows on the beamed ceiling. There was not a crackle or a whisper.
"Teacher?"
He poised in the center of the flat, cold room.
"Teacher!" he screamed.
He slashed the drapes aside; a faint shaft of sunlight fell through the
stained glass.
Edwin gestured. He commanded the fire to explode like a popcorn kernel
on the hearth. He commanded it to bloom to life! He shut his eyes, to
give Teacher time to appear. He opened his eyes and was stupefied at
what he saw on her desk.
Neatly folded was the gray cowl and robe, atop which gleamed her silver
spectacles, and one gray glove. He touched them. One gray glove was
gone. A piece of greasy cosmetic chalk lay on the robe. Testing it, he
made dark lines on his hands.
He drew back, staring at Teacher's empty robe, the glasses, the greasy
chalk. His hand touched a knob of a door which had always been locked.
The door swung slowly wide. He looked into a small brown closet.
"Teacher!"
He ran in, the door crashed shut, he pressed a red button. The room sank
down, and with it sank a slow mortal coldness. The World was silent,
quiet, and cool. Teacher gone and Mother--sleeping. Down fell the room,
with him in its iron jaws.
Machinery clashed. A door slid open. Edwin ran out.
The Parlor!
Behind was not a door, but a tall oak panel from which he had emerged.
Mother lay uncaring, asleep. Folded under her, barely showing as he
rolled her over, was one of Teacher's soft gray gloves.
He stood near her, holding the incredible glove, for a long time.
Finally, he began to whimper.
He fled back up to the Highlands. The hearth was cold, the room empty.
He waited. Teacher did not come. He ran down again to the solemn
Lowlands, commanded the table to fill with steaming dishes! Nothing
happened. He sat by his mother, talking and pleading with her and
touching her, and her hands were cold.
The clock ticked and the light changed in the sky and still she did not
move, and he was hungry and the silent dust dropped down on the air
through all the Worlds. He thought of Teacher and knew that if she was
in none of the hills and mountains above, then there was only one place
she could be. She had wandered, by error, into the Outlands, lost until
someone found her. And so he must go out, call after her, bring her back
to wake Mother, or she would lie here forever with the dust falling in
the great darkened spaces.
Through the kitchen, out back, he found late afternoon sun and the
Beasts hooting faintly beyond the rim of the World. He clung to the
garden wall, not daring to let go, and in the shadows, at a distance,
saw the shattered box he had flung from the window. Freckles of sunlight
quivered on the broken lid and touched tremblingly over and over the
face of the Jack jumped out and sprawled with its arms overhead in an
eternal gesture of freedom. The doll smiled and did not smile, smiled
and did not smile, as the sun winked on the mouth, and Edwin stood,
hypnotized, above and beyond it. The doll opened its arms toward the
path that led off between the secret trees, the forbidden path smeared
with oily droppings of the Beasts. But the path lay silent and the sun
warmed Edwin and he heard the wind blow softly in the trees. At last, he
let go of the garden wall.
"Teacher?"
He edged along the path a few feet.
"Teacher!"
His shoes slipped on the animal droppings and he stared far down the
motionless tunnel, blindly. The path moved under, the trees moved over
him.
"Teacher!"
He walked slowly but steadily. He turned. Behind him lay his World and
its very new silence. It was diminished, it was small! How strange to
see it less than it had been. It had always and forever seemed so large.
He felt his heart stop. He stepped back. But then, afraid of that
silence in the World, he turned to face the forest path ahead.
Everything before him was new. Odors filled his nostrils, colors, odd
shapes, incredible sizes filled his eyes.
If I run beyond the trees I'll die, he thought, for that's what Mother
said. You'll die, you'll die.
But what's dying? Another room? A blue room, a green room, far larger
than all the rooms that ever were! But where's the key? There, far
ahead, a great half-open iron door, a wrought-iron gate. Beyond a room
as large as the sky, all colored green with trees and grass! Oh, Mother,
Teacher . . .
He rushed, stumbled, fell, got up, ran again, his numb legs under him
were left behind as he fell down and down the side of a hill, the path
gone, wailing, crying, and then not wailing or crying any more, but
making new sounds. He reached the great rusted, screaming iron gate,
leapt through; the Universe dwindled behind, he did not look back at his
old Worlds, but ran as they withered and vanished.
The policeman stood at the curb, looking down the street.
"These kids. I'll never be able to figure them."
"How's that?" asked the pedestrian.
The policeman thought it over and frowned. "Couple seconds ago a little
kid ran by. He was laughing and crying, crying and laughing, both. He
was jumping up and down and touching things. Things like lampposts, the
telephone poles, fire hydrants, dogs, people. Things like sidewalks,
fences, gates, cars, plateglass windows, barber poles. Hell, he even
grabbed hold and looked at me, and looked at the sky, you should have
seen the tears, and all the time he kept yelling and yelling something
funny."
"What did he yell?" asked the pedestrian.
"He kept yelling, 'I'm dead, I'm dead, I'm glad I'm dead, I'm dead, I'm
dead, I'm glad I'm dead, I'm dead, I'm dead, it's good to be dead!' "The
policeman scratched his chin slowly. "One of them new kid games, I
guess."

The Scythe
Quite suddenly there was no more road. It ran down the valley like any
other road, between slopes of barren, stony ground and live oak trees,
and then past a broad field of wheat standing alone in the wilderness.
It came up beside the small white house that belonged to the wheat field
and then just faded out, as though there was no more use for it.
It didn't matter much, because just there the last of the gas was gone.
Drew Erickson braked the ancient car to a stop and sat there, not
speaking, staring at his big, rough farmer's hands.
Molly spoke, without moving where she lay in the corner beside him. "We
must of took the wrong fork back yonder."
Drew nodded.
Molly's lips were almost as white as her face. Only they were dry, where
her skin was damp with sweat. Her voice was flat with no expression in
it.
"Drew," she said. "Drew, what are we a-goin' to do now?"
Drew stared at his hands. A farmer's hands, with the farm blown out from
under them by the dry, hungry wind that never got enough good loam to
eat.
The kids in the back seat woke up and pried themselves out of the dusty
litter of bundles and bedding. They poked their heads over the back of
the seat and said:
"What are we stoppin' for, Pa? Are we gonna eat now, Pa? Pa, we're awful
hungry. Can we eat now, Pa?"
Drew closed his eyes. He hated the sight of his hands.
Molly's fingers touched his wrist. Very light, very soft. "Drew, maybe
in the house there they'd spare us somethin' to eat?"
A white line showed around his mouth. "Beggin'," he said harshly. "Ain't
none of us ever begged before. Ain't none of us ever goin' to."
Molly's hand tightened on his wrist. He turned and saw her eyes. He saw
the eyes of Susie and little Drew, looking at him. Slowly all the
stiffness went out of his neck and his back. His face got loose and
blank, shapeless like a thing that has been beaten too hard and too
long. He got out of the car and went up the path to the house. He walked
uncertainly, like a man who is sick, or nearly blind.
The door of the house was open. Drew knocked three times. There was
nothing inside but silence, and a white window curtain moving in the
slow, hot air.
He knew it before he went in. He knew there was death in the house. It
was that kind of silence.
He went through a small, clean living room and down a little hall. He
wasn't thinking anything. He was past thinking. He was going toward the
kitchen, unquestioning, like an animal.
Then he looked through an open door and saw the dead man. He was an old
man, lying out on a clean white bed. He hadn't been dead long; not long
enough to lose the last quiet look of peace. He must have known he was
going to die, because he wore his grave clothes--an old black suit,
brushed and neat, and a clean white shirt and a black tie.
A scythe leaned against the wall beside the bed. Between the old man's
hands there was a blade of wheat, still fresh. A ripe blade, golden and
heavy in the tassel.
Drew went into the bedroom, walking soft. There was a coldness on him.
He took off his broken, dusty hat and stood by the bed, looking down.
The paper lay open on the pillow beside the old man's head. It was meant
to he read. Maybe a request for burial, or to call a relative. Drew
scowled over the words, moving his pale, dry lips.
To him who stands beside me at my death bed:
Being of sound mind, and alone in the world as it has been decreed, I,
John Buhr, do give and bequeath this farm, with all pertaining to it, to
the man who is to come. Whatever his name or origin shall be, it will
not matter. The farm is his, and the wheat; the scythe, and the task
ordained thereto. Let him take them freely, and without question--and re
member that I, John Buhr, am only the giver, not the ordainer. To which
I set my hand and seal this third day of April, 1938.
((Signed)) John Buhr. Kyrie eléison!
Drew walked back through the house and opened the screen door. He said,
"Molly, you come in. Kids, you stay in the car."
Molly came inside. He took her to the bedroom. She looked at the will,
the scythe, the wheat field moving in a hot wind outside the window. Her
white face tightened up and she bit her lips and held onto him. "It's
too good to be true. There must be some trick to it."
Drew said, "Our luck's changin', that's all. We'll have work to do,
stuff to eat, somethin' over our heads to keep rain off." He touched the
scythe. It gleamed like a half-moon. Words were scratched on its blade:
WHO WIELDS ME--WIELDS THE WORLD! It didn't mean much to him, right at
that moment.
"Drew," Molly asked, staring at the old man's clasped hands, "why--why's
he holdin' that wheat-stalk so hard in his fingers?"
Just then the heavy silence was broken by the sound of the kids
scrambling up the front porch. Molly gasped.
They lived in the house. They buried the old man on a hill and said some
words over him, and came back down and swept the house and unloaded the
car and had something to eat, because there was food, lots of it, in the
kitchen; and they did nothing for three days but fix the house and look
at the land and lie in the good beds, and then look at one another in
surprise that all this was happening this way, and their stomachs were
full and there was even a cigar for him to smoke in the evenings
There was a small barn behind the house and in the barn a bull and three
cows; and there was a well-house, a spring-house, under some big trees
that kept it cool. And inside the well-house were big sides of beef and
bacon and pork and mutton, enough to feed a family five times their size
for a year, two years, maybe three. There was a churn and a box of
cheese there, and big metal cans for the milk.
On the fourth morning Drew Erickson lay in bed looking at the scythe,
and he knew it was time for him to work because there was ripe grain in
the long field; he had seen it with his eyes, and he did not want to get
soft. Three days' sitting were enough for any man. He roused himself in
the first fresh smell of dawn and took the scythe and held it before him
as he walked out into the field. He held it up in his hands and swung it
down.
It was a big field of grain. Too big for one man to tend, and yet one
man had tended it.
At the end of the first day of work, he walked in with the scythe riding
his shoulder quietly, and there was a look on his face of a puzzled man.
It was a wheat field the like of which he had never seen. It ripened
only in separate clusters, each set off from the others. Wheat shouldn't
do that. He didn't tell Molly. Nor did he tell her the other things
about the field. About how, for instance, the wheat rotted within a few
hours after he cut it down. Wheat shouldn't do that, either. He was not
greatly worried. After all, there was food at hand.
The next morning the wheat he had left rotting, cut down, had taken hold
and came up again in little green sprouts, with tiny roots, all born
again.
Drew Erickson rubbed his chin, wondered what and why and how it acted
that way, and what good it would be to him--he couldn't sell it. A
couple of times during the day he walked far up in the hills to where
the old man's grave was, just to be sure the old man was there, maybe
with some notion he might get an idea there about the field. He looked
down and saw how much land he owned. The wheat stretched three miles in
one direction toward the mountains, and was about two acres wide,
patches of it in seedlings, patches of it golden, patches of it green,
patches of it fresh cut by his hand. But the old man said nothing
concerning this; there were a lot of stones and dirt in his face now.
The grave was in the sun and the wind and silence. So Drew Erickson
walked back down to use the scythe, curious, enjoying it because it
seemed important. He didn't know just why, but it was. Very, very
important.
He couldn't just let the wheat stand. There were always new patches of
it ripened, and in his figuring out loud to no one in particular he
said, "If I cut the wheat for the next ten years, just as it ripens up,
I don't think I'll pass the same spot twice. Such a damn big field." He
shook his head. "That wheat ripens just so. Never too much of it so I
can't cut all the ripe stuff each day. That leaves nothin' hut green
grain. And the next mornin', sure enough, another patch of ripe stuff. .
. ."
It was damned foolish to cut the grain when it rotted as quick as it
fell. At the end of the week he decided to let it go a few days.
He lay in bed late, just listening to the silence in the house that
wasn't anything like death silence, but a silence of things living well
and happily.
He got up, dressed, and ate his breakfast slowly. He wasn't going to
work. He went out to milk the cows, stood on the porch smoking a
cigarette, walked about the back-yard a little and then came back in and
asked Molly what he had gone out to do.
"Milk the cows," she said.
"Oh, yes," he said, and went out again. He found the cows waiting and
full, and milked them and put the milk cans in the springhouse, hut
thought of other things. The wheat. The scythe.
All through the morning he sat on the hack porch rolling cigarettes. He
made a toy boat for little Drew and one for Susie, and then he churned
some of the milk into butter and drew off the buttermilk, hut the sun
was in his head, aching. It burned there. He wasn't hungry for lunch. He
kept looking at the wheat and the wind bending and tipping and ruffling
it. His arms flexed, his fingers, resting on his knee as he sat again on
the porch, made a kind of grip in the empty air, itching. The pads of
his palms itched and burned. He stood up and wiped his hands on his
pants and sat down and tried to roll another cigarette and got mad at
the mixings and threw it all away with a muttering. He had a feeling as
if a third arm had been cut off of him, or he had lost something of
himself. It had to do with his hands and his arms.
He heard the wind whisper in the field.
By one o'clock he was going in and out of the house, getting underfoot,
thinking about digging an irrigation ditch, but all the time really
thinking about the wheat and how ripe and beautiful it was, aching to be
cut.
"Damn it to hell!"
He strode into the bedroom, took the scythe down off its wallpegs. He
stood holding it. He felt cool. His hands stopped itching. His head
didn't ache. The third arm was returned to him. He was intact again.
It was instinct. Illogical as lightning striking and not hurting. Each
day the grain must be cut. It had to be cut. Why? Well, it just did,
that was all. He laughed at the scythe in his big hands. Then,
whistling, he took it out to the ripe and waiting field and did the
work. He thought himself a little mad. Hell, it was an ordinary-enough
wheat field, really, wasn't it? Almost.
The days loped away like gentle horses.
Drew Erickson began to understand his work as a sort of dry ache and
hunger and need. Things built in his head.
One noon, Susie and little Drew giggled and played with the scythe while
their father lunched in the kitchen. He heard them. He came out and took
it away from them. He didn't yell at them. He just looked very concerned
and locked the scythe up after that, when it wasn't being used.
He never missed a day, scything.
Up. Down. Up, down, and across. Back and up and down and across.
Cutting. Up. Down.
Up.
Think about the old man and the wheat in his hands when he died.
Down.
Think about this dead land, with wheat living on it.
Up.
Think about the crazy patterns of ripe and green wheat, the way it
grows!
Down.
Think about . . .
The wheat whirled in a full yellow tide at his ankles. The sky
blackened. Drew Erickson dropped the scythe and bent over to hold his
stomach, his eyes running blindly. The world reeled.
"I've killed somebody!" he gasped, choking, holding to his chest,
falling to his knees beside the blade. "I've killed a lot--"
The sky revolved like a blue merry-go-round at the county fair in
Kansas. But no music. Only a ringing in his ears.
Molly was sitting at the blue kitchen table peeling potatoes when he
blundered into the kitchen, dragging the scythe behind him.
"Molly!"
She swam around in the wet of his eyes.
She sat there, her hands fallen open, waiting for him to finally get it
out.
"Get the things packed!" he said, looking at the floor.
"Why?"
"We're leaving," he said, dully.
"We're leaving?" she said.
"That old man. You know what he did here? It's the wheat, Molly, and
this scythe. Every time you use the scythe on the wheat a thousand
people die. You cut across them and--"
Molly got up and put the knife down and the potatoes to one side and
said, understandingly, "We traveled a lot and haven't eaten good until
the last month here, and you been workin' every day and you're tired--"
"I hear voices, sad voices, out there. In the wheat," he said. "Tellin'
me to stop. Tellin' me not to kill them!"
"Drew!"
He didn't hear her. "The field grows crooked, wild, like a crazy thing.
I didn't tell you. But it's wrong."
She stared at him. His eyes were blue glass, nothing else.
"You think I'm crazy," he said, "but wait 'til I tell you. Oh, God,
Molly, help me; I just killed my mother!"
"Stop it!" she said firmly.
"I cut down one stalk of wheat and I killed her. I felt her dyin',
that's how I found out just now--"
"Drew!" Her voice was like a crack across the face, angry and afraid
now. "Shut up!"
He mumbled. "Oh--Molly--"
The scythe dropped from his hands, clamored on the floor. She picked it
up with a snap of anger and set it in one corner. "Ten years I been with
you," she said. "Sometimes we had nothin' but dust and prayers in our
mouths. Now, all this good luck sudden, and you can't bear up under it!"
She brought the Bible from the living room.
She rustled its pages over. They sounded like the wheat rustling in a
small, slow wind. "You sit down and listen," she said.
A sound came in from the sunshine. The kids, laughing in the shade of
the large live oak beside the house.
She read from the Bible, looking up now and again to see what was
happening to Drew's face.
She read from the Bible each day after that. The following Wednesday, a
week later, when Drew walked down to the distant town to see if there
was any General Delivery mail, there was a letter.
He came home looking two hundred years old.
He held the letter out to Molly and told her what it said in a cold,
uneven voice.
"Mother passed away--one o'clock Tuesday afternoon--her heart--"
All that Drew Erickson had to say was, "Get the kids in the car, load it
up with food. We're goin' on to California."
"Drew--" said his wife, holding the letter.
"You know yourself," he said, "this is poor grain land. Yet look how
ripe it grows. I ain't told you all the things. It ripens in patches, a
little each day. It ain't right. And when I cut it, it rots! And next
mornin' it comes up without any help, growin' again! Last Tuesday, a
week ago, when I cut the grain it was like rippin' my own flesh. I heard
somebody scream. It sounded just like--And now, today, this letter."
She said, "We're stayin' here."
"Molly."
"We're stayin' here, where we're sure of eatin' and sleepin' and livin'
decent and livin' long. I'm not starvin' my children down again, ever!"
The sky was blue through the windows. The sun slanted in, touching half
of Molly's calm face, shining one eye bright blue. Four or five water
drops hung and fell from the kitchen faucet slowly, shining, before Drew
sighed. The sigh was husky and resigned and tired. He nodded, looking
away. "All right," he said. "We'll stay."
He picked up the scythe weakly. The words on the metal leaped up with a
sharp glitter.
WHO WIELDS ME--WIELDS THE WORLD!
"We'll stay. . . ."
Next morning he walked to the old man's grave. There was a single fresh
sprout of wheat growing in the center of it. The same sprout, reborn,
that the old man had held in his hands weeks before.
He talked to the old man, getting no answers.
"You worked the field all your life because you had to, and one day you
came across your own life growin' there. You knew it was yours. You cut
it. And you went home, put on your grave clothes, and your heart gave
out and you died. That's how it was, wasn't it? And you passed the land
on to me, and when I die, I'm supposed to hand it over to someone else."
Drew's voice had awe in it. "How long a time has this been goin' on?
With nobody knowin' about this field and its use except the man with the
scythe . . ."
Quite suddenly he felt very old. The valley seemed ancient, mummified,
secretive, dried and bent and powerful. When the Indians danced on the
prairie it had been here, this field. The same sky, the same wind, the
same wheat. And, before the Indians? Some Cro-Magnon, gnarled and
shag-haired, wielding a crude wooden scythe, perhaps, prowling down
through the living wheat.
Drew returned to work. Up, down. Up, down. Obsessed with the idea of
being the wielder of the scythe. He, himself! It burst upon him in a
mad, wild surge of strength and horror.
Up! WHO WIELDS ME! Down! WIELDS THE WORLD!
He had to accept the job with some sort of philosophy. It was simply his
way of getting food and housing for his family. They deserved eating and
living decent, he thought, after all these years.
Up and down. Each grain a life he neatly cut into two pieces. If he
planned it carefully--he looked at the wheat--why, he and Molly and the
kids could live forever!
Once he found the place where the grain grew that was Molly and Susie
and little Drew he would never cut it.
And then, like a signal, it came, quietly.
Right there, before him.
Another sweep of the scythe and he'd cut them away.
Molly, Drew, Susie. It was certain. Trembling, he knelt and looked at
the few grains of wheat. They glowed at his touch.
He groaned with relief. What if he had cut them down, never guessing? He
blew out his breath and got up and took the scythe and stood back away
from the wheat and stood for a long while looking down.
Molly thought it awfully strange when he came home early and kissed her
on the cheek, for no reason at all.
At dinner, Molly said, "You quit early today? Does--does the wheat still
spoil when it falls?"
He nodded and took more meat.
She said, "You ought to write to the Agriculture people and have them
come look at it."
"No," he said.
"I was just suggestin'," she said.
His eyes dilated. "I got to stay here all my life. Can't nobody else
mess with that wheat; they wouldn't know where to cut and not to cut.
They might cut the wrong parts."
"What wrong parts?"
"Nothin'," he said, chewing slowly. "Nothin' at all."
He slapped his fork down, hard. "Who knows what they might want to do!
Those government men! They might even--might even want to plow the whole
field under!"
Molly nodded. "That's just what it needs," she said. "And start all over
again, with new seed."
He didn't finish eating. "I'm not writin' any gover'ment, and I'm not
handin' this field over to no stranger to cut, and that's that!" he
said, and the screen door banged behind him.
He detoured around that place where the lives of his children and his
wife grew up in the sun, and used his scythe on the far end of the field
where he knew he would make no mistakes.
But he no longer liked the work. At the end of an hour he knew he had
brought death to three of his old, loved friends in Missouri. He read
their names on the cut grain and couldn't go on.
He locked the scythe in the cellar and put the key away. He was done
with the reaping, done for good and all.
He smoked his pipe in the evening on the front porch, and told the kids
stories to hear them laugh. But they didn't laugh much. They seemed
withdrawn, tired and funny, like they weren't his children any more.
Molly complained of a headache, dragged around the house a little, went
to bed early and fell into a deep sleep. That was funny, too. Molly
always stayed up late and was full of vinegar.
The wheat field rippled with moonlight on it, making it into a sea.
It wanted cutting. Certain parts needed cutting now. Drew Erickson sat,
swallowing quietly, trying not to look at it.
What'd happen to the world if he never went in the field again? What'd
happen to people ripe for death, who waited the coming of the scythe?
He'd wait and see.
Molly was breathing softly when he blew out the oil lamp and got to bed.
He couldn't sleep. He heard the wind in the wheat, felt the hunger to do
the work in his arms and fingers.
In the middle of the night he found himself walking in the field, the
scythe in his hands. Walking like a crazy man, walking and afraid,
half-awake. He didn't remember unlocking the cellar door, getting the
scythe, but here he was in the moonlight, walking in the grain.
Among these grains there were many who were old, weary, wanting so very
much to sleep. The long, quiet, moonless sleep.
The scythe held him, grew into his palms, forced him to walk.
Somehow, struggling, he got free of it. He threw it down, ran off into
the wheat, where he stopped and went down on his knees.
"I don't want to kill anymore," he said. "If I work with the scythe I'll
have to kill Molly and the kids. Don't ask me to do that!"
The stars only sat in the sky, shining.
Behind him, he heard a dull, thumping sound.
Something shot up over the hill into the sky. It was like a living
thing, with arms of red color, licking at the stars. Sparks fell into
his face. The thick, hot odor of fire came with it.
The house!
Crying out, he got sluggishly, hopelessly, to his feet, looking at the
big fire.
The little white house with the live oaks was roaring up in one savage
bloom of fire. Heat rolled over the hill and he swam in it and went down
in it, stumbling, drowning over his head.
By the time he got down the hill there was not a shingle, bolt or
threshold of it that wasn't alive with flame. It made blistering,
crackling, fumbling noises.
No one screamed inside. No one ran around or shouted.
He yelled in the yard. "Molly! Susie! Drew!"
He got no answer. He ran close in until his eyebrows withered and his
skin crawled hot like paper burning, crisping, curling up in tight
little curls.
"Molly! Susie!"
The fire settled contentedly down to feed. Drew ran around the house a
dozen times, all alone, trying to find a way in. Then he sat where the
fire roasted his body and waited until all the walls had sunken down
with fluttering crashes, until the last ceiling bent, blanketing the
floors with molten plaster and scorched lathing. Until the flames died
and smoke coughed up, and the new day came slowly; and there was nothing
but embering ashes and an acid smoldering.
Disregarding the heat fanning from the leveled frames, Drew walked into
the ruin. It was still too dark to see much. Red light glowed on his
sweating throat. He stood like a stranger in a new and different land.
Here--the kitchen. Charred tables, chairs, the iron stove, the
cupboards. Here--the hall. Here the parlor and then over there was the
bedroom where--
Where Molly was still alive.
She slept among fallen timbers and angry-colored pieces of wire spring
and metal.
She slept as if nothing had happened. Her small white hands lay at her
sides, flaked with sparks. Her calm face slept with a flaming lath
across one cheek.
Drew stopped and didn't believe it. In the ruin of her smoking bedroom
she lay on a glittering bed of sparks, her skin intact, her breast
rising, falling, taking air.
"Molly!"
Alive and sleeping after the fire, after the walls had roared down,
after ceilings had collapsed upon her and flame had lived all about her.
His shoes smoked as he pushed through piles of fuming litter. It could
have seared his feet off at the ankles, he wouldn't have known.
"Molly. . ."
He bent over her. She didn't move or hear him, and she didn't speak. She
wasn't dead. She wasn't alive. She just lay there with the fire
surrounding her and not touching her, not harming her in any way. Her
cotton nightgown was streaked with ashes, but not burnt. Her brown hair
was pillowed on a tumble of red-hot coals.
He touched her cheek, and it was cold, cold in the middle of hell. Tiny
breaths trembled her half-smiling lips.
The children were there, too. Behind a veil of smoke he made out two
smaller figures huddled in the ashes sleeping.
He carried all three of them out to the edge of the wheat field.
"Molly. Molly, wake up! Kids! Kids, wake up!"
They breathed and didn't move and went on sleeping.
"Kids, wake up! Your mother is--"
Dead? No, not dead. But--
He shook the kids as if they were to blame. They paid no attention; they
were busy with their dreams. He put them back down and stood over them,
his face cut with lines.
He knew why they'd slept through the fire and continued to sleep now. He
knew why Molly just lay there, never wanting to laugh again.
The power of the wheat and the scythe.
Their lives, supposed to end yesterday, May 30th, 1938, had been
prolonged simply because he refused to cut the grain. They should have
died in the fire. That's the way it was meant to be. But since he had
not used the scythe, nothing could hurt them. A house had flamed and
fallen and still they lived, caught halfway, not dead, not alive.
Simply--waiting. And all over the world thousands more just like them,
victims of accidents, fires, disease, suicide, waited, slept just like
Molly and her children slept. Not able to die, not able to live. All
because a man was afraid of harvesting the ripe grain. All because one
man thought he could stop working with a scythe and never work with that
scythe again.
He looked down upon the children. The job had to be done every day and
every day with never a stopping but going on, with never a pause, but
always the harvesting, forever and forever and forever.
All right, he thought. All right. I'll use the scythe.
He didn't say good-by to his family. He turned with a slow-feeding anger
and found the scythe and walked rapidly, then he began to trot, then he
ran with long jolting strides into the field, raving, feeling the hunger
in his arms, as the wheat whipped and flailed his legs. He pounded
through it, shouting. He stopped.
"Molly!" he cried, and raised the blade and swung it down.
"Susie!" he cried. "Drew!" And swung the blade down again.
Somebody screamed. He didn't turn to look at the fire-ruined house.
And then, sobbing wildly, he rose above the grain again and again and
hewed to left and right and to left and to right and to left and to
right. Over and over and over! Slicing out huge scars in green wheat and
ripe wheat, with no selection and no care, cursing, over and over,
swearing, laughing, the blade swinging up in the sun and falling in the
sun with a singing whistle! Down!
Bombs shattered London, Moscow, Tokyo.
The blade swung insanely.
And the kilns of Belsen and Buchenwald took fire.
The blade sang, crimson wet.
And mushrooms vomited out blind suns at White Sands, Hiroshima, Bikini,
and up, through, and in continental Siberian skies.
The grain wept in a green rain, falling.
Korea, Indo-China, Egypt, India trembled; Asia stirred, Africa woke in
the night. . . .
And the blade went on rising, crashing, severing, with the fury and the
rage of a man who has lost and lost so much that he no longer cares what
he does to the world.
Just a few short miles off the main highway, down a rough dirt road that
leads to nowhere, just a few short miles from a highway jammed with
traffic bound for California.
Once in a while during the long years a jalopy gets off the main
highway, pulls up steaming in front of the charred ruin of a little
white house at the end of the dirt road, to ask instructions from the
farmer they see just beyond, the one who works insanely, wildly, without
ever stopping, night and day, in the endless fields of wheat.
But they get no help and no answer. The farmer in the field is too busy,
even after all these years; too busy slashing and chopping the green
wheat instead of the ripe.
And Drew Erickson moves on with his scythe, with the light of blind suns
and a look of white fire in his never-sleeping eyes, on and on and on. .
. .

Uncle Einar
It will take only a minute," said Uncle Einar's sweet wife.
"I refuse," he said. "And that takes but a second."
"I've worked all morning," she said, holding to her slender back, "and
you won't help? It's drumming for a rain."
"Let it rain," he cried, morosely. "I'll not be pierced by lightning
just to air your clothes."
"But you're so quick at it."
"Again, I refuse." His vast tarpaulin wings hummed nervously behind his
indignant back.
She gave him a slender rope on which were tied four dozen fresh-washed
clothes. He turned it in his fingers with distaste. "So it's come to
this," he muttered, bitterly. "To this, to this, to this." He almost
wept angry and acid tears.
"Don't cry; you'll wet them down again," she said. "Jump up, now, run
them about."
"Run them about." His voice was hollow, deep, and terribly wounded. "I
say: let it thunder, let it pour!"
"If it was a nice, sunny day I wouldn't ask," she said, reasonably. "All
my washing gone for nothing if you don't. They'll hang about the
house--"
That did it. Above all, he hated clothes flagged and festooned so a man
had to creep under on the way across a room. He jumped up. His vast
green wings boomed. "Only so far as the pasture fence!"
Whirl: up he jumped, his wings chewed and loved the cool air. Before
you'd say Uncle Einar Has Green Wings he sailed low across his farmland,
trailing the clothes in a vast fluttering loop through the pounding
concussion and back-wash of his wings!
"Catch!"
Back from the trip, he sailed the clothes, dry as popcorn, down on a
series of clean blankets she'd spread for their landing.
"Thank you!" she cried.
"Gahh!" he shouted, and flew off under the apple tree to brood.
Uncle Einar's beautiful silk-like wings hung like sea-green sails behind
him, and whirred and whispered from his shoulders when he sneezed or
turned swiftly. He was one of the few in the Family whose talent was
visible. All his dark cousins and nephews and brothers hid in small
towns across the world, did unseen mental things or things with
witchfingers and white teeth, or blew down the sky like fire-leaves, or
loped in forests like moonsilvered wolves. They lived comparatively safe
from normal humans. Not so a man with great green wings.
Not that he hated his wings. Far from it! In his youth he'd always flown
nights, because nights were rare times for winged men! Daylight held
dangers, always had, always would; but nights, ah, nights, he had sailed
over islands of cloud and seas of summer sky. With no danger to himself.
It had been a rich, full soaring, an exhilaration.
But now he could not fly at night.
On his way home to some high mountain pass in Europe after a Homecoming
among Family members in Mellin Town, Illinois (some years ago) he had
drunk too much rich crimson wine. "I'll be all right," he had told
himself, vaguely, as he beat his long way under the morning stars, over
the moon-dreaming country hills beyond Mellin Town. And then--crack out
of the sky--
A high-tension tower.
Like a netted duck! A great sizzle! His face blown black by a blue
sparkler of wire, he fended off the electricity with a terrific
back-jumping percussion of his wings, and fell.
His hitting the moonlit meadow under the tower made a noise like a large
telephone book dropped from the sky.
Early the next morning, his dew-sodden wings shaking violently, he stood
up. It was still dark. There was a faint bandage of dawn stretched
across the east. Soon the bandage would stain and all flight would be
restricted. There was nothing to do but take refuge in the forest and
wait out the day in the deepest thicket until another night gave his
wings a hidden motion in the sky.
In this fashion he met his wife.
During the day, which was warm for November first in Illinois country,
pretty young Brunilla Wexley was out to udder a lost cow, for she
carried a silver pail in one hand as she sidled through thickets and
pleaded cleverly to the unseen cow to please return home or burst her
gut with unplucked milk. The fact that the cow would have most certainly
come home when her teats needed pulling did not concern Brunilla Wexley.
It was a sweet excuse for forest-journeying, thistle-blowing, and flower
chewing; all of which Brunilla was doing as she stumbled upon Uncle
Einar.
Asleep near a bush, he seemed a man under a green shelter.
"Oh," said Brunilla, with a fever. "A man. In a camp-tent."
Uncle Einar awoke. The camp-tent spread like a large green fan behind
him.
"Oh," said Brunilla, the cow-searcher. "A man with wings."
That was how she took it. She was startled, yes, but she had never been
hurt in her life, so she wasn't afraid of anyone, and it was a fancy
thing to see a winged man and she was proud to meet him. She began to
talk. In an hour they were old friends, and in two hours she'd quite
forgotten his wings were there. And he somehow confessed how he happened
to be in this wood.
"Yes, I noticed you looked banged around," she said. "That right wing
looks very bad. You'd best let me take you home and fix it. You won't be
able to fly all the way to Europe on it, anyway. And who wants to live
in Europe these days?"
He thanked her, but he didn't quite see how he could accept.
"But I live alone," she said. "For, as you see, I'm quite ugly."
He insisted she was not.
"How kind of you," she said. "But I am, there's no fooling myself. My
folks are dead, I've a farm, a big one, all to myself, quite far from
Mellin Town, and I'm in need of talking company."
But wasn't she afraid of him? he asked.
"Proud and jealous would be more near it," she said. "May I?" And she
stroked his large green membraned veils with careful envy. He shuddered
at the touch and put his tongue between his teeth.
So there was nothing for it but that he come to her house for
medicaments and ointments, and my! what a burn across his face, beneath
his eyes! "Lucky you weren't blinded," she said. "How'd it happen?"
"Well . . ." he said, and they were at her farm, hardly noticing they'd
walked a mile, looking at each other.
A day passed, and another, and he thanked her at her door and said he
must be going, he much appreciated the ointment, the care, the lodging.
It was twilight and between now, six o'clock, and five the next morning,
he must cross an ocean and a continent. "Thank you; good-by," he said,
and started to fly off in the dusk and crashed right into a maple tree.
"Oh!" she screamed, and ran to his unconscious body.
When he waked the next hour he knew he'd fly no more in the dark again
ever; his delicate night-perception was gone. The winged telepathy that
had warned him where towers, trees, houses and hills stood across his
path, the fine clear vision and sensibility that guided him through
mazes of forest, cliff, and cloud, all were burnt forever by that strike
across his face, that blue electric fry and sizzle.
"How?" he moaned softly. "How can I go to Europe? If I flew by day, I'd
be seen and--miserable joke--maybe shot down! Or kept for a zoo perhaps,
what a life that'd be! Brunilla, tell me, what shall I do?"
"Oh," she whispered, looking at her hands. "We'll think of something. .
. ."
They were married.
The Family came for the wedding. In a great autumnal avalanche of maple,
sycamore, oak, elm leaf they hissed and rustled, fell in a shower of
horse-chestnut, thumped like winter apples on the earth, with an
over-all scent of farewell-summer on the wind they made in their
rushing. The ceremony? The ceremony was brief as a black candle lit,
blown out, and smoke left still on the air. Its briefness, darkness,
upside-down and backward quality escaped Brunilla, who only listened to
the great tide of Uncle Einar's wings faintly murmuring above them as
they finished out the rite. And as for Uncle Einar, the wound across his
nose was almost healed and, holding Brunilla's arm, he felt Europe grow
faint and melt away in the distance.
He didn't have to see very well to fly straight up, or come straight
down. It was only natural that on this night of their wedding he take
Brunilla in his arms and fly right up into the sky.
A farmer, five miles over, glanced at a low cloud at midnight, saw faint
glows and crackles.
"Heat lightning," he observed, and went to bed.
They didn't come down till morning, with the dew.
The marriage took. She had only to look at him, and it lifted her to
think she was the only woman in the world married to a winged man. "Who
else could say it?" she asked her mirror. And the answer was: "No one!"
He, on the other hand, found great beauty behind her face, great
kindness and understanding. He made some changes in his diet to fit her
thinking, and was careful with his wings about the house; knocked
porcelains and broken lamps were nerve-scrapers, he stayed away from
them. He changed his sleeping habits, since he couldn't fly nights now
anyhow. And she in turn fixed chairs so they were comfortable for his
wings, put extra padding here or took it out there, and the things she
said were the things he loved her for. "We're in our cocoons, all of us.
See how ugly I am?" she said. "But one day I'll break out, spread wings
as fine and handsome as you."
"You broke out long ago," he said.
She thought it over. "Yes," she had to admit. "I know just which day it
was, too. In the woods when I looked for a cow and found a tent!" They
laughed, and with him holding her she felt so beautiful she knew their
marriage had slipped her from her ugliness, like a bright sword from its
case.
They had children. At first there was fear, all on his part, that they'd
be winged.
"Nonsense, I'd love it!" she said. "Keep them out from under foot."
"Then," he exclaimed, "they'd be in your hair!"
"Ow!" she cried.
Four children were born, three boys and a girl, who, for their energy,
seemed to have wings. They popped up like toadstools in a few years, and
on hot summer days asked their father to sit under the apple tree and
fan them with his cooling wings and tell them wild starlit tales of
island clouds and ocean skies and textures of mist and wind and how a
star tastes melting in your mouth, and how to drink cold mountain air,
and how it feels to be a pebble dropped from Mt. Everest, turning to a
green bloom, flowering your wings just before you strike bottom!
This was his marriage.
And today, six years later, here sat Uncle Einar, here he was, festering
under the apple tree, grown impatient and unkind; not because this was
his desire, but because after the long wait, he was still unable to fly
the wild night sky; his extra sense had never returned. Here he sat
despondently, nothing more than a summer sun-parasol, green and
discarded, abandoned for the season by the reckless vacationers who once
sought the refuge of its translucent shadow. Was he to sit here forever,
afraid to fly by day because someone might see him? Was his only flight
to be as a drier of clothes for his wife, or a fanner of children on hot
August noons? His one occupation had always been flying Family errands,
quicker than storms. A boomerang, he'd whickled over hills and valleys
and like a thistle, landed. He had always had money; the Family had good
use for their winged man! But now? Bitterness! His wings jittered and
whisked the air and made a captive thunder.
"Papa," said little Meg.
The children stood looking at his thought-dark face.
"Papa," said Ronald. "Make more thunder!"
"It's a cold March day, there'll soon be rain and plenty of thunder,"
said Uncle Einar.
"Will you come watch us?" asked Michael.
"Run on, run on! Let papa brood!"
He was shut of love, the children of love, and the love of children. He
thought only of heavens, skies, horizons, infinities, by night or day,
lit by star, moon, or sun, cloudy or clear, but always it was skies and
heavens and horizons that ran ahead of you forever when you soared. Yet
here he was, sculling the pasture, kept low for fear of being seen.
Misery in a deep well!
"Papa, come watch us; it's March!" cried Meg. "And we're going to the
Hill with all the kids from town!"
Uncle Einar grunted. "What hill is that?"
"The Kite Hill, of course!" they all sang together.
Now he looked at them.
Each held a large paper kite, their faces sweating with anticipation and
an animal glowing. In their small fingers were balls of white twine.
From the kites, colored red and blue and yellow and green, hung caudal
appendages of cotton and silk strips.
"We'll fly our kites!" said Ronald. "Won't you come?"
"No," he said, sadly. "I mustn't be seen by anyone or there'd be
trouble."
"You could hide and watch from the woods." said Meg. "We made the kites
ourselves. Just because we know how."
"How do you know?"
"You're our father!" was the instant cry. "That's why!"
He looked at his children for a long while. He sighed. "A kite festival,
is it?"
"Yes, sir!"
"I'm going to win," said Meg.
"No, I'm!" Michael contradicted.
"Me, me!" piped Stephen.
"God up the chimney!" roared Uncle Einar, leaping high with a deafening
kettledrum of wings. "Children! Children, I love you dearly!"
"Father, what's wrong?" said Michael, backing off.
"Nothing, nothing, nothing!" chanted Einar. He flexed his wings to their
greatest propulsion and plundering. Whoom! they slammed like cymbals.
The children fell flat in the backwash! "I have it, I have it! I'm free
again! Fire in the flue! Feather on the wind! Brunilla!" Einar called to
the house. His wife appeared. "I'm free!" he called, flushed and tall,
on his toes. "Listen, Brunilla, I don't need the night any more! I can
fly by day! I don't need the night! I'll fly every day and any day of
the year from now on!--but, God, I waste time, talking. Look!"
And as the worried members of his family watched, he seized the cotton
tail from one of the little kites, tied it to his belt behind, grabbed
the twine ball, held one end in his teeth, gave the other end to his
children, and up, up into the air he flew, away into the March wind!
And across the meadows and over the farms his children ran, letting out
string to the daylit sky, bubbling and stumbling, and Brunilla stood
back in the farmyard and waved and laughed to see what was happening;
and her children marched to the far Kite Hill and stood, the four of
them, holding the twine in their eager, proud fingers, each tugging and
directing and pulling. And the children from Mellin Town came running
with their small kites to let up on the wind, and they saw the great
green kite leap and hover in the sky and exclaimed:
"Oh, oh, what a kite! What a kite! Oh, I wish I'd a kite like that!
Where, where did you get it!"
"Our father made it!" cried Meg and Michael and Stephen and Ronald, and
gave an exultant pull on the twine and the humming, thundering kite in
the sky dipped and soared and made a great and magical exclamation mark
across a cloud!

The Wind
The phone rang at five-thirty that evening. It was December, and long
since dark as Thompson picked up the phone.
"Hello."
"Hello, Herb?"
"Oh, it's you, Allin."
"Is your wife home, Herb?"
"Sure. Why?"
"Damn it."
Herb Thompson held the receiver quietly. "What's up? You sound funny."
"I wanted you to come over tonight."
"We're having company."
"I wanted you to spend the night. When's your wife going away?"
"That's next week," said Thompson. "She'll be in Ohio for about nine
days. Her mother's sick. I'll come over then."
"I wish you could come over tonight."
"Wish I could. Company and all, my wife'd kill me."
"I wish you could come over."
"What's it? the wind again?"
"Oh, no. No."
"Is it the wind?" asked Thompson.
The voice on the phone hesitated. "Yeah. Yeah, it's the wind."
"It's a clear night, there's not much wind."
"There's enough. It comes in the window and blows the curtains a little
bit. Just enough to tell me."
"Look, why don't you come and spend the night here?" said Herb Thompson
looking around the lighted halt.
"Oh, no. It's too late for that. It might catch me on the way over. It's
a damned long distance. I wouldn't dare, but thanks, anyway. It's thirty
miles, but thanks."
"Take a sleeping-tablet."
"I've been standing in the door for the past hour, Herb. I can see it
building up in the west. There are some clouds there and I saw one of
them kind of rip apart. There's a wind coming, all right."
"Well, you just take a nice sleeping-tablet. And call me any time you
want to call. Later this evening if you want."
"Any time?" said the voice on the phone.
"Sure."
"I'll do that, but I wish you could come out. Yet I wouldn't want you
hurt. You're my best friend and I wouldn't want that. Maybe it's best I
face this thing alone. I'm sorry I bothered you."
"Hell, what's a friend for? Tell you what you do, sit down and get some
writing done this evening," said Herb Thompson, shifting from one foot
to the other in the hall. "You'll forget about the Himalayas and the
Valley of the Winds and this preoccupation of yours with storms and
hurricanes. Get another chapter done on your next travel book."
"I might do that. Maybe I will, I don't know. Maybe I will. I might do
that. Thanks a lot for letting me bother you."
"Thanks, hell. Get off the line, now, you. My wife's calling me to
dinner."
Herb Thompson hung up.
He went and sat down at the supper table and his wife sat across from
him. "Was that Allin?" she asked. He nodded. "Him and his winds that
blow up and winds that blow down and winds that blow hot and blow cold,"
she said, handing him his plate heaped with food.
"He did have a time in the Himalayas, during the war," said Herb
Thompson.
"You don't believe what he said about that valley, do you?"
"It makes a good story."
"Climbing around, climbing up things. Why do men climb mountains and
scare themselves?"
"It was snowing," said Herb Thompson.
"Was it?"
"And raining and hailing and blowing all at once, in that valley.
Allin's told me a dozen times. He tells it well. He was up pretty high.
Clouds, and all. The valley made a noise."
"I bet it did," she said.
"Like a lot of winds instead of just one. Winds from all over the
world." He took a bite. "So says Allin."
"He shouldn't have gone there and looked, in the first place," she said.
"You go poking around and first thing you know you get ideas. Winds
start getting angry at you for intruding, and they follow you."
"Don't joke, he's my best friend," snapped Herb Thompson.
"It's all so silly!"
"Nevertheless he's been through a lot. That storm in Bombay, later, and
the typhoon off New Guinea two months after that. And that time, in
Cornwall."
"I have no sympathy for a man who continually runs into wind storms and
hurricanes, and then gets a persecution complex because of it."
The phone rang just then.
"Don't answer it," she said.
"Maybe it's important."
"It's only Allin, again."
They sat there and the phone rang nine times and they didn't answer.
Finally, it quieted. They finished dinner. Out in the kitchen, the
window curtains gently moved in the small breeze from a slightly opened
window.
The phone rang again.
"I can't let it ring," he said, and answered it. "Oh, hello, Allin."
"Herb! It's here! It got here!"
"You're too near the phone, back up a little."
"I stood in the open door and waited for it. I saw it coming down the
highway, shaking all the trees, one by one, until it shook the trees
just outside the house and it dived down toward the door and I slammed
the door in its face!"
Thompson didn't say anything. He couldn't think of anything to say, his
wife was watching him in the hail door.
"How interesting," he said, at last.
"It's all around the house, Herb. I can't get out now, I can't do
anything. But I fooled it, I let it think it had me, and just as it came
down to get me I slammed and locked the door! I was ready for it, I've
been getting ready for weeks."
"Have you, now; tell me about it, Allin, old man." Herb Thompson played
it jovially into the phone, while his wife looked on and his neck began
to sweat.
"It began six weeks ago. . . ."
"Oh, yes? Well, well."
". . . I thought I had it licked. I thought it had given up following
and trying to get me. But it was just waiting. Six weeks ago I heard the
wind laughing and whispering around the corners of my house, out here.
Just for an hour or so, not very long, not very loud. Then it went
away."
Thompson nodded into the phone. "Glad to hear it, glad to hear it." His
wife stared at him.
"It came back, the next night. It slammed the shutters and kicked sparks
out of the chimney. It came back five nights in a row, a little stronger
each time. When I opened the front door, it came in at me and tried to
pull me out, but it wasn't strong enough. Tonight it is."
"Glad to hear you're feeling better," said Thompson.
"I'm not better, what's wrong with you? Is your wife listening to us?"
"Yes."
"Oh, I see. I know I sound like a fool."
"Not at all. Go on."
Thompson's wife went back into the kitchen. He relaxed. He sat down on a
little chair near the phone. "Go on, Allin, get it out of you, you'll
sleep better."
"It's all around the house now, like a great big vacuum machine nuzzling
at all the gables. It's knocking the trees around."
"That's funny, there's no wind here, Allin."
"Of course not, it doesn't care about you, only about me."
"I guess that's one way to explain it."
"It's a killer, Herb, the biggest damnedest prehistoric killer that ever
hunted prey. A big sniffling hound, trying to smell me out, find me. It
pushes its big cold nose up to the house, taking air, and when it finds
me in the parlor it drives its pressure there, and when I'm in the
kitchen it goes there. It's trying to get in the windows, now, but I had
them reinforced and I put new hinges on the doors, and bolts. It's a
strong house. They built them strong in the old days. I've got all the
lights in the house on, now. The house is all lighted up, bright. The
wind followed me from room to room, looking through all the windows,
when I switched them on. Oh!"
"What's wrong?"
"It just snatched off the front screen door!"
"I wish you'd come over here and spend the night, Allin."
"I can't! God, I can't leave the house. I can't do anything. I know this
wind. Lord, it's big and it's clever. I tried to light a cigarette a
moment ago, and a little draft sucked the match out. The wind likes to
play games, it likes to taunt me, it's taking its time with me; it's got
all night. And now! God, right now, one of my old travel books, on the
library table, I wish you could see it. A little breeze from God knows
what small hole in the house, the little breeze is-- blowing the pages
one by one. I wish you could see it. There's my introduction. Do you
remember the introduction to my book on Tibet, Herb?"
"Yes."
"This book is dedicated to those who lost the game of elements, written
by one who has seen, but who has always escaped."
"Yes, I remember."
"The lights have gone out!"
The phone crackled.
"The power lines just went down. Are you there, Herb?"
"I still hear you."
"The wind doesn't like all that light in my house, it tore the power
lines down. The telephone will probably go next. Oh, it's a real party,
me and the wind, I tell you! Just a second."
"Allin?" A silence. Herb leaned against the mouthpiece. His wife glanced
in from the kitchen. Herb Thompson waited. "Allin?"
"I'm back," said the voice on the phone. "There was a draft from the
door and I shoved some wadding under it to keep it from blowing on my
feet. I'm glad you didn't come out after all, Herb, I wouldn't want you
in this mess. There! It just broke one of the living-room windows and a
regular gale is in the house, knocking pictures off the wall! Do you
hear it?"
Herb Thompson listened. There was a wild sirening on the phone and a
whistling and banging. Allin shouted over it. "Do you hear it?"
Herb Thompson swallowed drily. "I hear it."
"It wants me alive, Herb. It doesn't dare knock the house down in one
fell blow. That'd kill me. It wants me alive, so it can pull me apart,
finger by finger. It wants what's inside me. My mind, my brain. It wants
my life-power, my psychic force, my ego. It wants intellect."
"My wife's calling me, Allin. I have to go wipe the dishes."
"It's a big cloud of vapors, winds from all over the world. The same
wind that ripped the Celebes a year ago, the same pampero that killed in
Argentina, the typhoon that fed on Hawaii, the hurricane that knocked
the coast of Africa early this year. It's part of all those storms I
escaped. It followed me from the Himalayas because it didn't want me to
know what I know about the Valley of the Winds where it gathers and
plans its destruction. Something, a long time ago, gave it a start in
the direction of life. I know its feeding grounds, I know where it is
born and where parts of it expire. For that reason, it hates me; and my
books that tell how to defeat it. It doesn't want me preaching any more.
It wants to incorporate me into its huge body, to give it knowledge. It
wants me on its own side!"
"I have to hang up, Allin, my wife--"
"What?" A pause, the blowing of the wind in the phone, distantly. "What
did you say?"
"Call me back in an hour, Allin."
He hung up.
He went out to wipe the dishes. His wife looked at him and he looked at
the dishes, rubbing them with a towel.
"What's it like out tonight?" he said.
"Nice. Not very chilly. Stars," she said. "Why?"
"Nothing."
The phone rang three times in the next hour. At eight o'clock the
company arrived, Stoddard and his wife. They sat around until
eight-thirty talking and then got out and set up the card table and
began to play Gin.
Herb Thompson shuffled the cards over and over, with a clittering,
shuttering effect and clapped them out, one at a time before the three
other players. Talk went back and forth. He lit a cigar and made it into
a fine gray ash at the tip, and adjusted his cards in his hand and on
occasion lifted his head and listened. There was no sound outside the
house. His wife saw him do this, and he cut it out immediately, and
discarded a Jack of Clubs.
He puffed slowly on his cigar and they all talked quietly with
occasional small eruptions of laughter, and the clock in the hall
sweetly chimed nine o'clock.
"Here we all are," said Herb Thompson, taking his cigar out and looking
at it reflectively. "And life is sure funny."
"Eh?" said Mr. Stoddard.
"Nothing, except herç we are, living our lives, and some place else on
earth a billion other people live their lives."
"That's a rather obvious statement."
"Life," he put his cigar back in his lips, "is a lonely thing. Even with
married people. Sometimes when you're in a person's arms you feel a
million miles away from them."
"I like that," said his wife.
"I didn't mean it that way," he explained, not with haste; because he
felt no guilt, he took his time. "I mean we all believe what we believe
and live our own little lives while other people live entirely different
ones. I mean, we sit here in this room while a thousand people are
dying. Some of cancer, some of pneumonia, some of tuberculosis. I
imagine someone in the United States is dying right now in a wrecked
car."
"This isn't very stimulating conversation," said his wife.
"I mean to say, we all live and don't think about how other people think
or live their lives or die. We wait until death comes to us. What I mean
is here we sit, on our self-assured butt-bones, while, thirty miles
away, in a big old house, completely surrounded by night and
God-knows-what, one of the finest guys who ever lived is--"
"Herb!"
He puffed and chewed on his cigar and stared blindly at his cards.
"Sorry." He blinked rapidly and bit his cigar. "Is it my turn?"
"It's your turn."
The playing went around the table, with a flittering of cards, murmurs,
conversation. Herb Thompson sank lower into his chair and began to look
ill.
The phone rang. Thompson jumped and ran to it and jerked it off the
hook.
"Herb! I've been calling and calling. What's it like at your house,
Herb?"
"What do you mean, what's it like?"
"Has the company come?"
"Hell, yes, it has--"
"Are you talking and laughing and playing cards?"
"Christ, yes, but what has that got to do with--"
"Are you smoking your ten-cent cigar?"
"God damn it, yes, but. . ."
"Swell," said the voice on the phone. "That sure is swell. I wish I
could be there. I wish I didn't know the things I know. I wish lots of
things."
"Are you all right?"
"So far, so good. I'm locked in the kitchen now. Part of the front wall
of the house blew in. But I planned my retreat: When the kitchen door
gives, I'm heading for the cellar. If I'm lucky I may hold out there
until morning. It'll have to tear the whole damned house down to get to
me, and the cellar floor is pretty solid. I have a shovel and I may
dig--deeper. . . ."
It sounded like a lot of other voices on the phone.
"What's that?" Herb Thompson demanded, cold, shivering.
"That?" asked the voice on the phone. "Those are the voices of twelve
thousand killed in a typhoon, seven thousand killed by a hurricane,
three thousand buried by a cyclone. Am I boring you? That's what the
wind is. It's a lot of people dead. The wind killed them, took their
minds to give itself intelligence. It took all their voices and made
them into one voice. All those millions of people killed in the past ten
thousand years, tortured and run from continent to continent on the
backs and in the bellies of monsoons and whirlwinds. Oh, Christ, what a
poem you could write about it!"
The phone echoed and rang with voices and shouts and whinings.
"Come on back, Herb," called his wife from the card table.
"That's how the wind gets more intelligent each year, it adds to itself,
body by body, life by life, death by death."
"We're waiting for you, Herb," called his wife.
"Damn it!" He turned, almost snarling. "Wait just a moment, won't you!"
Back to the phone. "Allin, if you want me to come out there now, I will!
I should have come earlier. . ."
"Wouldn't think of it. This is a grudge fight, wouldn't do to have you
in it now. I'd better hang up. The kitchen door looks bad; I'll have to
get in the cellar."
"Call me back, later?"
"Maybe, if I'm lucky. I don't think I'll make it. I slipped away and
escaped so many times, but I think it has me now. I hope I haven't
bothered you too much, Herb."
"You haven't bothered anyone, damn it. Call me back."
"I'll try. . . ."
Herb Thompson went back to the card game. His wife glared at him. "How's
Allin, your friend?" she asked, "Is he sober?"
"He's never taken a drink in his life," said Thompson, sullenly, sitting
down. "I should have gone out there hours ago."
"But he's called every night for six weeks and you've been out there at
least ten nights to stay with him and nothing was wrong."
"He needs help. He might hurt himself."
"You were just out there, two nights ago, you can't always be running
after him."
"First thing in the morning I'll move him into a sanatorium. Didn't want
to. He seems so reasonable otherwise."
At ten-thirty coffee was served. Herb Thompson drank his slowly, looking
at the phone. I wonder if he's in the cellar now, he thought.
Herb Thompson walked to the phone, called long-distance, gave the
number.
"I'm sorry," said the operator. "The lines are down in that district.
When the lines are repaired, we will put your call through."
"Then the telephone lines are down!" cried Thompson. He let the phone
drop. Turning, he slammed open the closet door, pulled out his coat. "Oh
Lord," he said. "Oh, Lord, Lord," he said, to his amazed guests and his
wife with the coffee urn in her hand. "Herb!" she cried. "I've got to
get out there!" he said, slipping into his coat.
There was a soft, faint stirring at the door.
Everybody in the room tensed and straightened up.
"Who could that be?" asked his wife.
The soft stirring was repeated, very quietly.
Thompson hurried down the hall where he stopped, alert.
Outside, faintly, he heard laughter.
"I'll be damned," said Thompson. He put his hand on the doorknob,
pleasantly shocked and relieved. "I'd know that laugh anywhere. It's
Allin. He came on over in his car, after all. Couldn't wait until
morning to tell me his confounded stories." Thompson smiled weakly.
"Probably brought some friends with him. Sounds like a lot of other. .
."
He opened the front door.
The porch was empty.
Thompson showed no surprise; his face grew amused and sly. He laughed.
"Allin? None of your tricks now! Come on." He switched on the
porch-light and peered out and around. "Where are you, Allin? Come on,
now."
A breeze blew into his face.
Thompson waited a moment, suddenly chilled to his marrow. He stepped out
on the porch and looked uneasily, and very carefully, about.
A sudden wind caught and whipped his coat flaps, disheveled his hair. He
thought he heard laughter again. The wind rounded the house and was a
pressure everywhere at once, and then, storming for a full minute,
passed on.
The wind died down, sad, mourning in the high trees, passing away; going
back out to the sea, to the Celebes, to the Ivory Coast, to Sumatra and
Cape Horn, to Cornwall and the Philippines. Fading, fading, fading.
Thompson stood there, cold. He went in and closed the door and leaned
against it, and didn't move, eyes closed.
"What's wrong . . .?" asked his wife.

The Man Upstairs
He remembered how carefully and expertly Grandmother would fondle the
cold cut guts of the chicken and withdraw the marvels therein; the wet
shining loops of meat- smelling intestine, the muscled lump of heart,
the gizzard with the collection of seeds in it. How neatly and nicely
Grandma would slit the chicken and push her fat little hand in to
deprive it of its medals. These would be segregated, some in pans of
water, others in paper to be thrown to the dog later, perhaps. And then
the ritual of taxidermy, stuffing the bird with watered, seasoned bread,
and performing surgery with a swift, bright needle, stitch after
pulled-tight stitch.
This was one of the prime thrills of Douglas's eleven-year-old life
span.
Altogether, he counted twenty knives in the various squeaking drawers of
the magic kitchen table from which Grandma, a kindly, gentle-faced,
white-haired old witch, drew paraphernalia for her miracles.
Douglas was to be quiet. He could stand across the table from Grandmama,
his freckled nose tucked over the edge, watching, hut any loose boy-talk
might interfere with the spell. It was a wonder when Grandma brandished
silver shakers over the bird, supposedly sprinkling showers of
mummy-dust and pulverized Indian bones, muttering mystical verses under
her toothless breath.
"Grammy," said Douglas at last, breaking the silence. "Am I like that
inside?" He pointed at the chicken.
"Yes," said Grandma. "A little more orderly and presentable, but just
about the same. . . ."
"And more of it!" added Douglas, proud of his guts.
"Yes," said Grandma. "More of it."
"Grandpa has lots more'n me. His sticks out in front so he can rest his
elbows on it."
Grandma laughed and shook her head.
Douglas said, "And Lucie Williams, down the street, she . . ."
"Hush, child!" cried Grandma.
"But she's got. . ."
"Never you mind what she's got! That's different."
"But why is she different?"
"A darning-needle dragon-fly is coming by some day and sew up your
mouth," said Grandma firmly.
Douglas waited, then asked, "How do you know I've got insides like that,
Grandma?"
"Oh, go 'way, now!"
The front doorbell rang.
Through the front-door glass as he ran down the hall, Douglas saw a
straw hat. The bell jangled again and again. Douglas opened the door.
"Good morning, child, is the landlady at home?"
Cold gray eyes in a long, smooth, walnut-colored face gazed upon
Douglas. The man was tall, thin, and carried a suitcase, a briefcase, an
umbrella under one bent arm, gloves rich and thick and gray on his thin
fingers, and wore a horribly new straw hat.
Douglas backed up. "She's busy."
"I wish to rent her upstairs room, as advertised."
"We've got ten boarders, and it's already rented; go away!"
"Douglas!" Grandma was behind him suddenly. "How do you do?" she said to
the stranger. "Never mind this child."
Unsmiling, the man stepped stiffly in. Douglas watched them ascend out
of sight up the stairs, heard Grandma detailing the conveniences of the
upstairs room. Soon she hurried down to pile linens from the linen
closet on Douglas and send him scooting up with them.
Douglas paused at the room's threshold. The room was changed oddly,
simply because the stranger had been in it a moment. The straw hat lay
brittle and terrible upon the bed, the umbrella leaned stiff against one
wall like a dead bat with dark wings folded.
Douglas blinked at the umbrella.
The stranger stood in the center of the changed room, tall, tall.
"Here!" Douglas littered the bed with supplies. "We eat at noon sharp,
and if you're late coming down the soup'll get cold. Grandma fixes it so
it will, every time!"
The tall strange man counted out ten new copper pennies and tinkled them
in Douglas' blouse pocket. "We shall be friends," he said, grimly.
It was funny, the man having nothing but pennies. Lots of them. No
silver at all, no dimes, no quarters. Just new copper pennies.
Douglas thanked him glumly. "I'll drop these in my dime bank when I get
them changed into a dime. I got six dollars and fifty cents in dimes all
ready for my camp trip in August."
"I must wash now," said the tall strange man.
Once, at midnight, Douglas had wakened to hear a storm rumbling
outside--the cold hard wind shaking the house, the rain driving against
the window. And then a lightning bolt had landed outside the window with
a silent, terrific concussion. He remembered that fear of looking about
at his room, seeing it strange and awful in the instantaneous light.
So it was, now, in this room. He stood looking up at the stranger. This
room was no longer the same, but changed indefinably because this man,
quick as a lightning bolt, had shed his light about it. Douglas backed
up slowly as the stranger advanced.
The door closed in his face.
The wooden fork went up with mashed potatoes, came down empty. Mr.
Koberman, for that was his name, had brought the wooden fork and wooden
knife and spoon with him when Grandma called lunch.
"Mrs. Spaulding," he said, quietly, "my own cutlery; please use it. I
will have lunch today, but from tomorrow on, only breakfast and supper."
Grandma bustled in and out, bearing steaming tureens of soup and beans
and mashed potatoes to impress her new boarder, while Douglas sat
rattling his silverware on his plate, because he had discovered it
irritated Mr. Koberman.
"I know a trick," said Douglas. "Watch." He picked a fork-tine with his
fingernail. He pointed at various sectors of the table, like a magician.
Wherever he pointed, the sound of the vibrating forktine emerged, like a
metal elfin voice. Simply done, of course. He pressed the fork handle on
the table-top, secretly. The vibration came from the wood like a
sounding board. It looked quite magical. "There, there, and there!"
exclaimed Douglas, happily plucking the fork again. He pointed at Mr.
Koberman's soup and the noise came from it.
Mr. Koberman's walnut-colored face became hard and firm and awful. He
pushed the soup bowl away violently, his lips twisting. He fell back in
his chair.
Grandma appeared. "Why, what's wrong, Mr. Koberman?"
"I cannot eat this soup."
"Why?"
"Because I am full and can eat no more. Thank you."
Mr. Koberman left the room, glaring.
"What did you do, just then?" asked Grandma at Douglas, sharply.
"Nothing. Grandma, why does he eat with wooden spoons?"
"Yours not to question! When do you go back to school, anyway?"
"Seven weeks."
"Oh, my land!" said Grandma.
Mr. Koberman worked nights. Each morning at eight he arrived
mysteriously home, devoured a very small breakfast, and then slept
soundlessly in his room all through the dreaming hot daytime, until the
huge supper with all the other boarders at night.
Mr. Koberman's sleeping habits made it necessary for Douglas to be
quiet. This was unbearable. So, whenever Grandma visited down the
street, Douglas stomped up and down stairs beating a drum, bouncing golf
balls, or just screaming for three minutes outside Mr. Koberman's door,
or flushing the toilet seven times in succession.
Mr. Koberman never moved. His room was silent, dark. He did not
complain. There was no sound. He slept on and on. It was very strange.
Douglas felt a pure white flame of hatred burn inside himself with a
steady, unflickering beauty. Now that room was Koberman Land. Once it
had been flowery bright when Miss Sadlowe lived there. Now it was stark,
bare, cold, clean, everything in its place, alien and brittle.
Douglas climbed upstairs on the fourth morning.
Halfway to the second floor was a large sun-filled window, framed by
six-inch panes of orange, purple, blue, red and burgundy glass. In the
enchanted early mornings when the sun fell through to strike the landing
and slide down the stair banister, Douglas stood entranced at this
window peering at the world through the multicolored windows.
Now a blue world, a blue sky, blue people, blue streetcars and blue
trotting dogs.
He shifted panes. Now--an amber world! Two lemonish women glided by,
resembling the daughters of Fu Manchu! Douglas giggled. This pane made
even the sunlight more purely golden.
It was eight A.M. Mr. Koberman strolled by below, on the sidewalk,
returning from his night's work, his cane looped over his elbow, straw
hat glued to his head with patent oil.
Douglas shifted panes again. Mr. Koberman was a red man walking through
a red world with red trees and red flowers and-- something else.
Something about--Mr. Koberman.
Douglas squinted.
The red glass did things to Mr. Koberman. His face, his suit, his hands.
The clothes seemed to melt away. Douglas almost believed, for one
terrible instant, that he could see inside Mr. Koberman. And what he saw
made him lean wildly against the small red pane, blinking.
Mr. Koberman glanced up just then, saw Douglas, and raised his
cane-umbrella angrily, as if to strike. He ran swiftly across the red
lawn to the front door.
"Young man!" he cried, running up the stairs. "What were you doing?"
"Just looking," said Douglas, numbly.
"That's all, is it?" cried Mr. Koberman.
"Yes, sir. I look through all the glasses. All kinds of worlds. Blue
ones, red ones, yellow ones. All different."
"All kinds of worlds, is it!" Mr. Koberman glanced at the little panes
of glass, his face pale. He got hold of himself. He wiped his face with
a handkerchief and pretended to laugh. "Yes. All kinds of worlds. All
different." He walked to the door of his room. "Go right ahead; play,"
he said.
The door closed. The hall was empty. Mr. Koberman had gone in.
Douglas shrugged and found a new pane.
"Oh, everything's violet!"
Half an hour later, while playing in his sandbox behind the house,
Douglas heard the crash and the shattering tinkle. He leaped up.
A moment later, Grandma appeared on the back porch, the old razor strop
trembling in her hand.
"Douglas! I told you time and again never fling your basketball against
the house! Oh, I could just cry!"
"I been sitting right here," he protested.
"Come see what you've done, you nasty boy!"
The great colored window panes lay shattered in a rainbow chaos on the
upstairs landing. His basketball lay in the ruins.
Before he could even begin telling his innocence, Douglas was struck a
dozen stinging blows upon his rump. Wherever he landed, screaming, the
razor strop struck again.
Later, hiding his mind in the sandpile like an ostrich, Douglas nursed
his dreadful pains. He knew who'd thrown that basketball. A man with a
straw hat and a stiff umbrella and a cold, gray room. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
He dribbled tears. Just wait. Just wait.
He heard Grandma sweeping up the broken glass. She brought it out and
threw it in the trash bin. Blue, pink, yellow meteors of glass dropped
brightly down.
When she was gone, Douglas dragged himself, whimpering, over to save out
three pieces of the incredible glass. Mr. Koberman disliked the colored
windows. These--he clinked them in his fingers-- would be worth saving.
Grandfather arrived from his newspaper office each night, shortly ahead
of the other boarders, at five o'clock. When a slow, heavy tread filled
the hall, and a thick, mahogany cane thumped in the cane-rack, Douglas
ran to embrace the large stomach and sit on Grandpa's knee while he read
the evening paper.
"Hi, Grampa!"
"Hello, down there!"
"Grandma cut chickens again today. It's fun watching," said Douglas.
Grandpa kept reading. "That's twice this week, chickens. She's the
chickenist woman. You like to watch her cut 'em, eh? Coldblooded little
pepper! Ha!"
"I'm just curious."
"You are," rumbled Grandpa, scowling. "Remember that day when that young
lady was killed at the rail station? You just walked over and looked at
her, blood and all." He laughed. "Queer duck. Stay that way. Fear
nothing, ever in your life. I guess you get it from your father, him
being a military man and all, and you so close to him before you came
here to live last year." Grandpa returned to his paper.
A long pause. "Gramps?"
"Yes?"
"What if a man didn't have a heart or lungs or stomach but still walked
around, alive?"
"That," rumbled Gramps, "would be a miracle."
"I don't mean a--a miracle. I mean, what if he was all different inside?
Not like me."
"Well, he wouldn't be quite human then, would he, boy?"
"Guess not, Gramps. Gramps, you got a heart and lungs?"
Gramps chuckled. "Well, tell the truth, I don't know. Never seen them.
Never had an X-ray, never been to a doctor. Might as well be
potato-solid for all I know."
"Have I got a stomach?"
"You certainly have!" cried Grandma from the parlor entry. "'Cause I
feed it! And you've lungs, you scream loud enough to wake the crumblees.
And you've dirty hands, go wash them! Dinner's ready. Grandpa, come on.
Douglas, git!"
In the rush of boarders streaming downstairs, Grandpa, if he intended
questioning Douglas further about the weird conversation, lost his
opportunity. If dinner delayed an instant more, Grandma and the potatoes
would develop simultaneous lumps.
The boarders, laughing and talking at the table--Mr. Koberman silent and
sullen among them--were silenced when Grandfather cleared his throat. He
talked politics a few minutes and then shifted over into the intriguing
topic of the recent peculiar deaths in the town.
"It's enough to make an old newspaper editor prick up his ears," he
said, eying them all. "That young Miss Larson, lived across the ravine,
now. Found her dead three days ago for no reason, just funny kinds of
tattoos all over her, and a facial expression that would make Dante
cringe. And that other young lady, what was her name? Whitely? She
disappeared and never did come back."
"Them things happen alla time," said Mr. Britz, the garage mechanic,
chewing. "Ever peek inna Missing Peoples Bureau file? It's that long."
He illustrated. "Can't tell what happens to most of 'em."
"Anyone want more dressing?" Grandma ladled liberal portions from the
chicken's interior. Douglas watched, thinking about how that chicken had
had two kinds of guts--God-made and Manmade.
Well, how about three kinds of guts?
Eh?
Why not?
Conversation continued about the mysterious death of so-andso, and, oh,
yes, remember a week ago, Marion Barsumian died of heart failure, but
maybe that didn't connect up? or did it? you're crazy! forget it, why
talk about it at the dinner table? So.
"Never can tell," said Mr. Britz. "Maybe we got a vampire in town."
Mr. Koberman stopped eating.
"In the year 1927?" said Grandma. "A vampire? Oh go on, now."
"Sure," said Mr. Britz. "Kill 'em with silver bullets. Anything silver
for that matter. Vampires hate silver. I read it in a book somewhere,
once. Sure, I did."
Douglas looked at Mr. Koberman who ate with wooden knives and forks and
carried only new copper pennies in his pocket.
"It's poor judgment," said Grandpa, "to call anything by a name. We
don't know what a hobgoblin or a vampire or a troll is. Could be lots of
things. You can't heave them into categories with labels and say they'll
act one way or another. That'd be silly. They're people. People who do
things. Yes, that's the way to put it: people who do things."
"Excuse me," said Mr. Koberman, who got up and went out for his evening
walk to work.
The stars, the moon, the wind, the clock ticking, and the chiming of the
hours into dawn, the sun rising, and here it was another morning,
another day, and Mr. Koberman coming along the sidewalk from his night's
work. Douglas stood off like a small mechanism whirring and watching
with carefully microscopic eyes.
At noon, Grandma went to the store to buy groceries.
As was his custom every day when Grandma was gone, Douglas yelled
outside Mr. Koberman's door for a full three minutes. As usual, there
was no response. The silence was horrible.
He ran downstairs, got the pass-key, a silver fork, and the three pieces
of colored glass he had saved from the shattered window. He fitted the
key to the lock and swung the door slowly open.
The room was in half light, the shades drawn. Mr. Koberman lay atop his
bedcovers, in slumber clothes, breathing gently, up and down. He didn't
move. His face was motionless.
"Hello, Mr. Koberman!"
The colorless walls echoed the man's regular breathing.
"Mr. Koberman, hello!"
Bouncing a golf ball, Douglas advanced. He yelled. Still no answer. "Mr.
Koberman!"
Bending over Mr. Koberman, Douglas picked the tines of the silver fork
in the sleeping man's face.
Mr. Koberman winced. He twisted. He groaned bitterly.
Response. Good. Swell.
Douglas drew a piece of blue glass from his pocket. Looking through the
blue glass fragment he found himself in a blue room, in a blue world
different from the world he knew. As different as was the red world.
Blue furniture, blue bed, blue ceiling and walls, blue wooden eating
utensils atop the blue bureau, and the sullen dark blue of Mr.
Koberman's face and arms and his blue chest rising, falling. Also . . .
Mr. Koherman's eyes were wide, staring at him with a hungry darkness.
Douglas felt back, pulled the blue glass from his eyes.
Mr. Koberman's eyes were shut.
Blue glass again--open. Blue glass away--shut. Blue glass again--open.
Away--shut. Funny. Douglas experimented, trembling. Through the glass
the eyes seemed to peer hungrily, avidly through Mr. Koberman's closed
lids. Without the blue glass they seemed tightly shut.
But it was the rest of Mr. Koberman's body.
Mr. Koberman's bedclothes dissolved off him. The blue glass had
something to do with it. Or perhaps it was the clothes themselves, just
being on Mr. Koberman. Douglas cried out.
He was looking through the wall of Mr. Koberman's stomach, right inside
him!
Mr. Koberman was solid.
Or, nearly so, anyway.
There were strange shapes and sizes within him.
Douglas must have stood amazed for five minutes, thinking about the blue
worlds, the red worlds, the yellow worlds side by side, living together
like glass panes around the big white stair window. Side by side, the
colored panes, the different worlds; Mr. Koberman had said so himself.
So this was why the colored window had been broken.
"Mr. Koberman, wake up!"
No answer.
"Mr. Koberman, where do you work at night? Mr. Koberman, where do you
work?"
A little breeze stirred the blue window shade.
"In a red world or a green world or a yellow one, Mr. Koberman?"
Over everything was a blue glass silence.
"Wait there," said Douglas.
He walked down to the kitchen, pulled open the great squeaking drawer
and picked out the sharpest, biggest knife.
Very calmly he walked into the hall, climbed back up the stairs again,
opened the door to Mr. Koberman's room, went in, and closed it, holding
the sharp knife in one hand.
Grandma was busy fingering a piecrust into a pan when Douglas entered
the kitchen to place something on the table.
"Grandma, what's this?"
She glanced up briefly, over her glasses. "I don't know."
It was square, like a box, and elastic. It was bright orange in color.
It had four square tubes, colored blue, attached to it. It smelled
funny.
"Ever see anything like it, Grandma?"
"No."
"That's what I thought."
Douglas left it there, went from the kitchen. Five minutes later he
returned with something else. "How about this?"
He laid down a bright pink linked chain with a purple triangle at one
end.
"Don't bother me," said Grandma. "It's only a chain."
Next time he returned with two hands full. A ring, a square, a triangle,
a pyramid, a rectangle, and--other shapes. All of them were pliable,
resilient, and looked as if they were made of gelatin. "This isn't all,"
said Douglas, putting them down. "There's more where this came from."
Grandma said, "Yes, yes," in a far-off tone, very busy.
"You were wrong, Grandma."
"About what?"
"About all people being the same inside."
"Stop talking nonsense."
"Where's my piggy-bank?"
"On the mantel, where you left it."
"Thanks."
He tromped into the parlor, reached up for his piggy-bank.
Grandpa came home from the office at five.
"Grandpa, come upstairs."
"Sure, son. Why?"
"Something to show you. It's not nice; but it's interesting."
Grandpa chuckled, following his grandson's feet up to Mr. Koberman's
room.
"Grandma mustn't know about this; she wouldn't like it," said Douglas.
He pushed the door wide open. "There."
Grandfather gasped.
Douglas remembered the next few hours all the rest of his life. Standing
over Mr. Koberman's naked body, the coroner and his assistants. Grandma,
downstairs, asking somebody, "What's going on up there?" and Grandpa
saying, shakily, "I'll take Douglas away on a long vacation so he can
forget this whole ghastly affair. Ghastly, ghastly affair!"
Douglas said, "Why should it be bad? I don't see anything bad. I don't
feel bad."
The coroner shivered and said, "Koberman's dead, all right."
His assistant sweated. "Did you see those things in the pans of water
and in the wrapping paper?"
"Oh, my God, my God, yes, I saw them."
"Christ."
The coroner bent over Mr. Koberman's body again. "This better be kept
secret, boys. It wasn't murder. It was a mercy the boy acted. God knows
what might have happened if he hadn't."
"What was Koberman? A vampire? A monster?"
"Maybe. I don't know. Something--not human." The coroner moved his hands
deftly over the suture.
Douglas was proud of his work. He'd gone to much trouble. He had watched
Grandmother carefully and remembered. Needle and thread and all. All in
all, Mr. Koberman was as neat a job as any chicken ever popped into hell
by Grandma.
"I heard the boy say that Koberman lived even after all those things
were taken out of him." The coroner looked at the triangles and chains
and pyramids floating in the pans of water. "Kept on living. God."
"Did the boy say that?"
"He did."
"Then, what did kill Koberman?"
The coroner drew a few strands of sewing thread from their bedding.
"This. . . ." he said.
Sunlight blinked coldly off a half-revealed treasure trove; six dollars
and seventy cents' worth of silver dimes inside Mr. Koberman's chest.
"I think Douglas made a wise investment," said the coroner, sewing the
flesh back up over the "dressing" quickly.

There Was an Old Woman
"No, there's no lief arguin'. I got my mind fixed. Run along with your
silly wicker basket. Land, where you ever get notions like that? You
just skit out of here; don't bother me, I got my tattin' and knittin' to
do, and no never minds about tall, dark gentlemen with fangled ideas."
The tall, dark young man stood quietly, not moving. Aunt Tildy hurried
on with her talk.
"You heard what I said! If you got a mind to talk to me, well, you can
talk, but meantime I hope you don't mind if I pour myself coffee. There.
If you'd been more polite, I'd offer you some, but you jump in here high
and mighty and you never rapped on the door or nothin'. You think you
own the place."
Aunt Tildy fussed with her lap. "Now, you made me lose count! i'm makin'
myself a comforter. These winters get on mighty chill, and it ain't
fittin' for a lady with bones like rice-paper to be settin' in a drafty
old house without warmin' herself."
The tall, dark man sat down.
"That's an antique chair, so be gentle," warned Aunt Tildy. "Start
again, tell me things you got to tell, I'll listen respectful. But keep
your voice in your shoes and stop starin' at me with funny lights in
your eyes. Land, it gives me the collywobbles."
The bone-porcelain, flowered clock on the mantel finished chiming three.
Out in the hail, grouped around the wicker basket, four men waited,
quietly, as if they were frozen.
"Now, about that wicker basket," said Aunt Tildy. "It's past six feet
long, and by the look, it ain't laundry. And those four men you walked
in with, you don't need them to carry that basket-- why, it's light as
thistles. Eh?"
The dark young man was leaning forward on the antique chair. Something
in his face suggested the basket wouldn't be so light after a while.
"Pshaw," Aunt Tildy mused. "Where've I seen a wicker like that before?
Seems it was only a couple years ago. Seems to me-- oh! Now I remember.
It was when Mrs. Dwyer passed away next door."
Aunt Tildy set her coffee cup down, sternly. "So that's what you're up
to? I thought you were workin' to sell me somethin'. You just set there
until my little Emily trounces home from college this afternoon! I wrote
her a note last week. Not admittin', of course, that I wasn't feelin'
quite ripe and pert, but sort of hintin' I want to see her again, it's
been a good many weeks. Her livin' in New York and all. Almost like my
own daughter, Emily is.
"Now, she'll take care of you, young man. She'll shoo you out'n this
parlor so quick it'll--"
The dark young man looked at Aunt Tildy as if she were tired.
"No, I'm not!" she snapped.
He weaved back and forth on the chair, half-shutting his eyes, resting
himself. O, wouldn't she like to rest, too? he seemed to murmur. Rest,
rest, nice rest. . . ."
"Great sons of Goshen on the Gilberry Dike! I got a hunderd comforters,
two hundred sweaters and six hundred potholders in these fingers, no
matter they're skinny! You run off, come back when I'm done, maybe I'll
talk to you." Aunt Tildy shifted subjects. "Let me tell you about Emily,
my sweet, fair child."
Aunt Tildy nodded thoughtfully. Emily, with hair like yellow corn
tassels, just as soft and fine.
"I well remember the day her mother died, twenty years ago, leavin'
Emily to my house. That's why I'm mad at you and your wickers and such
goings-on. Who ever heard of people dyin' for any good cause? Young man,
I don't like it. Why, I remember--"
Aunt Tildy paused; a brief pain of memory touched her heart. Twenty-five
years back, her father's voice trembled in the late afternoon:
"Tildy," he whispered, "what you goin' to do in life? The way you act,
men don't walk much with you. You kiss and skedaddle. Why don't you
settle down, marry, raise children?"
"Papa," Tildy shouted back at him, "I like laughin' and playin' and
singin'. I'm not the marryin' kind. I can't find a man with my
philosophy, Papa."
"What 'philosophy's' that?"
"That death is ridiculous! It run off with Mama when we needed her most.
You call that intelligent?"
Papa's eyes got wet and gray and bleak. "You're always right, Tildy. But
what can we do? Death comes to everybody."
"Fight!" she cried. "Strike it below the belt! Don't believe in it!"
"Can't he done," said Papa sadly. "We all stand alone in the world."
"There's got to be a change sometime, Papa. I'm startin' my own
philosophy here and now! Why, it's silly people live a couple years and
are shoved like wet seeds in a hole; but nothin' sprouts. What good do
they do? Lay there a million years, helpin' no one. Most of them fine,
nice, neat people, or at least tryin'."
But Papa wasn't listening. He bleached out, faded away, like a photo
left lying in the sun. She tried to talk him out of it, hut he passed
on, anyway. She spun about and ran. She couldn't stay on once he was
cold, for his coldness denied her philosophy. She didn't attend his
burial. She didn't do anything but set up this antique shop on the front
of an old house and live alone for years, that is, until Emily came.
Tildy didn't want to take the girl in. Why? Because Emily believed in
dying. But her mother was an old friend and Tildy had promised help.
"Emily," continued Aunt Tildy, to the man in black, "was the first to
live in this house with me in all the years. I never got married. I
feared the idea of livin' with a man twenty-thirty years and then have
him up and die on me. It'd shake my convictions like a house of cards. I
shied off from the world. I screamed at people if they so much as
mentioned death."
The young man listened patiently, politely. Then he lifted his hand. He
seemed to know everything, with the dark, cold shining of his eyes,
before she opened her mouth. He knew about her and World War II, when
she shut off her radio forever and stopped the newspapers and beat a
man's head with an umbrella, driving him from her shop when he insisted
on describing the invasion beaches and the long, slow tides of the dead
drifting under the silent urgings of the moon.
Yes, the dark young man smiled from the antique rocker, he knew how Aunt
Tildy had stuck to her nice old phonograph records. Harry Lauder singing
"Roamin' in the Gloamin'," Madame Schumann-Heink and lullabies. With no
interruptions, no foreign calamities, murders, poisonings, auto
accidents, suicides. Music stayed the same each day, every day. So the
years ran, while Aunt Tildy tried to teach Emily her philosophy. But
Emily's mind was fixed on mortality. She respected Aunt Tildy's way of
thinking, however, and never mentioned--eternity.
All this the young man knew.
Aunt Tildy sniffed. "How do you know all those things? Well, if you
think you can talk me into that silly wicker basket, you're way off the
trestle. You lay hands on me, I'll spit right in your face!"
The young man smiled. Aunt Tildy sniffed again.
"Don't simper like a sick dog. I'm too old to be made love at. That's
all twisted dry, like an old tube of paint, and left behind in the
years."
There was a noise. The mantel clock chimed three. Aunt Tildy flashed her
eyes to it. Strange. Hadn't it chimed three o'clock just five minutes
ago? She liked the bone-white clock with gold angels dangling naked
about its numeraled face and its tone like cathedral bells, soft and far
away.
"Are you just goin' to sit there, young man?"
He was.
"Then, you won't mind if I take a little cat nap. Now, don't you stir
off that chair. Don't come creepin' around me. Just goin' to close my
eyes for a spell. That's right. That's right. . . ."
Nice and quiet and restful time of day. Silence. Just the clock ticking
away, busy as termites in wood. Just the old room smelling of polished
mahogany and oiled leather in the Morris chair, and hooks sitting stiff
on the shelves. So nice. Nice. .
"You aren't gettin' up from the chair, are you, mister? Better not. I
got one eye open for you. Yes, indeed I have. Yes, I have. Oh. Ah,
hmmmm."
So feathery. So drowsy. So deep. Under water, almost. Oh, so nice.
Who's that movin' around in the dark with my eyes closed? Who's that
kissin' my cheek? You, Emily? No. No. Guess it was my thoughts.
Onlydreamin'. Land, yes, that's it. Driftin' off, off, off.
AH? WHAT SAY? OH!
"Wait while I put on my glasses. There!"
The clock chimed three again. Shame, old clock, now, shame. Have to have
you fixed.
The young man in the dark suit stood near the door. Aunt Tildy nodded.
"You leavin' so soon, young man? Had to give up, didn't you? Couldn't
convince me; no, I'm mule-stubborn. Never get me free of this house, so
don't bother comin' back to try!"
The young man bowed with slow dignity.
He had no intention of coming again, ever.
"Fine," declared Aunt Tildy. "I always told Papa I'd win! Why, I'll knit
in this window the next thousand years. They'll have to chew the boards
down around me to get me out."
The dark young man twinkled his eyes.
"Quit lookin' like the cat that ate the bird," cried Aunt Tildy. "Get
that old fool wicker away!"
The four men trod heavily out the front door. Tildy studied the way they
handled an empty basket, yet staggered with its weight.
"Here, now!" She rose in tremulous indignation. "Did you steal my
antiques? My books? The clocks? What you got in that wicker?"
The dark young man whistled jauntily, turning his back to her, walking
along behind the four staggering men. At the door he pointed to the
wicker, offered its lid to Aunt Tildy. In pantomime he wondered if she
would like to open it and gaze inside.
"Curious? Me? Pshaw, no. Get out!" cried Aunt Tildy.
The dark young man tapped a hat onto his head, saluted her crisply.
"Good-by!" Aunt Tildy slammed the door.
There, there. That was better. Gone. Darned fool men with their maggoty
ideas. No never minds about the wicker. If they stole something, she
didn't care, long as they let her alone.
"Look." Aunt Tildy smiled. "Here comes Emily, home from college. About
time. Lovely girl. See how she walks. But, land, she looks pale and
funny today, walkin' so slow. I wonder why. Looks worried, she does.
Poor girl. I'll just fix some coffee and a tray of cakes."
Emily tapped up the front steps. Aunt Tildy, rustling around, could hear
the slow, deliberate steps. What ailed the girl? Didn't sound like she
had no more spunk than a flue-lizard. The front door swung wide. Emily
stood in the hall, holding to the brass doorknob.
"Emily?" called Aunt Tildy.
Emily shuffled into the parlor, head down.
"Emily! I been waitin' for you! There was the darndest fool men here
with a wicker. Tryin' to sell me something I didn't want. Glad you're
home. Makes it right cozy--"
Aunt Tildy realized that for a full minute Emily had been staring.
"Emily, what's wrong? Stop starin'. Here, I'll bring you a cup of
coffee. There! -
"Emily, why you backin' away from me?
"Emily, stop screamin', child. Don't scream, Emily! Don't! You keep
screamin' that way, you go crazy. Emily, get up off the floor, get away
from that wall! Emily! Stop cringin', child. I won't hurt you!
"Land, if it ain't one thing it's another.
"Emily, what's wrong, child . . ."
Emily groaned through her hands over her face.
"Child, child," whispered Aunt Tildy. "Here, sip this water. Sip it,
Emily, that's it."
Emily widened her eyes, saw something, then shut them, quivering,
pulling into herself. "Aunt Tildy, Aunt Tildy, Aunt--"
"Stop that!" Tildy slapped her. "What ails you?"
Emily forced herself to look up again.
She thrust her fingers out. They vanished inside Aunt Tildy.
"What fool notion!" cried Tildy. "Take your hand away! Take it, I say!"
Emily dropped aside, jerked her head, the golden hair shaking into shiny
temblors. "You're not here, Aunt Tildy. I'm dreaming. You're dead!"
"Hush, baby."
"You can't be here."
"Land of Goshen, Emily--"
She took Emily's hand. It passed clean through her. Instantly, Aunt
Tildy raised straight up, stomping her foot.
"Why, why!" she cried angrily. "That--fibber! That sneakthief!" Her thin
hands knotted to wiry, hard, pale fists. "That dark, dark fiend; He
stole it! He toted it away, he did, oh he did, he did! Why, I--" Wrath
steamed in her. Her pale blue eyes were fire. She sputtered into an
indignant silence. Then she turned to Emily. "Child, get up! I need
you!"
Emily lay, quivering.
"Part of me's here!" declared Aunt Tildy. "By the Lord Harry, what's
left will have to do, for a bit. Fetch my bonnet!"
Emily confessed. "I'm scared."
"Certainly, oh, certainly not of me?"
"Yes."
"Why, I'm no spook! You known me most of your life! Now's no time to
snivel-sop. Fetch up on your heels or I'll slap you crack across your
nose!"
Emily rose, in sobs, stood like something cornered, trying to decide
which direction to bolt in.
"Where's your car, Emily?"
"Down at the garage--ma'am."
"Good!" Aunt Tildy hustled her through the front door. "Now--" Her sharp
eyes poked up and down the streets. "Which way's the mortuary?"
Emily held to the step rail, fumbling down. "What're you going to do,
Aunt Tildy?"
"Do?" cried Aunt Tildy, tottering after her, jowls shaking in a thin,
pale fury. "Why, get my body back, of course! Get my body back! Go on!"
The car roared, Emily clenched to the steering wheel, staring straight
ahead at the curved, rain-wet streets. Aunt Tildy shook her parasol.
"Hurry, child, hurry, before they squirt juices in my body and dice and
cube it the way them persnickety morticians have a habit of doin'. They
cut and sew it so it ain't no good to no one!"
"Oh, Auntie, Auntie, let me go, don't make me drive! It won't do any
good, no good at all," sighed the girl.
"Here we are." Emily pulled to the curb, and collapsed over the wheel,
but Aunt Tildy had already popped from the car and trotted with mincing
skirt up the mortuary drive, around behind to where the shiny black
hearse was unloading a wicker basket.
"You!" she directed her attack at one of the four men with the wicker.
"Put that down!"
The four men looked up.
One said, "Step aside, lady. We're doing our job."
"That's my body tucked in there!" She brandished the parasol.
"That I wouldn't know anything about," said a second man. "Please don't
block traffic, madam. This thing is heavy."
"Sir!" she cried, wounded. "I'll have you know I weigh only one hundred
and ten pounds."
He looked at her casually. "I'm not interested in your heft, lady. I'm
due home for supper. My wife'll kill me if I'm late."
The four of them moved on, Aunt Tildy in pursuit, down a hall, into a
preparations room.
A white-smocked man awaited the wicker's arrival with a rather pleased
smile on his long, eagerlooking face. Aunt Tildy didn't care for the
avidity of that face, or the entire personality of the man. The basket
was deposited, the four men wandered off.
The man in the white smock glanced at Auntie and said:
"Madam, this is no fit place for a gentlewoman."
"Well," she said, gratified, "glad you feel that way. It's exactly what
I tried to tell that dark-clothed young man!"
The mortician puzzled. "What dark-clothed young man is that?"
"The one that came puddlin' around my house, that's who."
"No one of that description works for us."
"No matter. As you just so intelligently stated, this is no place for a
lady. I don't want me here. I want me home cookin' ham for Sunday
visitors, it's near Easter. I got Emily to feed, sweaters to knit,
clocks to wind--"
"You are quite philosophical, and philanthropical, no doubt of it,
madam, but I have work. A body has arrived." This last, he said with
apparent relish, and a winnowing of his knives, tubes, jars, and
instruments.
Tildy bristled. "You put so much as a fingerprint on that body, and
I'll--"
He laid her aside like a little old moth. "George," he called with a
suave gentleness, "escort this lady out, please."
Aunt Tildy glared at the approaching George.
"Show me your backside, goin' the other way!"
George took her wrists. "This way, please."
Tildy extricated herself. Easily. Her flesh sort of--slipped. It even
amazed Tildy. Such an unexpected talent to develop at this late day.
"See?" she said, pleased with her ability. "You can't budge me. I want
my body back!"
The mortician opened the wicker lid casually. Then, in a recurrent
series of scrutinies he realized the body inside was . . . it seemed . .
. could it be? . . . maybe. . . yes. . . no.. . no. . . it just couldn't
be, but . . . "Ah," he exhaled, abruptly. He turned. His eyes were wide,
then they narrowed.
"Madam," he said, cautiously. "This lady here is--a--relative-- of
yours?"
"A very dear relation. Be careful of her."
"A sister, perhaps?" He grasped at a straw of dwindling logic,
hopefully.
"No, you fool. Me, do you hear? Me!"
The mortician considered the idea. "No," he said. "Things like this
don't happen." He fumbled with his tools. "George, get help from the
others. I can't work with a crank present."
The four men returned. Aunt Tildy crossed her arms in defiance. "Won't
budge!" she cried, as she was moved like a pawn on a chessboard, from
preparations room to slumber room, to hall, to waiting chamber, to
funeral parlor, where she threw herself down on a chair in the very
center of the vestibule. There were pews going back into gray silence,
and a smell of flowers.
"Please, ma'am," said one of the men. "That's where the body rests for
the service tomorrow."
"I'm sittin' right plumb here until I get what I want."
She sat, pale fingers fussing with the lace at her throat, jaw set, one
high-buttoned shoe tapping with irritation. If a man got in whopping
distance, she gave him a parasol whop. And when they touched her, now,
she remembered to--slip away.
Mr. Carrington, Mortuary President, heard the disturbance in his office
and came toddling down the aisle to investigate. "Here, here," he
whispered to everyone, finger to mouth. "More respect, more respect.
What is this? Oh, madam, may I help you?"
She looked him up and down. "You may."
"How may I be of service, please?"
"Go in that room back there," directed Aunt Tildy.
"Yee--ess."
"And tell that eager young investigator to quit fiddlin' with my body.
I'm a maiden lady. My moles, birthmarks, scars, and other bric-a-brac,
including the turn of my ankle, are my own secret. I don't want him
pryin' and probin', cuttin', or hurtin' it any way."
This was vague to Mr. Carrington, who hadn't correlated bodies yet. He
looked at her in blank helplessness.
"He's got me in there on his table, like a pigeon ready to be drawn and
stuffed!" she told him.
Mr. Carrington hustled off to check. After fifteen minutes of waiting
silence and horrified arguing, comparing notes with the mortician behind
closed doors, Carrington returned, three shades whiter.
Carrington dropped his glasses, picked them up. "You're making it
difficult for us."
"I am?" raged Aunt Tildy. "Saint Vitus in the mornin'! Looky here,
Mister Blood and Bones or whatever, you tell that--"
"We're already draining the blood from the--"
"What!"
"Yes, yes, I assure you, yes. So, you just go away, now; there's nothing
to be done." He laughed nervously. "Our mortician is also performing a
brief autopsy to determine cause of death."
Auntie jumped to her feet, burning.
"He can't do that! Only coroners are allowed to do that!"
"Well, we sometimes allow a little--"
"March straight in and tell that Cut-'em-up to pump all that fine New
England blue blood right back into that fine-skinned body, and if he's
taken anything out, for him to attach it back in so it'll function
proper, and then turn that body, fresh as paint, into my keepin'. You
hear!"
"There's nothing I can do. Nothing."
"Tell you what. I'm settin' here for the next two hundred years. You
listenin'? And every time any of your customers come by, I'll spit
ectoplasm right squirt up their nostrils!"
Carrington groped that thought around his weakening mind and emitted a
groan. "You'd ruin our business. You wouldn't do that."
Auntie smiled. "Wouldn't I?"
Carrington ran up the dark aisle. In the distance you could hear him
dialing a phone over and over again. Half an hour later cars roared up
in front of the mortuary. Three vice-presidents of the mortuary came
down the aisle with their hysterical president.
"What seems to be the trouble?"
Auntie told them with a few well-chosen infernalities.
They held a conference, meanwhile notifying the mortician to discontinue
his homework, at least until such time as an agreement was reached. . .
. The mortician walked from his chamber and stood smiling amiably,
smoking a big black cigar.
Auntie stared at the cigar.
"Where'd you put the ashes?" she cried, in horror.
The mortician only grinned imperturbably and puffed.
The conference broke up.
"Madam, in all fairness, you wouldn't force us out on the street to
continue our services, would you?"
Auntie scanned the vultures. "Oh, I wouldn't mind at all."
Carrington wiped sweat from his jowls. "You can have your body back."
"Ha!" shouted Auntie. Then, with caution: "Intact?"
"Intact."
"No formaldehyde?"
"No formaldehyde."
"Blood in it?"
"Blood, my God, yes, blood, if only you'll take it and go!"
A prim nod. "Fair enough. Fix 'er up. It's a deal."
Carrington snapped his fingers at the mortician. "Don't stand there, you
mental incompetent. Fix it up!"
"And be careful with that cigar!" said the old woman.
"Easy, easy," said Aunt Tildy. "Put the wicker on the floor where I can
step in it."
She didn't look at the body much. Her only comment was,
"Natural-lookin'." She let herself fall back into the wicker.
A biting sensation of arctic coldness gripped her, followed by an
unlikely nausea and a giddy whorling. She was two drops of matter
fusing, water trying to seep into concrete. Slow to do. Hard. Like a
butterfly trying to squirm back into a discarded husk of flinty
chrysalis!
The vice-presidents watched Aunt Tildy with apprehension. Mr. Carrington
wrung his fingers and tried to assist with boosting and pushing moves of
his hands and arms. The mortician, frankly skeptical, watched with idle,
amused eyes.
Seeping into cold, long granite. Seeping into a frozen and ancient
statue. Squeezing all the way.
"Come alive, damn ye!" shouted Aunt Tildy to herself. "Raise up a bit."
The body half-rose, rustling in the dry wicker.
"Fold your legs, woman!"
The body grabbled up, blindly groping.
"See!" shouted Aunt Tildy.
Light entered the webbed blind eyes.
"Feel!" urged Aunt Tildy.
The body felt the warmth of the room, the sudden reality of the
preparations table on which to lean, panting.
"Move!"
The body took a creaking, slow step.
"Hear!" she snapped.
The noises of the place came into the dull ears. The harsh, expectant
breath of the mortician, shaken; the whimpering Mr. Carrington; her own
crackling voice.
"Walk!" she said.
The body walked.
"Think!" she said.
The old brain thought.
"Speak!" she said.
The body spoke, bowing to the morticians:
"Much obliged. Thank you."
"Now," she said, finally, "cry!"
And she began to cry tears of utter happiness.
And now, any afternoon about four, if you want to visit Aunt Tildy, you
just walk around to her antique shop and rap. There's a big, black
funeral wreath on the door. Don't mind that! Aunt Tildy left it there;
that's how her humor runs. You rap on the door. It's double-barred and
triple-locked, and when you rap her voice shrills out at you.
"Is that the man in black?"
And you laugh and say no, no, it's only me, Aunt Tildy.
And she laughs and says, "Come on in, quick!" and she whips the door
open and slams it shut behind, so no man in black can ever slip in with
you. Then she sets you down and pours your coffee and shows you her
latest knitted sweater. She's not as fast as she used to be, and can't
see as good, but she gets on.
"And if you're 'specially good," Aunt Tildy declares, setting her coffee
cup to one side, "I'll give you a little treat."
"What's that?" visitors will ask.
"This," says Auntie, pleased with her little uniqueness, her little
joke.
Then with modest moves of her fingers she will unfasten the white lace
at her neck and chest and for a brief moment show what lies beneath.
The long blue scar where the autopsy was neatly sewn together.
"Not bad sewin' for a man," she allows. "Oh, some more coffee? There!"

The Cistern
It was an afternoon of rain, and lamps lighted against the gray. For a
long while the two sisters had been in the dining-room. One of them,
Juliet, embroidered tablecloths; the younger, Anna, sat quietly on the
window seat, staring out at the dark street and the dark sky.
Anna kept her brow pressed against the pane, but her lips moved and
after reflecting a long moment, she said, "I never thought of that
before."
"Of what?" asked Juliet.
"It just came to me. There's actually a city under a city. A dead city,
right here, right under our feet."
Juliet poked her needle in and out of the white cloth. "Come away from
the window. That rain's done something to you."
"No, really. Didn't you ever think of the cisterns before? They're all
through the town, there's one for every street, and you can walk in them
without bumping your head, and they go everywhere and finally go down to
the sea," said Anna, fascinated with the rain on the asphalt pavement
out there and the rain falling from the sky and vanishing down the
gratings at each corner of the distant intersection. "Wouldn't you like
to live in a cistern?"
"I would not!"
"But wouldn't it be fun--I mean, very secret? To live in the cistern and
peek up at people through the slots and see them and them not see you?
Like when you were a child and played hide-andseek and nobody found you,
and there you were in their midst all the time, all sheltered and hidden
and warm and excited. I'd like that. That's what it must be like to live
in the cistern."
Juliet looked slowly up from her work. "You are my sister, aren't you,
Anna? You were born, weren't you? Sometimes, the way you talk, I think
Mother found you under a tree one day and brought you home and planted
you in a pot and grew you to this size and there you are, and you'll
never change."
Anna didn't reply, so Juliet went back to her needle. There was no color
in the room; neither of the two sisters added any color to it. Anna held
her head to the window for five minutes. Then she looked way off into
the distance and said, "I guess you'd call it a dream. While I've been
here, the last hour, I mean. Thinking. Yes, Juliet, it was a dream."
Now it was Juliet's turn not to answer.
Anna whispered. "All this water put me to sleep a while, I guess, and
then I began to think about the rain and where it came from and where it
went and how it went down those little slots in the curb, and then I
thought about deep under, and suddenly there they were. A man. . . and a
woman. Down in that cistern, under the road."
"What would they be doing there?" asked Juliet.
Anna said, "Must they have a reason?"
"No, not if they're insane, no," said Juliet. "In that case no reasons
are necessary. There they are in their cistern, and let them stay."
"But they aren't just in the cistern," said Anna, knowingly, her head to
one side, her eyes moving under the half-down lids. "No, they're in
love, these two."
"For heaven's sake," said Juliet, "did love make them crawl down there?"
"No, they've been there for years and years," said Anna.
"You can't tell me they've been in that cistern for years, living
together," protested Juliet.
"Did I say they were alive?" asked Anna, surprised. "Oh, hut no. They're
dead."
The rain scrambled in wild, pushing pellets down the window. Drops came
and joined with others and made streaks.
"Oh," said Juliet.
"Yes," said Anna, pleasantly. "Dead. He's dead and she's dead." This
seemed to satisfy her; it was a nice discovery, and she was proud of it.
"He looks like a very lonely man who never traveled in all his life."
"How do you know?"
"He looks like the kind of man who never traveled but wanted to. You
know by his eyes."
"You know what he looks like, then?"
"Yes. Very ill and very handsome. You know how it is with a man made
handsome by illness? Illness brings out the bones in the face."
"And he's dead?" asked the older sister.
"For five years." Anna talked softly, with her eyelids rising and
falling, as if she were about to tell a long story and knew it and
wanted to work into it slowly, and then faster and then faster, until
the very momentum of the story would carry her on, with her eyes wide
and her lips parted. But now it was slowly, with only a slight fever to
the telling. "Five years ago this man was walking along a street and he
knew he'd been walking the same street on many nights and he'd go on
walking it, so he came to a manhole cover, one of those big iron waffles
in the center of the street, and he heard the river rushing under his
feet, under the metal cover, rushing toward the sea." Anna put out her
right hand. "And he bent slowly and lifted up the cistern lid and looked
down at the rushing foam and the water, and he thought of someone he
wanted to love and couldn't, and then he swung himself onto the iron
rungs and walked down them until he was all gone. . . ."
"And what about her?" asked Juliet, busy. "When'd she die?"
"I'm not sure. She's new. She's just dead, now. But she is dead.
Beautifully, beautifully dead." Anna admired the image she had in her
mind. "It takes death to make a woman really beautiful, and it takes
death by drowning to make her most beautiful of all. Then all the
stiffness is taken out of her, and her hair hangs up on the water like a
drift of smoke." She nodded her head, amusedly. "All the schools and
etiquettes and teachings in the world can't make a woman move with this
dreamy ease, supple and ripply and fine." Anna tried to show how fine,
how ripply, how graceful, with her broad, coarse hand.
"He'd been waiting for her, for five years. But she hadn't known where
he was till now. So there they are, and will be, from now on. . . . In
the rainy season they'll live. But in the dry seasons--that's sometimes
months--they'll have long rest periods, they'll lie in little hidden
niches, like those Japanese water flowers, all dry and compact and old
and quiet."
Juliet got up and turned on yet another little lamp in the corner of the
dining-room. "I wish you wouldn't talk about it."
Anna laughed. "But let me tell you about how it starts, how they come
back to life. I've got it all worked out." She bent forward, held onto
her knees, staring at the street and the rain and the cistern mouths.
"There they are, down under, dry and quiet, and up above the sky gets
electrical and powdery." She threw back her dull, graying hair with one
hand. "At first all the upper world is pellets. Then there's lightning
and then thunder and the dry season is over, and the little pellets run
along the gutters and get big and fall into the drains. They take gum
wrappers and theatre tickets with them, and bus transfers!"
"Come away from that window, now."
Anna made a square with her hands and imagined things. "I know just what
it's like under the pavement, in the big square cistern. It's huge. It's
all empty from the weeks with nothing but sunshine. It echoes if you
talk. The only sound you can hear standing down there is an auto passing
above. Far up above. The whole cistern is like a dry, hollow camel bone
in a desert, waiting."
She lifted her hand, pointing, as if she herself were down in the
cistern, waiting. "Now, a little trickle. It comes down on the floor.
It's like something was hurt and bleeding up in the outer world. There's
some thunder! Or was it a truck going by?"
She spoke a little more rapidly now, but held her body relaxed against
the window, breathing out, and in the next words: "It seeps down. Then,
into all the other hollows come other seepages. Little twines and
snakes. Tobacco-stained water. Then it moves. It joins others. It makes
snakes and then one big constrictor which rolls along on the flat,
papered floor. From everywhere, from the north and south, from other
streets, other streams come and they join and make one hissing and
shining coil. And the water writhes into those two little dry niches I
told you about. It rises slowly around those two, the man and the woman,
lying there like Japanese flowers."
She clasped her hands, slowly, working finger into finger, interlacing.
"The water soaks into them. First, it lifts the woman's hand. In a
little move. Her hand's the only live part of her. Then her arm lifts
and one foot. And her hair. . ." she touched her own hair as it hung
about her shoulders ". . . unloosens and opens out like a flower in the
water. Her shut eyelids are blue. . . ."
The room got darker, Juliet sewed on, and Anna talked and told all she
saw in her mind. She told how the water rose and took the woman with it,
unfolding her out and loosening her and standing her full upright in the
cistern. "The water is interested in the woman, and she lets it have its
way. After a long time of lying still, she's ready to live again, any
life the water wants her to have."
Somewhere else, the man stood up in the water also. And Anna told of
that, and how the water carried him slowly, drifting, and her, drifting,
until they met each other. "The water opens their eyes. Now they can see
but not see each other. They circle, not touching yet." Anna made a
little move of her head, eyes closed. "They watch each other. They glow
with some kind of phosphorus. They smile. . . . They--touch hands."
At last Juliet, stiffening, put down her sewing and stared at her
sister, across the gray, rain-silent room.
"Anna!"
"The tide--makes them touch. The tide comes and puts them together. It's
a perfect kind of love, with no ego to it, only two bodies, moved by
water, which makes it clean and all right. It's not wicked, this way."
"It's bad you're saying it!" cried her sister.
"No, it's all right," insisted Anna, turning for an instant. "They're
not thinking, are they? They're just so deep down and quiet and not
caring."
She took her right hand and held it over her left hand very slowly and
gently, quavering and interweaving them. The rainy window, with the pale
spring light penetrating, put a movement of light and running water on
her fingers, made them seem submerged, fathoms deep in gray water,
running one about the other as she finished her little dream:
"Him, tall and quiet, his hands open." She showed with a gesture how
tall and how easy he was in the water. "Her, small and quiet and
relaxed." She looked at her sister, leaving her hands just that way.
"They're dead, with no place to go, and no one to tell them. So there
they are, with nothing applying to them and no worries, very secret and
hidden under the earth in the cistern waters. They touch their hands and
lips and when they come into a cross-street outlet of the cistern, the
tide rushes them together. Then, later . . ." she disengaged her hands.
. . "maybe they travel together, hand in hand, bobbling and floating
down all the streets, doing little crazy upright dances when they're
caught in sudden swirls." She whirled her hands about, a drenching of
rain spatted the window. "And they go down to the sea, all across the
town, past cross drain and cross drain, street and street. Genesee
Avenue, Crenshaw, Edmond Place, Washington, Motor City, Ocean Side and
then the ocean. They go anywhere the water wants them, all over the
earth, and come back later to the cistern inlet and float back up under
the town, under a dozen tobacco shops and four dozen liquor stores, and
six dozen groceries and ten theatres, a rail junction, Highway 101,
under the walking feet of thirty thousand people who don't even know or
think of the cistern."
Anna's voice drifted and dreamed and grew quiet again.
"And then--the day passes and the thunder goes away up on the street.
The rain stops. The rain season's over. The tunnels drip and stop. The
tide goes down." She seemed disappointed, sad it was over. "The river
runs out to the ocean. The man and woman feel the water leave them
slowly to the floor. They settle." She lowered her hands in little
bobblings to her lap, watching them fixedly, longingly. "Their feet lose
the life the water has given them from outside. Now the water lays them
down, side by side, and drains away, and the tunnels are drying. And
there they lie. Up above, in the world, the sun comes out. There they
lie, in the darkness, sleeping, until the next time. Until the next
rain."
Her hands were now upon her lap, palms up and open. "Nice man, nice
woman," she murmured. She bowed her head over them and shut her eyes
tight.
Suddenly Anna sat up and glared at her sister. "Do you know who the man
is?" she shouted, bitterly.
Juliet did not reply; she had watched, stricken, for the past five
minutes while this thing went on. Her mouth was twisted and pale. Anna
almost screamed:
"The man is Frank, that's who he is! And I'm the woman!"
"Anna!"
"Yes, it's Frank, down there!"
"But Frank's been gone for years, and certainly not down there, Anna!"
Now, Anna was talking to nobody, and to everybody, to Juliet, to the
window, the wall, the street. "Poor Frank," she cried. "I know that's
where he went. He couldn't stay anywhere in the world. His mother
spoiled him for all the world! So he saw the cistern and saw how secret
and fine it was. Oh, poor Frank. And poor Anna, poor me, with only a
sister. Oh, Julie, why didn't I hold onto Frank when he was here? Why
didn't I fight to win him from his mother?"
"Stop it, this minute, do you hear, this minute!"
Anna slumped down into the corner, by the window, one hand up on it, and
wept silently. A few minutes later she heard her sister say, "Are you
finished?"
"What?"
"If you're done, come help me finish this, I'll be forever at it."
Anna raised her head and glided over to her sister. "What do you want me
to do?" she sighed.
"This and this," said Juliet, showing her.
"All right," said Anna, and took it and sat by the window looking at the
rain, moving her hands with the needle and thread, but watching how dark
the street was now, and the room, and how hard it was to see the round
metal top of the cistern now--there were just little midnight gleams and
glitters out there in the black black late afternoon. Lightning crackled
over the sky in a web.
Half an hour passed. Juliet drowsed in her chair across the room,
removed her glasses, placed them down with her work and for a moment
rested her head back and dozed. Perhaps thirty seconds later she heard
the front door open violently, heard the wind come in, heard the
footsteps run down the walk, turn, and hurry along the black street.
"What?" asked Juliet, sitting up, fumbling for her glasses. "Who's
there? Anna, did someone come in the door?" She stared at the empty
window seat where Anna had been. "Anna!" she cried. She sprang up and
ran out into the hall.
The front door stood open, rain fell through it in a fine mist.
"She's only gone out for a moment," said Juliet, standing there, trying
to peer into the wet blackness. "She'll be right back. Won't you be
right back, Anna dear? Anna, answer me, you will be right back, won't
you, sister?"
Outside, the cistern lid rose and slammed down.
The rain whispered on the street and fell upon the closed lid all the
rest of the night.

Homecoming
Here they come," said Cecy, lying there flat in her bed.
"Where are they?" cried Timothy from the doorway.
"Some of them are over Europe, some over Asia, some of them over the
Islands, some over South America!" said Cecy, her eyes closed, the
lashes long, brown, and quivering.
Timothy came forward upon the bare plankings of the upstairs room. "Who
are they?"
"Uncle Einar and Uncle Fry, and there's Cousin William, and I see Frulda
and Helgar and Aunt Morgiana and Cousin Vivian, and I see Uncle Johann!
They're all coming fast!"
"Are they up in the sky?" cried Timothy, his little gray eyes flashing.
Standing by the bed, he looked no more than his fourteen years. The wind
blew outside, the house was dark and lit only by starlight.
"They're coming through the air and traveling along the ground, in many
forms," said Cecy, in her sleeping. She did not move on the bed; she
thought inward on herself and told what she saw. "I see a wolflike thing
coming over a dark river--at the shallows--just above a waterfall, the
starlight shining up his pelt. I see a brown oak leaf blowing far up in
the sky. I see a small bat flying. I see many other things, running
through the forest trees and slipping through the highest branches; and
they're all coming this way!"
"Will they be here by tomorrow night?" Timothy clutched the bedclothes.
The spider on his lapel swung like a black pendulum, excitedly dancing.
He leaned over his sister. "Will they all be here in time for the
Homecoming?"
"Yes, yes, Timothy, yes," sighed Cecy. She stiffened. "Ask no more of
me. Go away now. Let me travel in the places I like best."
"Thanks, Cecy," he said. Out in the hail, he ran to his room. He
hurriedly made his bed. He had just awakened a few minutes ago, at
sunset, and as the first stars had risen, he had gone to let his
excitement about the party run with Cecy. Now she slept so quietly there
was not a sound. The spider hung on a silvery lasso about Timothy's
slender neck as he washed his face. "Just think, Spid, tomorrow night is
Allhallows Eve!"
He lifted his face and looked into the mirror. His was the only mirror
allowed in the house. It was his mother's concession to his illness. Oh,
if only he were not so afflicted! He opened his mouth, surveyed the
poor, inadequate teeth nature had given him. No more than so many corn
kernels--round, soft and pale in his jaws. Some of the high spirit died
in him.
It was now totally dark and he lit a candle to see by. He felt
exhausted. This past week the whole family had lived in the fashion of
the old country. Sleeping by day, rousing at sunset to move about. There
were blue hollows under his eyes. "Spid, I'm no good," he said, quietly,
to the little creature. "I can't even get used to sleeping days like the
others."
He took up the candleholder. Oh, to have strong teeth, with incisors
like steel spikes. Or strong hands, even, or a strong mind. Even to have
the power to send one's mind out, free, as Cecy did. But, no, he was the
imperfect one, the sick one. He was even--he shivered and drew the
candle flame closer--afraid of the dark. His brothers snorted at him.
Bion and Leonard and Sam. They laughed at him because he slept in a bed.
With Cecy it was different; her bed was part of her comfort for the
composure necessary to send her mind abroad to hunt. But Timothy, did he
sleep in the wonderful polished boxes like the others? He did not!
Mother let him have his own bed, his own room, his own mirror. No wonder
the family skirted him like a holy man's crucifix. If only the wings
would sprout from his shoulder blades. He bared his back, stared at it.
And sighed again. No chance. Never.
Downstairs were exciting and mysterious sounds, the slithering black
crape going up in all the halls and on the ceilings and doors. The
sputter of burning black tapers in the banistered stair well. Mother's
voice, high and firm. Father's voice, echoing from the damp cellar. Bion
walking from outside the old country house lugging vast two-gallon jugs.
"I've just got to go to the party, Spid," said Timothy. The spider
whirled at the end of its silk, and Timothy felt alone. He would polish
cases, fetch toadstools and spiders, hang crape, but when the party
started he'd be ignored. The less seen or said of the imperfect son the
better.
All through the house below, Laura ran.
"The Homecoming!" she shouted gaily. "The Homecoming!" Her footsteps
everywhere at once.
Timothy passed Cecy's room again, and she was sleeping quietly. Once a
month she went below-stairs. Always she stayed in bed. Lovely Cecy. He
felt like asking her, "Where are you now, Cecy? And in who? And what's
happening? Are you beyond the hills? And what goes on there?" But he
went on to Ellen's room instead.
Ellen sat at her desk, sorting out many kinds of blonde, red and black
hair and little scimitars of fingernails gathered from her manicurist
job at the Mellin Village beauty parlor fifteen miles over. A sturdy
mahogany case lay in one corner with her name on it.
"Go away," she said, not even looking at him. "I can't work with you
gawking."
"Allhallows Eve, Ellen; just think!" he said, trying to be friendly.
"Hunh!" She put some fingernail clippings in a small white sack, labeled
them. "What can it mean to you? What do you know of it? It'll scare hell
out of you. Go back to bed."
His cheeks burned. "I'm needed to polish and work and help serve."
"If you don't go, you'll find a dozen raw oysters in your bed tomorrow,"
said Ellen, matter-of-factiy. "Good-by, Timothy."
In his anger, rushing downstairs, he bumped into Laura.
"Watch where you're going!" she shrieked from clenched teeth.
She swept away. He ran to the open cellar door, smelled the channel of
moist earthy air rising from below. "Father?"
"It's about time," Father shouted up the steps. "Hurry down, or they'll
be here before we're ready!"
Timothy hesitated only long enough to hear the million other sounds in
the house. Brothers came and went like trains in a station, talking and
arguing. If you stood in one spot long enough the entire household
passed with their pale hands full of things. Leonard with his little
black medical case, Samuel with his large, dusty ebon bound book under
his arm, bearing more black crape, and Bion excursioning to the car
outside and bringing in many more gallons of liquid.
Father stopped polishing to give Timothy a rag and a scowl. He thumped
the huge mahogany box. "Come on, shine this up, so we can start on
another. Sleep your life away."
While waxing the surface, Timothy looked inside.
"Uncle Einar's a big man, isn't he, Papa?"
"Unh."
"How big is he?"
"The size of the box'll tell you."
"I was only asking. Seven feet tall?"
"You talk a lot."
About nine o'clock Timothy went out into the October weather. For two
hours in the now-warm, now-cold wind he walked the meadows collecting
toadstools and spiders. His heart began to beat with anticipation again.
How many relatives had Mother said would come? Seventy? One hundred? He
passed a farmhouse. If only you knew what was happening at our house, he
said to the glowing windows. He climbed a hill and looked at the town,
miles away, settling into sleep, the town-hall clock high and round
white in the distance. The town did not know, either. He brought home
many jars of toadstools and spiders.
In the little chapel belowstairs a brief ceremony was celebrated. It was
like all the other rituals over the years, with Father chanting the dark
lines, mother's beautiful white ivory hands moving in the reverse
blessings, and all the children gathered except Cecy, who lay upstairs
in bed. But Cecy was present. You saw her peering, now from Bion's eyes,
now Samuel's, now Mother's, and you felt a movement and now she was in
you, fleetingly and gone.
Timothy prayed to the Dark One with a tightened stomach. "Please,
please, help me grow up, help me be like my sisters and brothers. Don't
let me be different. If only I could put the hair in the plastic images
as Ellen does, or make people fall in love with me as Laura does with
people, or read strange books as Sam does, or work in a respected job
like Leonard and Bion do. Or even raise a family one day, as mother and
father have done. . . ."
At midnight a storm hammered the house. Lightning struck outside in
amazing, snow-white bolts. There was a sound of an approaching, probing,
sucking tornado, funneling and nuzzling the moist night earth. Then the
front door, blasted half off its hinges, hung stiff and discarded, and
in trooped Grandmama and Grandpapa, all the way from the old country!
From then on people arrived each hour. There was a flutter at the side
window, a rap on the front porch, a knock at the back. There were fey
noises from the cellar; autumn wind piped down the chimney throat,
chanting. Mother filled the large crystal punch bowl with a scarlet
fluid poured from the jugs Bion had carried home. Father swept from room
to room lighting more tapers. Laura and Ellen hammered up more
wolfsbane. And Timothy stood amidst this wild excitement, no expression
to his face, his hands trembling at his sides, gazing now here, now
there. Banging of doors, laughter, the sound of liquid pouring,
darkness, sound of wind, the webbed thunder of wings, the padding of
feet, the welcoming bursts of talk at the entrances, the transparent
rattlings of casements, the shadows passing, coming, going, wavering.
"Well, well, and this must be Timothy!"
"What?"
A chilly hand took his hand. A long hairy face leaned down over him. "A
good lad, a fine lad," said the stranger.
"Timothy," said his mother. "This is Uncle Jason."
"Hello, Uncle Jason."
"And over here--" Mother drifted Uncle Jason away. Uncle Jason peered
back at Timothy over his caped shoulder, and winked.
Timothy stood alone.
From off a thousand miles in the candled darkness, he heard a high
fluting voice; that was Ellen. "And my brothers, they are clever. Can
you guess their occupations, Aunt Morgiana?"
"I have no idea."
"They operate the undertaking establishment in town."
"What!" A gasp.
"Yes!" Shrill laughter. "Isn't that priceless!"
Timothy stood very still.
A pause in the laughter. "They bring home sustenance for Mama, Papa and
all of us," said Laura. "Except, of course, Timothy. . . ."
An uneasy silence. Uncle Jason's voice demanded. "Well? come now. What
about Timothy?"
"Oh, Laura, your tongue," said mother.
Laura went on with it. Timothy shut his eyes. "Timothy
doesn't--well--doesn't like blood. He's delicate."
"He'll learn," said mother. "He'll learn," she said very firmly. "He's
my son, and he'll learn. He's only fourteen."
"But I was raised on the stuff," said Uncle Jason, his voice passing
from one room on into another. The wind played the trees outside like
harps. A little rain spatted on the windows--"raised on the stuff,"
passing away into faintness.
Timothy bit his lips and opened his eyes.
"Well, it was all my fault." Mother was showing them into the kitchen
now. "I tried forcing him. You can't force children, you only make them
sick, and then they never get a taste for things. Look at Bion, now, he
was thirteen before he . . ."
"I understand," murmured Uncle Jason. "Timothy will come around."
"I'm sure he will," said mother, defiantly.
Candle flames quivered as shadows crossed and recrossed the dozen musty
rooms. Timothy was cold. He smelled the hot tallow in his nostrils and
instinctively he grabbed at a candle and walked with it around and about
the house, pretending to straighten the crape.
"Timothy," someone whispered behind a patterned wall, hissing and
sizzling and sighing the words, "Timothy is afraid of the dark."
Leonard's voice. Hateful Leonard!
"I like the candle, that's all," said Timothy in a reproachful whisper.
More lightning, more thunder. Cascades of roaring laughter. Bangings and
clickings and shouts and rustles of clothing. Clammy fog swept through
the front door. Out of the fog, settling his wings, stalked a tall man.
"Uncle Einar!"
Timothy propelled himself on his thin legs, straight through the fog,
under the green webbing shadows. He threw himself across Einar's arms.
Einar lifted him.
"You've wings, Timothy!" He tossed the boy light as thistles. "Wings,
Timothy: fly!" Faces wheeled under. Darkness rotated. The house blew
away. Timothy felt breezelike. He flapped his arms. Einar's fingers
caught and threw him once more to the ceiling. The ceiling rushed down
like a charred wall. "Fly, Timothy!" shouted Einar, loud and deep. "Fly
with wings! Wings!"
He felt an exquisite ecstasy in his shoulder blades, as if roots grew,
burst to explode and blossom into new, moist membrane. He babbled wild
stuff; again Einar hurled him high.
The autumn wind broke in a tide on the house, rain crashed down, shaking
the beams, causing chandeliers to tilt their enraged candle lights. And
the one hundred relatives peered out from every black, enchanted room,
circling inward, all shapes and sizes, to where Einar balanced the child
like a baton in the roaring spaces.
"Enough!" shouted Einar, at last.
Timothy, deposited on the floor timbers, exaltedly, exhaustedly fell
against Uncle Einar, sobbing happily. "Uncle, uncle, uncle!"
"Was it good, flying? Eh, Timothy?" said Uncle Einar, bending down,
patting Timothy's head. "Good, good."
It was coming toward dawn. Most had arrived and were ready to bed down
for the daylight, sleep motionlessly with no sound until the following
sunset, when they would shout out of their mahogany boxes for the
revelry.
Uncle Einar, followed by dozens of others, moved toward the cellar.
Mother directed them downward to the crowded row on row of highly
polished boxes. Einar, his wings like sea-green tarpaulins tented behind
him, moved with a curious whistling down the passageway; where his wings
touched they made a sound of drum heads gently beaten.
Upstairs, Timothy lay wearily thinking, trying to like the darkness.
There was so much you could do in darkness that people couldn't
criticize you for, because they never saw you. He did like the night,
but it was a qualified liking: sometimes there was so much night he
cried out in rebellion.
In the cellar, mahogany doors sealed downward, drawn in by pale hands.
In corners, certain relatives circled three times to lie, heads on paws,
eyelids shut. The sun rose. There was a sleeping.
Sunset. The revel exploded like a bat nest struck full, shrieking out,
fluttering, spreading. Box doors banged wide. Steps rushed up from
cellar damp. More late guests, kicking on front and back portals, were
admitted.
It rained, and sodden visitors laid their capes, their water-pelleted
hats, their sprinkled veils upon Timothy who bore them to a closet. The
rooms were crowd-packed. The laughter of one cousin, shot from one room,
angled off the wall of another, ricocheted, banked and returned to
Timothy's ears from a fourth room, accurate and cynical.
A mouse ran across the floor.
"I know you, Niece Leibersrouter!" exclaimed father.
The mouse spiraled three women's feet and vanished into a corner.
Moments later a beautiful woman rose up out of nothing and stood in the
corner, smiling her white smile at them all.
Something huddled against the flooded pane of the kitchen window. It
sighed and wept and tapped continually, pressed against the glass, but
Timothy could make nothing of it, he saw nothing. In imagination he was
outside staring in. The rain was on him, the wind at him, and the
taper-dotted darkness inside was inviting. Waltzes were being danced;
tall thin figures pirouetted to outlandish music. Stars of light
flickered off lifted bottles; small clods of earth crumbled from
casques, and a spider fell and went silently legging over the floor.
Timothy shivered. He was inside the house again. Mother was calling him
to run here, run there, help, serve, out to the kitchen now, fetch this,
fetch that, bring the plates, heap the food--on and on--the party
happened around him but not to him. The dozens of towering people
pressed in against him, elbowed him, ignored him.
Finally, he turned and slipped away up the stairs.
He called softly. "Cecy. Where are you now, Cecy?"
She waited a long while before answering. "In the Imperial Valley," she
murmured faintly. "Beside the Salton Sea, near the mud pots and the
steam and the quiet. I'm inside a farmer's wife. I'm sitting on a front
porch. I can make her move if I want, or do anything or think anything.
The sun's going down."
"What's it like, Cecy?"
"You can hear the mud pots hissing," she said, slowly, as if speaking in
a church. "Little gray heads of steam push up the mud like bald men
rising in the thick syrup, head first, out in the boiling channels. The
gray heads rip like rubber fabric, collapse with noises lilce wet lips
moving. And feathery plumes of steam escape from the ripped tissue. And
there is a smell of deep sulphurous burning and old times. The dinosaur
has been abroiling here ten million years."
"Is he done yet, Cecy?"
"Yes, he's done. Quite done." Cecy's calm sleeper's lips turned up. The
languid words fell slowly from her shaping mouth. "Inside this woman's
skull I am, looking out, watching the sea that does not move, and is so
quiet it makes you afraid. I sit on the porch and wait for my husband to
come home. Occasionally, a fish leaps, falls back, starlight edging it.
The valley, the sea, the few cars, the wooden porch, my rocking chair,
myself, the silence."
"What now, Cecy?"
"I'm getting up from my rocking chair," she said.
"Yes?"
"I'm walking off the porch, toward the mud pots. Planes fly over, like
primordial birds. Then it is quiet, so quiet."
"How long will you stay inside her, Cecy?"
"Until I've listened and looked and felt enough: until I've changed her
life some way. I'm walking off the porch and along the wooden boards. My
feet knock on the planks, tiredly, slowly."
"And now?"
"Now the sulphur fumes are all around me. I stare at the bubbles as they
break and smooth. A bird darts by my temple, shrieking. Suddenly I am in
the bird and fly away! And as I fly, inside my new small glass-bead eyes
I see a woman below me, on a boardwalk, take one two three steps forward
into the mud pots. I hear a sound as of a boulder plunged into molten
depths. I keep flying, circle back. I see a white hand, like a spider,
wriggle and disappear into the gray lava pool. The lava seals over. Now
I'm flying home, swift, swift, swift!"
Something clapped hard against the window, Timothy started.
Cecy flicked her eyes wide, bright, full, happy, exhilarated.
"Now I'm home!" she said.
After a pause, Timothy ventured, "The Homecoming's on. And everybody's
here."
"Then why are you upstairs?" She took his hand. "Well, ask me." She
smiled slyly. "Ask me what you came to ask."
"I didn't come to ask anything," he said. "Well, almost nothing.
Well--oh, Cecy!" It came from him in one long rapid flow. "I want to do
something at the party to make them look at me, something to make me
good as them, something to make me belong, but there's nothing I can do
and I feel funny and, well, I thought you might . . ."
"I might," she said, closing her eyes, smiling inwardly. "Stand up
straight. Stand very still." He obeyed. "Now, shut your eyes and blank
out your thought."
He stood very straight and thought of nothing, or at least thought of
thinking nothing.
She sighed. "Shall we go downstairs now, Timothy?" Like a hand into a
glove, Cecy was within him.
"Look everybody!" Timothy held the glass of warm red liquid. He held up
the glass so that the whole house turned to watch him. Aunts, uncles,
cousins, brothers, sisters!
He drank it straight down.
He jerked a hand at his sister Laura. He held her gaze, whispering to
her in a subtle voice that kept her silent, frozen. He felt tall as the
trees as he walked to her. The party now slowed. It waited on all sides
of him, watching. From all the room doors the faces peered. They were
not laughing. Mother's face was astonished. Dad looked bewildered, but
pleased and getting prouder every instant.
He nipped Laura, gently, over the neck vein. The candle flames swayed
drunkenly. The wind climbed around on the roof outside. The relatives
stared from all the doors. He popped toadstools into his mouth,
swallowed, then beat his arms against his flanks and circled. "Look,
Uncle Einar! Jean fly, at last!" Beat went his hands. Up and down pumped
his feet. The faces flashed past him.
At the top of the stairs flapping, he heard his mother cry, "Stop,
Timothy!" far below. "Hey!" shouted Timothy, and leaped off the top of
the well, thrashing.
Halfway down, the wings he thought he owned dissolved. He screamed.
Uncle Einar caught him.
Timothy flailed whitely in the receiving arms. A voice burst out of his
lips, unbidden. "This is Cecy! This is Cecy! Come see me, all of you,
upstairs, first room on the left!" Followed by a long trill of high
laughter. Timothy tried to cut it off with his tongue.
Everybody was laughing. Einar set him down. Running through the crowding
blackness as the relatives flowed upstairs toward Cecy's room to
congratulate her, Timothy banged the front door open.
"Cecy, I hate you, I hate you!"
By the sycamore tree, in deep shadow. Timothy spewed out his dinner,
sobbed bitterly and threshed in a pile of autumn leaves. Then he lay
still. From his blouse pocket, from the protection of the matchbox he
used for his retreat, the spider crawled forth. Spid walked along
Timothy's arm. Spid explored up his neck to his ear and climbed in the
ear to tickle it. Timothy shook his head. "Don't, Spid. Don't."
The feathery touch of a tentative feeler probing his eardrum set Timothy
shivering. "Don't, Spid!" He sobbed somewhat less.
The spider traveled down his cheek, took a station under the boy's nose,
looked up into the nostrils as if to seek the brain, and then clambered
softly up over the rim of the nose to sit, to squat there peering at
Timothy with green gem eyes until Timothy filled with ridiculous
laughter. "Go away, Spid!"
Timothy sat up, rustling the leaves. The land was very bright with the
moon. In the house he could heard the faint ribaldry as Mirror, Mirror
was played. Celebrants shouted, dimly muffled, as they tried to identify
those of themselves whose reflections did not, had not ever appeared in
a glass.
"Timothy." Uncle Einar's wings spread and twitched and came in with a
sound like kettledrums. Timothy felt himself plucked up like a thimble
and set upon Einar's shoulder. "Don't feel badly, Nephew Timothy. Each
to his own, each in his own way. How much better things are for you. How
rich. The world's dead for us. We've seen so much of it, believe me.
Life's best to those who live the least of it. It's worth more per
ounce, Timothy, remember that."
The rest of the black morning, from midnight on, Uncle Einar led him
about the house, from room to room, weaving and singing. A horde of late
arrivals set the entire hilarity off afresh. Great-great-great-great and
a thousand more great-greats Grandmother was there, wrapped in Egyptian
cerements. She said not a word, but lay straight as a burnt ironing
board against the wall, her eye hollows cupping a distant, wise, silent
glimmering. At the breakfast, at four in the morning,
one-thousand-odd-greats Grandmama was stiffly seated at the head of the
longest table.
The numerous young cousins caroused at the crystal punch bowl. Their
shiny olive-pit eyes, their conical, devilish faces and curly bronze
hair hovered over the drinking table, their hard-soft, half-girl halfboy
bodies wrestling against each other as they got unpleasantly, sullenly
drunk. The wind got higher, the stars burned with fiery intensity, the
noises redoubled, the dances quickened, the drinking became more
positive. To Timothy there were thousands of things to hear and watch.
The many darknesses roiled, bubbled, the many faces passed and repassed.
"Listen!"
The party held its breath. Far away the town clock struck its chimes,
saying six o'clock. The party was ending. In time to the rhythm of the
striking clock, their one hundred voices began to sing songs that were
four hundred years old, songs Timothy could not know. Arms twined,
circling slowly, they sang, and somewhere in the cold distance of
morning the town clock finished out its chimes and quieted.
Timothy sang. He knew no words, no tune, yet the words and tune came
round and high and good. And he gazed at the closed door at the top of
the stairs.
"Thanks Cecy," he whispered. "You're forgiven. Thanks."
Then he just relaxed and let the words move, with Cecy's voice, free
from his lips.
Good-bys were said, there was a great rustling. Mother and Father stood
at the door to shake hands and kiss each departing relative in turn. The
sky beyond the open door colored in the east. A cold wind entered. And
Timothy felt himself seized and settled in one body after another, felt
Cecy press him into Uncle Fry's head so he stared from the wrinkled
leather face, then leaped in a flurry of leaves up over the house and
awakening hills. . . .
Then, loping down a dirt path, he felt his red eyes burning, his fur
pelt rimed with morning, as inside Cousin William he panted through a
hollow and dissolved away.
Like a pebble in Uncle Einar's mouth, Timothy flew in a webbed thunder,
filling the sky. And then he was back, for all time, in his own body.
In the growing dawn, the last few were embracing and crying and thinking
how the world was becoming less a place for them. There had been a time
when they had met every year, but now decades passed with no
reconciliation. "Don't forget," someone cried, "we meet in Salem in
1970!"
Salem. Timothy's numbed mind turned the words over. Salem, 1970. And
there would be Uncle Fry and a thousand-times-great Grandmother in her
withered cerements, and Mother and Father and Ellen and Laura and Cecy
and all the rest. But would he be there? Could he be certain of staying
alive until then?
With one last withering blast, away they all went, so many scarves, so
many fluttery mammals, so many sere leaves, so many whining and
clustering noises, so many midnights and insanities and dreams.
Mother shut the door. Laura picked up a broom. "No," said Mother. "We'll
clean tonight. Now we need sleep." And the Family vanished down cellar
and upstairs. And Timothy moved in the crape-littered hall, his head
down. Passing a party mirror, he saw the pale mortality of his face all
cold and trembling.
"Timothy," said Mother.
She came to touch her hand on his face. "Son," she said, "we love you.
Remember that. We all love you. No matter how different you are, no
matter if you leave us one day." She kissed his cheek. "And if and when
you die, your bones will lie undisturbed, we'll see to that. You'll lie
at ease forever, and I'll come visit every Allhallows Eve and tuck you
in the more secure."
The house was silent. Far away the wind went over a hill with its last
cargo of dark bats, echoing, chittering.
Timothy walked up the steps, one by one, crying to himself all the way.

The Wonderful Death of Dudley Stone
"Alive!"
"Dead!"
"Alive in New England, damn it."
"Died twenty years ago!"
"Pass the hat, I'll go myself and bring back his head!"
That's how the talk went that night. A stranger set it off with his
mouthings about Dudley Stone dead. Alive! we cried. And shouldn't we
know? Weren't we the last frail remnants of those who had burnt incense
and read his books by the light of blazing intellectual votives in the
twenties?
The Dudley Stone. That magnificent stylist, that proudest of literary
lions. Surely you recall the head-pounding, the cliff-jumping, the
whistlings of doom that followed on his writing his publishers this
note:
Sirs: Today, aged 30, I retire from the field, renounce writing, burn
all my effects, toss my latest manuscript on the dump, cry hail and fare
thee well. Yrs., affect.
Dudley Stone
Earthquakes and avalanches, in that order.
"Why?" we asked ourselves, meeting down the years.
In fine soap-opera fashion we debated if it was women caused him to hurl
his literary future away. Was it the Bottle? Or Horses that outran him
and stopped a fine pacer in his prime?
We freely admitted to one and all, that were Stone writing now,
Faulkner, Hemingway, and Steinbeck would be buried in his lava. All the
sadder that Stone, on the brink of his greatest work, turned one day and
went off to live in a town we shall call Obscurity by the sea best named
The Past.
"Why?"
That question forever lived with those of us who had seen the glints of
genius in his piebald works.
One night a few weeks ago, musing off the erosion of the years, finding
each others' faces somewhat more pouched and our hairs more
conspicuously in absence, we became enraged over the typical citizen's
ignorance of Dudley Stone.
At least, we muttered, Thomas Wolfe had had a full measure of success
before he seized his nose and jumped off the rim of Eternity. At least
the critics gathered to stare after his plunge into darkness as after a
meteor that made much fire in its passing. But who now remembered Dudley
Stone, his coteries, his frenzied followers of the twenties?
"Pass the hat," I said. "I'll travel three hundred miles, grab Dudley
Stone by the pants and say: 'Look here, Mr. Stone, why did you let us
down so badly? Why haven't you written a book in twenty-five years?'"
The hat was lined with cash; I sent a telegram and took a train.
I do not know what I expected. Perhaps to find a doddering and frail
praying mantis, whisping about the station, blown by seawinds, a
chalk-white ghost who would husk at me with the voices of grass and
reeds blown in the night. I clenched my knees in agony as my train
chuffed into the station. I let myself down into a lonely country-side,
a mile from the sea, like a man foolishly insane, wondering why I had
come so far.
On a bulletin board in front of the boarded-up ticket office I found a
cluster of announcements, inches thick, pasted and nailed one upon
another for uncountable years. Leafing under, peeling away
anthropological layers of printed tissue I found what I wanted. Dudley
Stone for alderman, Dudley Stone for Sheriff, Dudley Stone for mayor! On
up through the years his photograph, bleached by sun and rain, faintly
recognizable, asked for ever more responsible positions in the life of
this world near the sea. I stood reading them.
"Hey!"
And Dudley Stone plunged across the station platform behind me suddenly.
"Is that you, Mr. Douglas!" I whirled to confront this great
architecture of a man, big but not in the least fat, his legs huge
pistons thrusting him on, a bright flower in his lapel, a bright tie at
his neck. He crushed my hand, looked down upon me like Michelangelo's
God creating Adam with a mighty touch. His face was the face of those
illustrated North Winds and South Winds that blow hot and cold in
ancient mariners' charts. It was the face that symbolizes the sun in
Egyptian carvings, ablaze with life!
My God! I thought. And this is the man who hasn't written in twenty-odd
years. Impossible. He's so alive it's sinful. I can hear his heartbeat!
I must have stood with my eyes very wide to let the look of him cram in
upon my startled senses.
"You thought you'd find Marley's Ghost," he laughed. "Admit it."
"I--"
"My wife's waiting with a New England boiled dinner, we've plenty of ale
and stout. I like the ring of those words. To ale is not to sicken, but
to revive the flagging spirit. A tricky word, that. And stout? There's a
nice ruddy sound to it. Stout!" A great golden watch bounced on his
vest-front, hung in bright chains. He vised my elbow and charmed me
along, a magician well on his way back to his cave with a luckless
rabbit. "Glad to see you! I suppose you've come, as the others came, to
ask the same question, eh! Well, this time I'll tell everything!"
My heart jumped. "Wonderful!"
Behind the empty station sat an open-top 1927-vintage Model-T Ford.
"Fresh air. Drive at twilight like this, you get all the fields, the
grass, the flowers, coming at you in the wind. I hope you're not one of
those who tiptoe around shutting windows! Our house is like the top of a
mesa. We let the weather do our broom-work. Hop in!"
Ten minutes later we swung off the highway onto a drive that had not
been leveled or filled in years. Stone drove straight on over the pits
and bumps, smiling steadily. Bang! We shuddered the last few yards to a
wild, unpainted two-story house. The car was allowed to gasp itself away
into mortal silence.
"Do you want the truth?" Stone turned to look me in the face and hold my
shoulder with an earnest hand. "I was murdered by a man with a gun
twenty-five years ago almost to this very day."
I sat staring after him as he leapt from the car. He was solid as a ton
of rock, no ghost to him, but yet I knew that somehow the truth was in
what he had told me before firing himself like a cannon at the house.
"This is my wife, and this is the house, and that is our supper waiting
for us! Look at our view. Windows on three sides of the living room, a
view of the sea, the shore, the meadows. We nail the windows open three
out of four seasons. I swear you get a smell of limes here midsummer,
and something from Antarctica, ammonia and ice cream, come December. Sit
down! Lena, isn't it nice having him here?"
"I hope you like New England boiled dinner," said Lena, now here, now
there, a tall, firmly-built woman, the sun in the East, Father
Christmas' daughter, a bright lamp of a face that lit our table as she
dealt out the heavy useful dishes made to stand the pound of giants'
fists. The cutlery was solid enough to take a lion's teeth. A great
whiff of steam rose up, through which we gladly descended, sinners into
Hell. I saw the seconds-plate skim by three times and felt the ballast
gather in my chest, my throat, and at last my ears. Dudley Stone poured
me a brew he had made from wild Concords that had cried for mercy, he
said. The wine bottle, empty, had its green glass mouth blown softly by
Stone, who summoned out a rhythmic one-note tune that was quickly done.
"Well, I've kept you waiting long enough," he said, peering at me from
that distance which drinking adds between people and which, at odd turns
in the evening, seems closeness itself. "I'll tell you about my murder.
I've never told anyone before; believe me. Do you know John Oatis
Kendall?"
"A minor writer in the twenties, wasn't he?" I said. "A few books. Burnt
out by '31. Died last week."
"God rest him." Mr. Stone lapsed into a special brief melancholy from
which he revived as he began to speak again.
"Yes. John Oatis Kendall, burnt out by the year 1931, a writer of great
potentialities."
"Not as great as yours," I said, quickly.
"Well, just wait. We were boys together, John Oatis and I, born where
the shade of an oak tree touched my house in the morning and his house
at night, swam every creek in the world together, got sick on sour
apples and cigarettes together, saw the same lights in the same blonde
hair of the same young girl together, and in our late teens went out to
kick Fate in the stomach and get heat on the head together. We both did
fair, and then I better and still better as the years ran. If his first
book got one good notice, mine got six, if I got one bad notice, he got
a dozen. We were like two friends on a train which the public has
uncoupled. There went John Oatis on the caboose, left behind, crying
out, 'Save me! You're leaving me in Tank Town, Ohio; we're on the same
track!' And the conductor saying, 'Yes, but not the same train!' And
myself yelling, 'I believe in you, John, he of good heart, I'll come
back for you!' And the caboose dwindling behind with its red and green
lamps like cherry and lime pops shining in the dark and we yelling our
friendship to each other: 'John, old man!' 'Dudley, old pal!' while John
Oatis went out on a dark siding behind a tin baling-shed at midnight and
my engine, with all the flag-wavers and brass bands, boiled on toward
dawn."
Dudley Stone paused and noticed my look of general confusion.
"All this to lead up to my murder," he said. "For it was John Oatis
Kendall who, in 1930, traded a few old clothes and some remaindered
copies of his books for a gun and came out to this house and this room."
"He really meant to kill you?"
"Meant to, hell! He did! Bang! Have some more wine? That's better."
A strawberry shortcake was set upon the table by Mrs. Stone, while he
enjoyed my gibbering suspense. Stone sliced it into three huge chunks
and served it around, fixing me with his kindly approximation of the
Wedding Guest's eye.
"There he sat, John Oatis, in that chair where you sit now. Behind him,
outside, in the smokehouse, seventeen hams; in our wine cellars, five
hundred bottles of the best; beyond the window open country, the elegant
sea in full lace, overhead a moon like a dish of cool cream, everywhere
the full panoply of spring, and Lena across the table, too, a willow
tree in the wind, laughing at everything I said or did not choose to
say, both of us thirty, mind you, thirty years old, life our magnificent
carousel, our fingers playing full chords, my books selling well, fan
mail pouring upon us in crisp white founts, horses in the stables for
moonlight rides to coves where either we or the sea might whisper all we
wished in the night. And John Oatis seated there where you sit now,
quietly taking the little blue gun from his pocket."
"I laughed, thinking it was a cigar lighter of some sort," said his
wife.
"But John Oatis said quite seriously: 'I'm going to kill you, Mr.
Stone.'
"What did you do?"
"Do? I sat there, stunned, riven; I heard a terrible slam! the coffin
lid in my face! I heard coal down a black chute; dirt on my buried door.
They say all your past hurtles by at such times. Nonsense. The future
does. You see your face a bloody porridge. You sit there until your
fumbling mouth can say, 'But why, John, what have I done to you?'
"'Done!' he cried.
"And his eyes skimmed along the vast bookshelf and the handsome brigade
of books drawn stiffly to attention there with my name on each blazing
like a panther's eyes in the Moroccan blackness. 'Done!' he cried,
mortally. And his hand itched the revolver in a sweat. 'Now, John,' I
cautioned. 'What do you want?'
"'One thing more than anything else in the world,' he said, 'to kill you
and be famous. Get my name in headlines. Be famous as you are famous. Be
known for a lifetime and beyond as the man who killed Dudley Stone!'
"'You can't mean that!'
"'I do. I'll be very famous. Far more famous than I am today, in your
shadow. Oh, listen here, no one in the world knows how to hate like a
writer does. God, how I love your work and God, how I hate you because
you write so well. Amazing ambivalence. But I can't take it any more,
not being able to write as you do, so I'll take my fame the easy way.
I'll cut you off before you reach your prime. They say your next book
will be your finest, your most brilliant!'
"'They exaggerate.'
"'My guess is they're right!' he said.
"I looked beyond him to Lena who sat in her chair, frightened, but not
frightened enough to scream or run and spoil the scene so it might end
inadvertently.
"'Calm,' I said. 'Calmness. Sit there, John. I ask only one minute. Then
pull the trigger.'
"'No!' Lena whispered.
"'Calmness,' I said to her, to myself, to John Oatis.
"I gazed out the open windows, I felt the wind, I thought of the wine in
the cellar, the coves at the beach, the sea, the night moon like a disc
of menthol cooling the summer heavens, drawing clouds of flaming salt,
the stars, after it in a wheel toward morning. I thought of myself only
thirty, Lena thirty, our whole lives ahead. I thought of all the flesh
of life hung high and waiting for me to really start banqueting! I had
never climbed a mountain, I had never sailed an ocean, I had never run
for Mayor, I had never dived for pearls, I had never owned a telescope,
I had never acted on a stage or built a house or read all the classics I
had so wished to read. All the actions waiting to be done!
"So in that almost instantaneous sixty seconds, I thought at last of my
career. The books I had written, the books I was writing, the books I
intended to write. The reviews, the sales, our huge balance in the bank.
And, believe or disbelieve me, for the first time in my life I got free
of it all. I became, in one moment, a critic. I cleared the scales. On
one hand I put all the boats I hadn't taken, the flowers I hadn't
planted, the children I hadn't raised, all the hills I hadn't looked at,
with Lena there, goddess of the harvest. In the middle I put John Oatis
Kendall with his gun--the upright that held the balances. And on the
empty scale opposite I laid my pen, my ink, my empty paper, my dozen
books. I made some minor adjustments. The sixty seconds were ticking by.
The sweet night wind blew across the table. It touched a curl of hair on
Lena's neck, oh Lord, how softly, softly it touched . . .
"The gun pointed at me. I have seen the moon craters in photographs, and
that hole in space called the Great Coal Sack Nebula, but neither was as
big, take my word, as the mouth of that gun across the room from me.
"'John,' I said at last, 'do you hate me that much? Because I've been
lucky and you not?'
"'Yes, damn it!' he cried.
"It was almost funny he should envy me. I was not that much better a
writer than he. A flick of the wrist made the difference.
"'John,' I said quietly to him, 'if you want me dead, I'll be dead.
Would you like for me never to write again?'
"'I'd like nothing better!' he cried. 'Get ready!' He aimed at my heart!
"'All right,' I said, 'I'll never write again.'
"'What?' he said.
"'We're old old friends, we've never lied to each other, have we? Then
take my word, from this night on I'll never put pen to paper.'
"'Oh God,' he said, and laughed with contempt and disbelief.
"'There,' I said, nodding my head at the desk near him, 'are the only
original copies of the two books I've been working on for the last three
years. I'll burn one in front of you now. The other you yourself may
throw in the sea. Clean out the house, take everything faintly
resembling literature, burn my published books, too. Here.' I got up. He
could have shot me then, but I had him fascinated. I tossed one
manuscript on the hearth and touched a match to it.
"'No!' Lena said. I turned. 'I know what I'm doing,' I said. She began
to cry. John Oatis Kendall simply stared at me, bewitched. I brought him
the other unpublished manuscript. 'Here,' I said, tucking it under his
right shoe so his foot was a paper weight. I went back and sat down. The
wind was blowing and the night was warm and Lena was white as
apple-blossoms there across the table.
"I said, 'From this day forward I will not write ever again.'
"At last John Oatis managed to say, 'How can you do this?'
"'To make everyone happy,' I said. 'To make you happy because we'll be
friends again, eventually. To make Lena happy because I'll be just her
husband again and no agent's performing seal. And myself happy because
I'd rather be a live man than a dead author. A dying man will do
anything, John. Now take my last novel and get along with you.'
"We sat there, the three of us, just as we three are sitting tonight.
There was a smell of lemons and limes and camellias. The ocean roared on
the stony coastland below; God, what a lovely moonlit sound. And at
last, picking up the manuscript, John Oatis took it, like my body, out
of the room. He paused at the door and said, 'I believe you.' And then
he was gone. I heard him drive away. I put Lena to bed. That was one of
the few nights in my life I ever walked down by the shore, but walk I
did, taking deep breaths and feeling my arms and legs and my face with
my hands, crying like a child, walking and wading in the surf to feel
the cold salt water foaming about me in a million suds."
Dudley Stone paused. Time had made a stop in the room. Time was in
another year, the three of us sitting there, enchanted with his telling
of the murder.
"And did he destroy your last novel?" I asked.
Dudley Stone nodded. "A week later one of the pages drifted up on the
shore. He must have thrown them over the cliff, a thousand pages, I see
it in my mind's eye, a flock of white sea-gulls it might seem, flying
down to the water and going out with the tide at four in the black
morning. Lena ran up the beach with that single page in her hand,
crying, 'Look, look!' And when I saw what she handed me, I tossed it
back in the ocean."
"Don't tell me you honored your promise!"
Dudley Stone looked at me steadily. "What would you have done in a
similar position? Look at it this way: John Oatis did me a favor. He
didn't kill me. He didn't shoot me. He took my word. He honored my word.
He let me live. He let me go on eating and sleeping and breathing. Quite
suddenly he had broadened my horizons. I was so grateful that standing
on the beach hip-deep in water that night, I cried. I was grateful. Do
you really understand that word? Grateful he had let me live when he had
had it in his hand to annihilate me forever."
Mrs. Stone rose up, the dinner was ended. She cleared the dishes, we lit
cigars; and Dudley Stone strolled me over to his office-athome, a
rolltop desk, its jaws propped wide with parcels and papers and ink
bottles, a typewriter, documents, ledgers, indexes.
"It was all rolling to a boil in me. John Oatis simply spooned the froth
off the top so I could see the brew. It was very clear," said Dudley
Stone. "Writing was always so much mustard and gallweed to me; fidgeting
words on paper, experiencing vast depressions of heart and soul.
Watching the greedy critics graph me up, chart me down, slice me like
sausage, eat me at midnight breakfasts. Work of the worst sort. I was
ready to fling the pack. My trigger was set. Boom! There was John Oatis!
Look here."
He rummaged in the desk and brought forth hand-bills and posters. "I had
been writing about living. Now I wanted to live. Do things instead of
tell about things. I ran for the board of education. I won. I ran for
alderman. I won. I ran for Mayor. I won! Sheriff! Town librarian! Sewage
disposal official. I shook a lot of hands, saw a lot of life, did a lot
of things. We've lived every way there is to live, with our eyes and
noses and mouths, with our ears and hands. We've climbed hills and
painted pictures, there are some on the wall! We've been three times
around the world! I even delivered our baby son, unexpectedly. He's
grown and married now--lives in New York! We've done and done again."
Stone paused and smiled. "Come on out in the yard; we've set up a
telescope, would you like to see the rings of Saturn?"
We stood in the yard, and the wind blew from a thousand miles at sea and
while we were standing there, looking at the stars through the
telescope, Mrs. Stone went down into the midnight cellar after a rare
Spanish wine.
It was noon the next day when we reached the lonely station after a
hurricane trip across the jouncing meadows from the sea. Mr. Dudley
Stone let the car have its head, while he talked to me, laughing,
smiling, pointing to this or that outcrop of Neolithic stone, this or
that wild flower, falling silent again only as we parked and waited for
the train to come and take me away.
"I suppose," he said, looking at the sky, "you think I'm quite insane."
"No, I'd never say that."
"Well," said Dudley Stone, "John Oatis Kendall did me one other favor."
"What was that?"
Stone hitched around conversationally in the patched leather seat.
"He helped me get out when the going was good. Deep down inside I must
have guessed that my literary success was something that would melt when
they turned off the cooling system. My subconscious had a pretty fair
picture of my future. I knew what none of my critics knew, that I was
headed nowhere but down. The two books John Oatis destroyed were very
bad. They would have killed me deader than Oatis possibly could. So he
helped me decide, unwittingly, what I might not have had the courage to
decide myself, to how gracefully out while the cotillion was still on,
while the Chinese lanterns still cast flattering pink lights on my
Harvard complexion. I had seen too many writers up, down, and out, hurt,
unhappy, suicidal. The combination of circumstance, coincidence,
subconscious knowledge, relief, and gratitude to John Oatis Kendall to
just be alive, were fortuitous, to say the least."
We sat in the warm sunlight another minute.
"And then I had the pleasure of seeing myself compared to all the greats
when I announced my departure from the literary scene. Few authors in
recent history have bowed out to such publicity. It was a lovely
funeral. I looked, as they say, natural. And the echoes lingered. 'His
next book!' the critics cried, 'would have been it! A masterpiece!' I
had them panting, waiting. Little did they know. Even now, a
quarter-century later, my readers who were college boys then, make sooty
excursions on drafty kerosene-stinking shortline trains to solve the
mystery of why I've made them wait so long for my 'masterpiece.' And
thanks to John Oatis Kendall I still have a little reputation; it has
receded slowly, painlessly. The next year I might have died by my own
writing hand. How much better to cut your own caboose off the train,
before others do it for you.
"My friendship with John Oatis Kendall? It came back. It took time, of
course. But he was out here to see me in 1947; it was a nice day, all
around, like old times. And now he's dead and at last I've told someone
everything. What will you tell your friends in the city? They won't
believe a word of this. But it is true, I swear it, as I sit here and
breathe God's good air and look at the calluses on my hands and begin to
resemble the faded handbills I used when I ran for county treasurer."
We stood on the station platform.
"Good-by, and thanks for coming and opening your ears and letting my
world crash in on you. God bless to all your curious friends. Here comes
the train! I've got to run; Lena and I are going to a Red Cross drive
down the coast this afternoon! Good-by!"
I watched the dead man stomp and leap across the platform, felt the
plankings shudder, saw him jump into his Model-T, heard it lurch under
his bulk, saw him bang the floor-boards with a big foot, idle the motor,
roar it, turn, smile, wave to me, and then roar off and away toward that
suddenly brilliant town called Obscurity by a dazzling seashore called
The Past.

ABOUT RAY BRADBURY
Mr. Bradbury was born in Waukegan, Illinois, in 1920. His family moved
to Los Angeles in 1934 and he was graduated from high school there in
1938. After graduation he supported himself by selling newspapers while
he began to write, and published his first story in 1940. Among his
recent productions is the screenplay of Moby Dick, directed by John
Huston and starring Gregory Peck. Mr. Bradbury now resides in Los
Angeles with his wife and children.
His first four books, including THE MARTIAN CHRONICLES and THE GOLDEN
APPLES OF THE SUN, brought Ray Bradbury the kind of international
acclaim of which the following quotation from Punch is an example: "It
is hard to speak with restraint of these extraordinary tales, which
raise Ray Bradbury to a secure place among the imaginative writers of
today." It is fair to say that FAHRENHEIT 451 took him a long step
further forward in the critics' and public's eyes. Gilbert Highet called
it "a wonderderful story." The Nation said: "One of the most brilliant
over-all jobs of social satire to appear recently." The (London) Times
Literary Supplement said: "Absorbing . . . it has the tactile and
immediate quality of very clear sight, and the things seen are not
ordinary." The Listener (London) said: "Bradbury's style is an organic
expression of personality . . . supple, incisive, so moulded into his
tale that matter and manner are one and indistinguishable." Simon and
Schuster will publish in 1962 Mr. Bradbury's new novel, SOMETHING WICKED
THIS WAY COMES.
ÿ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