                                 
                          In a Season of Calm Weather
                                      1957

     George and Alice Smith detrained at Biarritz one summer noon and in an hour
had  run through their hotel on to the beach into the ocean and back out to bake
upon the sand.
     To  see George Smith sprawled burning there, you'd think him only a tourist
flown  fresh as iced lettuce to Europe and soon to be transhipped home. But here
was a man who loved art more than life itself.
     "There..." George Smith sighed. Another ounce of perspiration trickled down
his  chest.  Boil  out  the Ohio tap-water, he thought, then drink down the best
Bordeaux.  Silt  your  blood with rich French sediment so you'll see with native
eyes!
     Why?  Why  eat,  breathe,  drink everything French? So that, given time, he
might really begin to understand the genius of one man.
     His mouth moved, forming a name.
     "George?"  His  wife  loomed over him. "I know what you've been thinking. I
can read your lips."
     He lay perfectly still, waiting.
     "And?"
     "Picasso," she said.
     He winced. Some day she would learn to pronounce that name.
     "Please,"  she  said. "Relax. I know you heard the rumour this morning, but
you should see your eyes - your tic is back. All right, Picasso's here, down the
coast  a  few  miles  away, visiting friends in some small fishing town. But you
must forget it or our vacation's ruined."
     "I wish I'd never heard the rumour," he said honestly.
     "If only," she said, "you liked other painters."
     Others?  Yes,  there  were  others.  He could breakfast most congenially on
Caravaggio  still-lifes  of  autumn  pears  and midnight plums. For lunch: those
fire-squirting, thick-wormed Van Gogh sunflowers, those blooms a blind man might
read  with  one rush of scorched fingers down fiery canvas. But the great feast?
The  paintings he saved his palate for? There, filling the horizon, like Neptune
risen,  crowned  with  limewood,  alabaster,  coral,  paintbrushes clenched like
tridents  in  horn-nailed  fists,  and with fishtail vast enough to fluke summer
showers  out  over  all  Gibraltar  -  who else but the creator of Girl Before a
Mirror and Guernica?
     "Alice," he said, patiently, "how can I explain? Coming down on the train I
thought. Good Lord, it's all Picasso country!"
     But  was  it  really,  he  wondered.  The  sky,  the  land, the people, the
flushed-pink  bricks  here,  scrolled  electric-blue ironwork balconies there, a
mandolin  ripe as a fruit in some man's thousand fingerprinting hands, billboard
tatters  blowing  like  confetti in night winds - how much was Picasso, how much
George  Smith  staring  round  the world with wild Picasso eyes? He despaired of
answering.  That  old man had distilled turpentine and linseed oil so thoroughly
through  George  Smith  that they shaped his being, all Blue Period at twilight,
all Rose Period at dawn.
     "I keep thinking," he said aloud, "if we saved our money..."
     "We'll never have five thousand dollars."
     "I  know,"  he  said quietly. "But it's nice thinking we might bring it off
some  day.  Wouldn't it be great to just step up to him, say 'Pablo, here's five
thousand!  Give us the sea, the sand, that sky, or any old thing you want, we'll
be happy...."
     After a moment, his wife touched his arm.
     "I think you'd better go in the water now," she said.
     "Yes," he said. "I'd better do just that."
     White fire showered up when he cut the water.
     During the afternoon George Smith came out and went into the ocean with the
vast  spilling  motions of now warm, now cool people who at last, with the sun's
decline,  their  bodies  all  lobster  colours  and colours of broiled squab and
guinea hen, trudged for their wedding-cake hotels.
     The  beach  lay  deserted for endless mile on mile save for two people. One
was  George Smith, towel over shoulder, out for a last devotional. Far along the
shore  another  shorter, square-cut man walked alone in the tranquil weather. He
was  deeper  tanned,  his close-shaven head dyed almost mahogany by the sun, and
his  eyes were clear and bright as water in his face. So the shoreline stage was
set,  and in a few minutes the two men would meet. And once again Fate fixed the
scales  for  shocks  and  surprises,  arrivals and departures. And all the while
these  two  solitary  strollers  did not for a moment think on coincidence, that
unswum  stream  which lingers at man's elbow with every crowd in every town. Nor
did  they  ponder  the  fact  that  if man dares dip into that stream he grabs a
wonder  in  each hand. Like most they shrugged at such folly, and stayed well up
the bank lest Fate should shove them in.
     The  stranger  stood  alone.  Glancing about, he saw his aloneness, saw the
waters  of the lovely bay, saw the sun sliding down the late colours of the day,
and  then  half-turning  spied a small wooden object on the sand. It was no more
than  the  slender  stick from a lime ice-cream delicacy long since melted away.
Smiling  he  picked  the  stick  up. With another glance around to re-insure his
solitude,  the  man stooped again and holding the stick gently with light sweeps
of his hand began to do the one thing in all the world he knew best how to do.
     He  began to draw incredible figures along the sand. He sketched one figure
and  then moved over and still looking down, completely focused on his work now,
drew  a  second  and  a  third figure, and after that a fourth and a fifth and a
sixth.
     George  Smith,  printing  the  shoreline  with  his feet, gazed here, gazed
there,  and  then  saw the man ahead. George Smith, drawing nearer, saw that the
man,  deeply  tanned,  was bending down. Neerer yet, and it was obvious what the
man was up to. George Smith chuckled. Of course, of course... along on the beach
this man - how old? Sixty-five? Seventy? - was scribbling and doodling away. How
the  sand  flew! How the wild portraits flung themselves out there on the shore!
How
     George Smith took one more step and stopped, very still.
     The  stranger was drawing and drawing and did not seem to sense that anyone
stood  immediately  behind him and the world of his drawings in the sand. By now
he  was  so deeply enchanted with his solitudinous creation that depth-bombs set
off in the bay might not have stopped his flying hand nor turned him round.
     George  Smith looked down at the sand. And, after a long while, looking, he
began to tremble.
     For   there   on  the  flat  shore  were  pictures  of  Grecian  lions  and
Mediterranean goats and maidens with flesh of sand like powdered gold and satyrs
piping  on  hand-carved  horns  and children dancing, strewing flowers along and
along  the  beach  with  lambs  gambolling after and musicians skipping to their
harps  and lyres, and unicorns racing youths towards distant meadows, woodlands,
ruined  temples and volcanoes. Along the shore in a never-broken line, the hand,
the  wooden  stylus  of  this  man  bent down in fever and raining perspiration,
scribbled,  ribboned,  looped  around  over  and  up, across, in, out, stitched,
whispered, stayed, then hurried on as if this travelling bacchanal must flourish
to  its  end before the sun was put out by the sea. Twenty, thirty yards or more
the nymphs and dryads and summer founts sprang up in unravelled hieroglyphs. And
the  sand,  in the dying light, was the colour of molten copper on which was now
slashed a message that any man in any time might read and savour down the years.
Everything  whirled  and  poised in its own wind and gravity. Now wine was being
crushed  from  under  the grape-blooded feet of dancing vintners' daughters, now
steaming  seas gave birth to coin-sheathed monsters while flowered kites strewed
scent on blowing clouds... now... now... now....
     The artist stopped.
     George Smith drew back and stood away.
     The  artist  glanced  up, surprised to find someone so near. Then he simply
stood  there,  looking  from  George  Smith to his own creations flung like idle
footprints  down the way. He smiled at last and shrugged as if to say. Look what
I've  done; see what a child? You will forgive me, won't you? One day or another
we  are  all  fools...  you,  too, perhaps? So allow an old fool this, eh? Good!
Good!
     But  George  Smith could only look at the little man with the sun-dark skin
and the clear sharp eyes, and say the man's name once, in a whisper, to himself.
     They  stood  thus for perhaps another five seconds, George Smith staring at
the  sand-frieze,  and  the  artist watching George Smith with amused curiosity.
George  Smith  opened  his  mouth, closed it, put out his hand, took it back. He
stepped  towards  the  picture,  stepped  away.  Then he moved along the line of
figures,  like  a  man  viewing  a  precious series of marbles cast up from some
ancient  ruin on the shore. His eyes did not blink, his hand wanted to touch but
did not dare to touch. He wanted to run but did not run.
     He  looked  suddenly at the hotel. Run, yes! Run! What? Grab a shovel, dig,
excavate,  save  a chunk of this all too crumbling sand? Find a repair-man, race
him  back  here with plaster-of-paris to cast a mould of some small fragile part
of these? No, no. Silly, silly. Or...? His eyes flicked to his hotel window. The
camera!  Run,  get  it,  get back, and hurry along the shore, clicking, changing
film, clicking until...
     George  Smith  whirled  to face the sun. It burned faintly on his face, his
eyes  were  two  small  fires  from  it.  The sun was half underwater and, as he
watched, it sank the rest of the way in a matter of seconds.
     The  artist  had  drawn  nearer and now was gazing into George Smith's face
with great friendliness as if he were guessing every thought. Now he was nodding
his  head  in a little bow. Now the ice-cream stick had fallen casually from his
fingers. Now he was saying good night, good night. Now he was gone, walking back
down the beach towards the south.
     George  Smith stood looking after him. After a full minute, he did the only
thing  he could possibly do. He started at the beginning of the fantastic frieze
of  satyrs  and  fauns  and wine-dipped maidens and prancing unicorns and piping
youths  and he walked slowly along the shore. He walked a long way, looking down
at  e free-running bacchanal. And when he came to the end of the animals and men
he turned round and started back in the other direction, just staring down as if
he  had lost something and did not quite know where to find it. He kept on doing
this until there was no more light in the sky, or on the sand, to see by.

     
     He sat down at the supper table.
     "You're  late,"  said  his  wife.  "I  just  had  to  come  down alone. I'm
ravenous."
     "That's all right," he said.
     "Anything interesting happen on your walk?" she asked.
     "No," he said.
     "You  look  funny; George, you didn't swim out too far, did you, and almost
drown? I can tell by your face. You did swim out too far, didn't you?"
     "Yes," he said.
     "Well,"  she  said,  watching him closely. "Don't ever do that again. Now -
what'll you have?"
     He picked up the menu and started to read it and stopped suddenly.
     "What's wrong?" asked his wife.
     He turned his head and shut his eyes for a moment.
     "Listen."
     She listened.
     "I don't hear anything," she said.
     "Don't you?"
     "No. What is it?"
     "Just  the  tide,"  he  said,  after a while, sitting there, his eyes still
shut. "Just the tide, coming in." 
