  THE HEADPIECE

  THE parcel arrived in the late afternoon mail. Mr Andrew Lemon knew
  what was inside by shaking it. It whispered in there like a large
  hairy tarantula.

  It took him some time to get up his courage, tremble the wrappings
  open, and remove the lid from the white cardboard box.

  There the bristly thing lay on its snowy tissue bed, as imper­sonal as
  the black horsechair clock-springs stuffed in an old sofa. Andrew
  Lemon chuckled.

  'Indians come and gone, left this piece of a massacre behind as a
  sign, a warning. Well. There!'

  And he fitted the new patent-leather black shining toupee to his naked
  scalp. He tugged at it like someone touching his cap to passers-by.

  The toupee fitted perfectly, covering the neat coin-round hole which
  marred the top of his brow. Andrew Lemon gazed at the strange man in
  the mirror and yelled with delight.

  'Hey there, who're you? Face's familiar, but, by gosh now, pass you on
  the street without looking twice! Why? Because,

  it's gone! Darn hole's covered, nobody'd guess it was ever there.
  Happy New Year, man, that's what it is, Happy New Year!'

  He walked around and around his little apartment, smiling, needing to
  do something, but not yet ready to open the door and surprise the
  world. He walked by the mirror, glancing sidewise at someone going
  past there, and each time laughed and shook his head. Then he sat down
  in the rocker and rocked, grinning, and tried to look at a couple of
  copies of Wild West Weekly and then Thrilling Movie Magazine.

  But he couldn't keep his right hand from crawling up along his face,
  tremulously, to feel at the rim of that crisp new sedge above his
  ears.

  'Let me buy you a drink, young fellow!'

  He opened the fly-specked medicine cabinet and took three gulps from a
  bottle. Eyes watering, he was on the verge of cut­ting himself a chew
  of tobacco when he stopped, listening.

  Outside, in the dark hallway, there was a sound like a field-mouse
  moving softly, daintily on the threadbare carpeting.

  'Miss Fremwell!' he said to the mirror.

  Suddenly the toupee was off his head and into the box as if,
  frightened, it had scuttled back there of itself. He clapped the lid
  down, sweating cold, afraid of even the sound that woman made moving
  by like a summer breeze.

  He tiptoed to the door that was nailed shut in one wall and bent his
  raw and now furiously blushing head. He heard Miss Fremwell unlock her
  door and shut it and move delicately about her room with little
  tinkles of chinaware and chimes of cutlery, turning in a
  merry-go-round to make her dinner. He backed away from that door that
  was bolted, locked, latched, and driven shut with its four-inch
  hard-steel nails. He thought of the nights he had flinched in bed,
  thinking he heard her quietly pulling out the nails, pulling out the
  nails, touching at the bolts and slithering the latch . . . And how it
  always took him an hour to turn away towards sleep after that.

  Now she would rustle about her room for an hour or so. It would grow
  dark. The stars would be out and shining when he tapped on her door
  and asked if she'd sit on the porch or walk in the park. Then the only
  way she could possibly know of this third blind and staring eye in his
  head would be to run her hand in a Braille-like motion there. But her
  small white fingers had never moved within a thousand miles of that
  scar which was no more to her than, well, one of those pockmarks off
  on the full moon tonight. His toe brushed a copy of Wonder Science
  Tales.

  He snorted. Perhaps if she thought at all of his damaged head — she
  wrote songs and poems, didn't she, once in a while? — she figured that
  a long time back a meteor had run and hit him and vanished up there
  where there were no shrubs or trees, where it was just white, above
  his eyes. He snorted again and shook his head. Perhaps, perhaps. But
  however she thought, he would see her only when the sun had set.

  He waited another hour, from time to time spitting out the window into
  the warm summer night.

  'Eight-thirty. Here goes.'

  He opened the hall door and stood for a moment looking back at that
  nice new toupee hidden in its box. No, he still could not bring
  himself to wear it.

  He stepped along the hall to Miss Naomi Fremwell's door, a door so
  thinly made it seemed to beat with the sound of her small heart there
  behind it.

  'Miss Fremwell,' he whispered.

  He wanted to cup her like a small white bird in his great bowled
  hands, speak soft to her quietness. But then, in wiping the sudden
  perspiration from his brow, he found again the pit and only at the
  last quick moment saved himself from falling over, in, and screaming,
  down! He clapped his hand to that place to cover that emptiness. After
  he had held his hand tight tight to the hole for a long moment he was
  then afraid to pull his hand away. It had changed. Instead of being
  afraid he might fall in there, he was afraid something terrible,
  something secret, something private, might gush out and drown him.

  He brushed his free hand across her door, disturbing little more than
  dust.

  'Miss Fremwell?'

  He looked to see if there were too many lamps lit under her doorsill,
  the light of which might strike out at him when she swung the door
  wide. The very thrust of lamplight alone might knock his hand away,
  and reveal that sunken wound. Then mightn't she peer through it like a
  keyhole, into his life?

  The light was dim under the doorsill.

  He made a fist of one hand and brought it down gently, three times, on
  Miss Fremwell's door.

  The door opened and moved slowly back.

  Later, on the front porch, feverishly adjusting and re-adjust­ing his
  senseless legs, perspiring, he tried to work around to ask­ing her to
  marry him. When the moon rose high, the hole in his brow looked like a
  leaf-shadow fallen there. If he kept one profile to her, the crater
  did not show, it was hidden away over on the other side of his world.
  It seemed that when he did this, though, he only had half as many
  words and felt only half a man.

  'Miss Fremwell,' he managed to say, at last.

  'Yes?' She looked at him as if she didn't quite see him.

  'Miss Naomi, I don't suppose you ever really noticed me, lately.'

  She waited. He went on.

  'I've been noticing you. Fact is, well, I might as well put it right
  out on the line and get it over with. We been sitting out here on the
  porch for quite a few months. I mean we've known each other a long
  time. Sure, you're good fifteen years younger than me, but would there
  be anything wrong with our getting engaged, do you think?'

  'Thank you very much, Mr Lemon,' she said quickly. She was very
  polite. 'But — '

  'Oh, I know,' he said, edging forward with the words. 'I know! It's my
  head, it's always this darn thing up here on my head!'

  She looked at his turned-away profile in the uncertain light.

  'Why, no, Mr Lemon, I don't think I would say that, I don't think
  that's it at all. I have wondered a bit about it, certainly, but I
  don't think it's an interference in any way. A friend of mine, a very
  dear friend, married a man once, I recall, who had a wooden leg. She
  told me she didn't even know he had it, after a while.'

  'It's always this darn hole,' cried Mr Lemon bitterly. He took out his
  plug of tobacco, looked at it as if he might bite it, decided not to
  and put it away. He formed a couple of fists and stared at them
  bleakly as if they were big rocks. 'Well, I'll tell you all about it,
  Miss Naomi. I'll tell you how it happened.'

  'You don't have to if you don't want.'

  'I was married once, Miss Naomi. Yes, I was, darn it. And one day my
  wife she just took hold of a hammer and hit me right on the head!'

  Miss Fremwell gasped. It was as if she had been struck her­self.

  Mr Lemon brought one clenching fist down through the warm air.

  'Yes, ma'am, she hit me straight-on with that hammer, she did. I tell
  you, the world blew up on me. Everything fell down on me. It was like
  the house coming down in one heap. That one little hammer buried me,
  buried me! The pain? I can't tell you!'

  Miss Fremwell turned in on herself. She shut her eyes and thought,
  biting her lips. Then she said, 'Oh, poor Mr Lemon.'

  'She did it so calm,' said Mr Lemon, puzzled. 'She just stood over me
  where I lay on the couch and it was a Tuesday afternoon about two
  o'clock and she said, "Andrew, wake up!" and I opened my eyes and
  looked at her is all and then she hit me with that hammer. Oh, Lord.'

  'But why?' asked Miss Fremwell.

  'For no reason, no reason at all. Oh, what an ornery woman.'

  'But why should she do a thing like that?' said Miss Fremwell.

  'I told you: for no reason.'

  'She was crazy?'

  'Must have been. Oh, yes, she must of been.'

  'Did you prosecute her?'

  'Well, no, I didn't. After all, she didn't know what she was doing.'

  'Did it knock you out?'

  Mr Lemon paused and there it was again, so clear, so tall, in his
  mind, the old thought of it. Seeing it there, he put it in words.

  'No, I remember just standing up, I stood up and I said to her,
  "What'd you do?" and I stumbled towards her. There was a mirror. I saw
  the hole in my head, deep, and blood coming out. It made an Indian of
  me. She just stood there, my wife did. And at last she screamed three
  kinds of horror and dropped that hammer on the floor and ran out the
  door.'

  'Did you faint then?'

  'No. I didn't faint. I got out on the street some way and I mumbled to
  somebody I needed a doctor. I got on a bus, mind you, a bus! And paid
  my fare! And said to leave me by some doctor's house downtown.
  Everybody screamed, I tell you. I got sort of weak then, and next
  thing I knew the doctor was working on my head, had it cleaned out
  like a new thimble, like a bunghole in a barrel . . . '

  He reached up and touched that spot now, fingers hovering over it as a
  delicate tongue hovers over the vacated area where once grew a fine
  tooth.

  'A neat job. The doctor kept staring at me, too, as if he ex­pected me
  to fall down dead any minute.'

  'How long did you stay in the hospital?'

  'Two days. Then I was up and around, feeling no better, no worse. By
  that time my wife had picked up and skedaddled.'

  'Oh, my goodness, my goodness,' said Miss Ffemwell, recover­ing her
  breath. 'My heart's going like an eggbeater. I can hear and feel and
  see it all, Mr Lemon. Why, why, oh, why did she do it?'

  'I already told you, for no reason I could see. She was just took with
  a notion, I guess.'

  'But there must have been an argument — ?'

  Blood drummed in Mr Lemon's cheeks. He felt that place up there on his
  head glow like a fiery crater. 'There wasn't no argument. I was just
  sitting, peaceful as you please. I like to sit, my shoes off, my shirt
  unbuttoned, afternoons.'

  'Did you — did you know any other women?'

  'No, never, none!'

  'You didn't — drink?'

  'Just a nip once in a while, you know how it is.'

  'Did you gamble?'

  'No, no, no!'

  'But a hole punched in your head like that, Mr Lemon, my land, my
  land! All over nothing?'

  'You women are all alike. You see something and right off you expect
  the worst. I tell you there was no reason. She just fancied hammers.'

  'What did she say before she hit you?'

  'Just "Wake up, Andrew".'

  'No, before that.'

  'Nothing. Not for half an hour or an hour, anyway. Oh, she said
  something about wanting to go shopping for something or other, but I
  said it was too hot. I'd better lie down, I didn't feel so good. She
  didn't appreciate how I felt. She must have got mad and thought about
  it for an hour and grabbed that hammer and come in and gone kermash. I
  think the weather got her, too.'

  Miss Fremwell sat back thoughtfully in the lattice shadow, her brows
  moving slowly up and then slowly down.

  'How long were you married to her?'

  'A year. I remember we got married in July and in July it was I got
  sick.'

  'Sick?'

  'I wasn't a well man. I worked in a garage. Then I got these backaches
  so I couldn't work and had to lie down afternoons. Elbe, she worked in
  the First National Bank.'

  'I see,' said Miss Fremwell.

  'What?'

  'Nothing,' she said.

  'I'm an easy man to get on with. I don't talk too much. I'm easy-going
  and relaxed. I don't waste money. I'm economical. Even Ellie had to
  admit that. I don't argue. Why, sometimes Ellie would jaw at me and
  jaw at me, like bouncing a ball hard on a house, but me not bouncing
  back. I just sat. I took it easy. What's the use of always stirring
  around and talking, right?'

  Miss Fremwell looked over at Mr Lemon's brow in the moon­light. Her
  lips moved but he could not hear what she said.

  Suddenly, she straightened up and took a deep breath and blinked
  around surprised to see the world out beyond the porch lattice. The
  sounds of traffic came in. to the porch now, as if they had been tuned
  up, they had been so quiet for a time. Miss Fremwell took a deep
  breath and let it out.

  'As you yourself say, Mr Lemon, nobody ever got anywhere arguing.'

  'Right!' he said. 'I'm easy-going, I tell you — '

  But Miss Fremwell's eyes were lidded now and her mouth was strange. He
  sensed this and tapered off.

  A night wind blew fluttering her light summer dress and the sleeves of
  his shirt.

  'It's late,' said Miss Fremwell.

  'Only nine o'clock!'

  'I have to get up early tomorrow.'

  'But you haven't answered my question yet, Miss Frem­well.'

  'Question?' She blinked. 'Oh, the question. Yes.' She rose from the
  wicker seat. She hunted around in the dark for the screen doorknob.
  'Oh now, Mr Lemon, let me think it over.'

  'That's fair enough,' he said. 'No use arguing, is there?'

  The screen door closed. He heard her find her way down the dark warm
  hall. He breathed shallowly, feeling of the third eye in his head, the
  eye that saw nothing.

  He felt a vague unhappiness shift around inside his chest like an
  illness brought on by too much talking. And then he thought of the
  fresh white gift-box waiting with its lid on in his room. He
  quickened. Opening the screen door he walked down the silent hall and
  went into his room. Inside, he slipped and almost fell on a slick copy
  of True Romance Tales.

  He switched on the light, excitedly, smiling, fumbled the box open and
  lifted the toupee from the tissues. He stood before the bright mirror
  and followed directions with the spirit gum and tapes, and tucked it
  here and stuck it there and shifted it again and combed it neat. Then
  he opened the door and walked along the hall to knock for Miss
  Fremwell.

  'Miss Naomi?' he called, smiling.

  The light under her door clicked out at the sound of his voice.

  He stared at the dark keyhole with disbelief.

  'Oh, Miss Naomi?' he said again, quickly.

  Nothing happened in the room. It was dark. After a moment he tried the
  knob, experimentally. The knob rattled. He heard Miss Fremwell sigh.
  He heard her say something. Again, the words were lost. Her small feet
  tapped to the door. The light came on.

  'Yes?' she said, behind the panel.

  'Look, Miss Naomi,' he entreated. 'Open the door. Look.'

  The bolt of the door snapped back. She jerked the door open about an
  inch. One of her eyes looked at him sharply.

  'Look,' he announced proudly, adjusting the toupee so it very
  definitely covered the sunken crater. He imagined he saw him­self in
  her bureau mirror and was pleased. 'Look here, Miss Fremwell!'

  She opened the door a bit wider and looked. Then she slam­med the door
  and locked it. From behind the thin panelling, her voice was toneless.

  'I can still see the hole, Mr Lemon,' she said.
