AND SO DIED RIABOUCHINSKA (1963)

The cellar was cold cement and the dead man was cold stone and the air
was filled with an invisible fall of rain, while the people gathered to
look at the body as if it had been washed in on an empty shore at
morning. The gravity of the earth was drawn to a focus here in this
single basement room - a gravity so immense that it pulled their faces
down, bent their mouths at the corners and drained their cheeks. Their
hands hung weighted and their feet were planted so they could not move
without seeming to walk under water.

A voice was calling, but nobody listened. The voice called again and
only after a long time did the people turn and look, momentarily, into
the air. They were at the seashore in November and this was a gull
crying over their heads in the gray color of dawn. It was a sad crying,
like the birds going south for the steel winter to come. It was an ocean
sounding the shore so far away that it was only a whisper of sand and
wind in a seashell.

The people in the basement room shifted their gaze to a table and a
golden box resting there, no more than twenty four inches long,
inscribed with the name RIABOUCHINSKA. Under the lid of this small
coffin the voice at last settled with finality, and the people stared at
the box, and the dead man lay on the floor, not hearing the soft cry.

"Let me out, let me out, oh, please, please, someone let me out."

And finally Mr. Fabian, the ventriloquist, bent and whispered to the
golden box, "No, Ria, this is serious business. Later. Be quiet, now,
that's a good girl." He shut his eyes and tried to laugh.

From under the polished lid her calm voice said, "Please don't laugh.
You should be much kinder now after what's happened."

Detective lieutenant Krovitch touched Fabian's arm "If you don't mind
we’ll save your dummy act for later. Right now there's all this to clean
up." He glanced at the woman who had now taken a folding chair.

"Mrs. Fabian." He nodded to the young man sitting next to her. "Mr.
Douglas, you're Mr. Fabian’s press agent and manager?"

The young man said he was. Krovitch looked at the face of the man on the
floor. "Fabian, Mrs. Fabian, Mr. Douglas, all of you say you don't know
this man who was murdered here last night, never heard the name Ockham
before. Yet Ockham earlier told the stage manager he knew Fabian and had
to see him about something vitally important."

The voice in the box began again quietly. Krovitch shouted. "Damn it,
Fabian!"

Under the lid, the voice laughed. It was like a muffled bell ringing.

"Pay no attention to her, lieutenant," said Fabian.

"Her? Or you, damn it! What is this? Get together, you two!"

"We'll never be together," said the quiet voice, "never again after
tonight."

Krovitch put out his hand. "Give me the key, Fabian." In the silence
there was the rattle of the key in the small lock, the squeal of the
miniature hinges as the lid was opened and laid back against the table
top. "Thank you," said Riabouchinska.

Krovitch stood motionless, just looking down and seeing Riabouchinska in
her box and not quite believing what he saw.

The face was white and it was cut from marble or from the whitest wood
he had ever seen. It might have been cut from snow. And the neck that
held the head which was as dainty as a porcelain cup with the sun
shining through the thinness of it, the neck was also white. And the
hands could have been ivory and they were thin small things with tiny
fingernails and whorls on the pads of the fingers, little delicate
spirals and lines.

She was all white stone, with light pouring through the stone and light
coming out of the dark eyes with blue tones beneath like fresh
mulberries. He was reminded of milk glass and of cream poured into a
crystal tumbler. The brows were arched and black and thin and the cheeks
were hollowed and them was a faint pink vein in each temple and a faint
blue vein barely visible above the slender bridge of the nose, between
the shining dark eyes.

Her lips were half parted and it looked as if they might be slightly
damp, and the nostrils were arched and modeled perfectly, as were the
ears. The hair was black and it was parted in the middle and drawn back
of the ears and it was real - he could see every single strand of hair.
Her gown was as black as her hair and draped in such a fashion as to
show her shoulders, which were carved wood as white as a stone that has
lain a long time in the sun. She was very beautiful.

Krovitch felt his throat move and then he stopped and did not say
anything.

Fabian took Riabouchinska from her box. "My lovely lady" he said.
"Carved from the rarest imported woods. She's appeared in Paris, Rome,
Istanbul. Everyone in the world loves her and thinks she's really human,
some sort of incredibly delicate midget creature. They won't accept that
she was once part of many forests growing far away from cities and
idiotic people."

Fabian's wife, Alyce, watched her husband, not taking her eyes from his
mouth. Her eyes did not blink once in all the time he was telling of the
doll he held in his arms. He in turn seemed aware of no one but the
doll; the cellar and its people were lost in a mist that settled
everywhere.

But finally the small figure stirred and quivered. "Please, don’t talk
about me! You know Alyce doesn't like it."

"Alyce never has liked it"

"Shh, don't!" cried Riabouchinska. "Not here, not now." And then,
swiftly, she turned to Krovitch and her tiny lips moved. "How did it all
happen? I mean, Mr. Ockham."

Fabian said, "You'd better go to sleep now, Rio."

"But I don't want to," she replied. "I've as much right to listen and
talk, I'm as much a part of this murder as Alyce or-or Mr. Douglas
even."

The press agent threw down his cigarette. "Don't drag me into this,
you-" And he looked at the doll as if it had suddenly become six feet
tall and were breathing there before him.

"It's just that I want the truth to be told." Riabouchinska turned her
head to see all of the room. "And if I'm locked in my coffin there'll be
no truth, for John's a consummate liar and I must watch after him, isn't
that right, John?"

"Yes," he said, his eyes shut, "I suppose it is."

"John loves me best of all the women in the world and I love him and try
to understand his wrong way of thinking."

Krovitch hit the table with his flat. "God damn, oh, God damn it,
Fabian! If you think you can-"

"I'm helpless," said Fabian.

"But she's-"

"I know, I know what you want to say," said Fabian quietly, looking at
the detective. "She's in my throat, is that it? No, no. She's not in my
throat. She's somewhere else. I don't know. Here, or here." He touched
his chest, his head. "She's quick to hide. Sometimes there's nothing I
can do. Sometimes she is only herself, nothing of me at all. Sometimes
she tells me what to do and I must do it. She stands guard, she
reprimands me, is honest where I am dishonest, good when I am wicked as
all the sins that ever were. She lives a life apart. She's raised a wall
in my head and lives there, ignoring me if I try to make her say
improper thing, co-operating if I suggest the right words and
pantomime." Fabian sighed. "So if you intend going on I'm afraid Ria
must be present. Locking her up will do no good, no good at all."

Lieutenant Krovitch sat silently for the better part of a minute, then
made his decision. "All right. Let her stay. It just may be, by God,
that before the night's over I'll be tired enough to ask even a
ventriloquist's dummy questions."

Krovitch unwrapped a fresh cigar, lit it and puffed smoke. "So you don't
recognize the dead man, Mr. Douglas?"

"He looks vaguely familiar. Could be an actor."

Krovitch swore. "Let's all stop lying, what do you say? Look at Ockham's
shoes, his clothing. It's obvious he needed money and came here tonight
to beg, borrow or steal some.

Let me ask you this, Douglas. Are you in love with Mrs. Fabian?"

"Now, wait just a moment!" cried Alyce Fabian.

Krovitch motioned her down. "You sit there, side by side, the two of
you. I'm not exactly blind. When a press agent sits where the husband
should be sitting, consoling the wife, well! The way you look at the
marionette's coffin, Mrs. Fabian, holding your breath when she appears.
You make fists when she talks. Hell, you're obvious."

"If you think for one moment I'm jealous of a stick of wood!"

"Aren't you?"

"No, no, I'm not!"

Fabian moved. "You needn't tell him anything, Alyce."

"Let her!" They all jerked their heads and stared at the small figurine,
whose mouth was now slowly shutting. Even Fabian looked at the
marionette as if it had struck him a blow.

After a long while Alyce Fabian began to speak. "I married John seven
years ago because he said he loved me and because I loved him and I
loved Riabouchinska. At first, anyway. But then I began to see that he
really lived all of his life and paid most of his attentions to her and
I was a shadow waiting in the wings every night. He spent fifty thousand
dollars a year on her wardrobe -a hundred thousand dollars for a
dollhouse with gold and silver and platinum furniture. He tucked her in
a small satin bed each night and talked to her. I thought it was all an
elaborate joke at first and I was wonderfully amused. But when it
finally came to me that I was indeed merely an assistant in his act I
began to feel a vague sort of hatred and distrust-not for the
marionette, because after all it wasn't her doing, but I felt a terrible
growing dislike and hatred for John, because it was his fault.

He, after all, was the control, and all of his cleverness and natural
sadism came out through his relationship with the wooden doll. And when
I finally became very jealous, how silly of me! It was the greatest
tribute I could have paid him and the way he had gone about perfecting
the art of throwing his voice. It was all so idiotic, it was all so
strange. And yet I knew that something had hold of John, just as people
who drink have a hungry animal somewhere in them, starving to death. "So
I moved back and forth from anger to pity, from jealousy to
understanding. There were long periods when I didn't hate him at all,
and I never hated the thing that Ria was in him, for she was the best
half, the good part, the honest and the lovely part of him. She was
everything that he never let himself try to be."

Alyce Fabian stopped talking and the basement room was silent.

"Tell about Mr. Douglas," said a voice, whispering.

Mrs. Fabian did not look up at the marionette. With an effort she
finished it out. "When the years passed and there was so little love and
understanding from John, I guess it was natural I turned to Mr.
Douglas."

Krovitch nodded. "Everything begins to fall into place. Mr. Ockham was a
very poor man, down on his luck, and he came to this theater tonight
because he knew something about you and Mr. Douglas. Perhaps he
threatened to speak to Mr. Fabian if you didn't buy him

off. That would give you the best of reasons to get rid of him."

"That's even sillier than all the rest," said Alyce Fabian tiredly. "I
didn't kill him."

"Mr. Douglas might have and not told you."

"Why kill a man?" said Douglas. "John knew all about us."

"I did indeed," said John Fabian, and laughed.

He stopped laughing and his hand twitched, hidden in the snowflake
interior of the tiny doll, and her mouth opened and shut, opened and
shut. He was trying to make her carry the laughter on after he had
stopped, but there was no sound, save the little empty whisper of her
lips moving and gasping, while Fabian stared down at the little face and
perspiration came out, shining, upon his cheeks.

The next afternoon lieutenant Krovitch moved through the theater
darkness backstage, found the iron stairs and climbed with great
thought, biking as much time as he deemed necessary on each step, up to
the second-level dressing rooms. He rapped on one of the thin-paneled
doors. "Come in," said Fabian's voice from what seemed a great distance.

Krovitch entered and closed the door and stood looking at the man who
was slumped before his dressing mirror. "I have something I'd like to
show you," Krovitch said. His face showing no emotion whatever, he
opened a manila folder and pulled out a glossy photograph which he
placed on the dressing table.

John Fabian raised his eyebrows, glanced quickly up at Krovitch and then
settled slowly back in his chair. He put his fingers to the bridge of
his nose and massaged his face carefully, as if he had a headache.
Krovitch turned the picture over and began to read from the typewritten
data on the back. "Name, Miss Ilyana Riamonova. One hundred pounds. Blue
eyes. Black hair. Oval face. Born 1914, New York City. Disappeared 1934.
Believed a victim of Russo-Slav parentage. Et cetera, Et cetera."

Fabian's lip twitched. Krovitch laid the photograph down, shaking his
head thoughtfully. "It was pretty silly of me to go through police files
for a picture of a marionette. You should have heard the laughter at
headquarters. God. Still, here she is. Riabouchinska. Not papier-mache,
not wood, not a puppet, but a woman who once lived and moved around
and---disappeared." He looked steadily at Fabian.

"Suppose you take it from there?"

Fabian half smiled. "There's nothing to it at all. I saw this woman's
picture a long time ago, liked her looks and copied my marionette after
her."

"Nothing to it at all." Krovitch took a deep breath and exhaled, wiping
his face with a huge handkerchief. "Fabian, this very morning I shuffled
through a stack of Billboard magazines that high. In the year 1934 I
found an interesting article concerning an act which played on a
second-rate circuit, known as Fabian and Sweet William. Sweet William
was a little boy dummy. There was a girl assistant - Ilyana Riamonova.
No picture of her in the article, but I at least had a name, the name of
a real person, to go on. It was simple to check police files then and
dig up this picture. The resemblance, needless to say, between the live
woman on one hand and the puppet on the other is nothing short of
incredible. Suppose you go back and tell your story over, Fabian."

"She was my assistant, that's all. I simply used her as a model."

"You're making me sweat," said the detective.

"Do you think I'm a fool? Do you think I don't know love when I see it?
I've watched you handle the marionette, I've seen you talk to it, I've
seen how you make it react to you. You're in love with the puppet
naturally, because you loved the original woman very, very much. I've
lived too long not to sense that. Hell, Fabian, stop fencing around."

Fabian lifted his pale slender hands, turned them over, examined them
and let them fall. "All right. In 1934 I was billed as Fabian and Sweet
William. Sweet William was a small bulb-nosed boy dummy I carved a long
time ago. I was in Los Angeles when this girl appeared at the stage door
one night. She'd followed my work for years. She was desperate for a job
and she hoped to be my assistant..."

He remembered her in the half-light of the alley behind the theater and
how startled he was at her freshness and eagerness to work with and for
him and the way the coal rain touched softly down through the narrow
alleyway and caught in small spangles through her hair, melting in dark
warmness, and the rain beaded upon her white porcelain hand holding her
coat together at her neck.

He saw her lips' motion in the dark and her voice, separated off on
another sound track, it seemed, speaking to him in the autumn wind, and
he remembered that without his saying yes or no or perhaps she was
suddenly on the stage with him, in the great pouring bright light, and
in two months he, who had always prided himself on his cynicism and
disbelief, had stepped off the rim of the world after her, plunging down
a bottomless place of no limit and no light anywhere.

Arguments followed, and more than arguments--things said and done that
lacked all sense and sanity and fairness. She had edged away from him at
last, causing his rages and remarkable hysterias. Once he burned her
entire wardrobe in a fit of jealousy. She had taken this quietly.

But then one night he handed her a week's notice, accused her of
monstrous disloyalty, shouted at her, seized her, slapped her again and
again across the face, bullied her about and thrust her out the door,
slamming it! She disappeared that night. When he found the next day that
she was really gone and there was nowhere to find her, it was like
standing in the center of a titanic explosion. All the world was smashed
flat and all the echoes of the explosion came back to reverberate at
midnight, at four in the morning, at dawn, and he was up early, stunned
with the sound of coffee simmering and the sound of matches being struck
and cigarettes lit and himself trying to shave and looking at mirrors
that were sickening in their distortion.

He clipped out all advertisements that he took in the papers and pasted
them in neat rows in a scrapbook - all the ads describing her and
telling about her and asking for her back. He even put a private
detective on the case. People talked. The police dropped by to question
him. There was more talk.

But she was gone like a piece of white incredibly fragile tissue paper,
blown over the sky and down. A record of her was sent to the largest
cities, and that was the end of it for the police. But not for Fabian.
She might be dead or just run, run away, but wherever she was he knew
that somehow in some way he would have her back.

One night he came home, bringing his own darkness with him, and
collapsed upon a chair, and before he knew it he found himself speaking
to Sweet William in the totally black room "William, it's all over and
done. I can't keep it up!" And William cried, "Coward! Coward!" from the
air above his head, out of the emptiness. "You can get her back if

you want!"

Sweet William squeaked and clappered at him in the night. "Yes, you can!
Think!" he insisted. "Think of a way. You can do it. Put me aside, lock
me up. Start all over."

"Start all over?"

"Yes," whispered Sweet William, and darkness moved within darkness.
"Yes. Buy wood, Buy fine new wood. Buy hardgrained wood. Buy beautiful
fresh new wood. And carve. Carve slowly and carve carefully. Whittle
away. Cut delicately. Make the little nostrils so. And cut her thin
black brows round and high, so, and make her cheeks in small hollows.
Carve, carve"

"No! It's foolish. I could never do it!"

"Yes you could. Yes you could, could, could, could... "

The voice faded, a ripple of water in an underground stream. The stream
rose up and swallowed him. His head fell forward. Sweet William sighed.
And then the two of them lay like stones buried under a waterfall.

The next morning, John Fabian bought the hardest, finest grained piece
of wood that he could find and brought it home and laid it on the table,
but could not touch it. He sat for hours staring at it. It was
impossible to think that out of this cold chunk of material he expected
his hands and his memory to re-create something warm and pliable and
familiar. There was no way even faintly to approximate that quality of
rain and summer and the first powderings of snow upon a clear pane of
glass in the middle of a December night. No way, no way at all to catch
the snowflake without having it melt swiftly in your clumsy fingers.

And yet Sweet William spoke out, sighing and whispering, after midnight,
"You can do it. Oh, yes, yes, you can do it." And so he began. It took
him an entire month to carve her hands into things as natural and
beautiful as shells lying in the sun. Another month and the skeleton,
like a fossil imprint he was searching out, stamped and hidden in the
wood, was revealed, all febrile and so infinitely delicate as to suggest
the veins in the white flesh of an apple.

And all the while Sweet William lay mantled in dust in his box that was
fast becoming a very real coffin. Sweet William croaking and wheezing
some feeble sarcasm, some sour criticism, some hint, some help but dying
all the time, fading, soon to be untouched, soon to be like a heath
molted in summer and left behind to blow in the wind.

As the weeks passed and Fabian molded and scraped and polished the new
wood, Sweet William lay longer and longer in stricken silence, and one
day as Fabian held the puppet in his hand Sweet William seemed to look
at him a moment with puzzled eyes and then there was a death rattle in
his throat.

And Sweet William was gone. Now as he worked, a fluttering, a faint
motion of speech began far back in his throat, echoing and re-echoing,
speaking silently like a breeze among dry leaves. And then for the first
time he held the doll in a certain way in his hands and memory moved
down his arms and into his fingers and from his lingers into the
hollowed wood and the tiny hands flickered and the body became suddenly
soft and pliable and her eyes opened and looked up at him.

And the small mouth opened the merest fraction of an inch and she was
ready to speak and he knew all of the things that she must say to him,
he knew the first and the second and the third things he would have her
say. There was a whisper, a whisper, a whisper.

The tiny head turned this way gently, that way gently. The mouth half
opened again and began to speak. And as it spoke he bent his head and he
could feel the warm breath-of course it was there!-coming from her
mouth, and when he listened very carefully, holding her to his head, his
eyes shut, wasn't it there, too, softly, gently-the beating of her

heart?

Krovitch sat in a chair for a full minute after Fabian stopped talking.
Finally he said, "I see. And your wife?"

"Alyce? She was my second assistant, of course. She worked very hard
and, God help her, she loved me. It's hard now to know why I ever
married her. It was unfair of me."

"What about the dead man--Ockham?"

"I never saw him before you showed me his body in the theater basement
yesterday."

"Fabian," said the detective.

"It's the truth!"

"Fabian."

"The truth, the truth, damn it, I swear it's the truth!"

"The truth." There was a whisper like the sea coming in on the gray
shore at early morning. The water was ebbing in a fine lace on the sand.
The sky was cold and empty. There were no people on the shore. The sun
was gone. And the whisper said again, "The truth."

Fabian sat up straight and took hold of his knees with his thin hands.
His face was rigid. Krovitch found himself making the same motion he had
made the day before-looking at the gray ceiling as if it were a November
sky and a lonely bird going over and away, gray within the cold
grayness. "The truth." Fading. "The truth."

Krovitch lifted himself and moved as carefully as he could to the far
side of the dressing room where the golden box lay open and inside the
box the thing that whispered and talked and could laugh sometimes and
could sometimes sing. He carried the golden box over and set it down in
front of Fabian and waited for him to put his living hand within the
gloved delicate hollowness, waited for-the fine small mouth to quiver
and the eyes to focus. He did not have to wait long. "The first letter
came a month ago."

"No."

"The first letter came a month ago."

"No, no!"

"The letter said, "Riabouchinska, born 1914, died 1934. Born again in
1935." Mr. Ockham was a juggler. He'd been on the same bill with John
and Sweet William years before. He remembered that once there had been a
woman, before there was a puppet."

"No, that's not true!"

"Yes," said the voice.

Snow was falling in silences and even deeper silences through the
dressing room. Fabian's mouth trembled. He stared at the blank walls as
if seeking some new door by which to escape. He half rose from his
chair. "Please..."

"Ockham threatened to tell about us to everyone in the world."

Krovitch saw the doll quiver, saw the fluttering of the lips, saw
Fabian's eyes widen and fix and his throat convulse and tighten as if to
stop the whispering. "I-I was in the room when Mr. Ockham came. I lay in
the box and I listened and heard, and I know." The voice blurred then
recovered and went on. "Mr. Ockham threatened tear me up, burn me into
ashes if John didn't pay him thousand dollars. Then suddenly there was a
falling sound. Cry.. Mr. Ockham's head must have struck the floor. I
heard John cry out and I heard him swearing, I heard him sobbing, I
heard a gasping and a choking sound."

"You heard nothing! You're deaf, you're blind! You! Wood!" cried Fabian.

"But I heard," she said, and stopped as if someone had put hand to her
mouth.

Fabian had leaped to his feet now and stood with the doll in his hand.

The mouth clapped twice, three times, then finally made words. "The
choking sound stopped. I heard John drag Mr. Ockham down the stairs
under the theater the old dressing rooms that haven't been used in
years. Down, down, down I heard them going away and away-down..."

Krovitch stepped back as if he were watching a motion picture that had
suddenly grown monstrously tall. The figuring terrified and frightened
him, they were immense, they threatened to inundate him with size.
Someone had turned up the sound so that it screamed.

He saw Fabian's teeth, a grimace, a whisper, a clench. He saw the man's
eyes squeeze shut.

Now the soft voice was so high and faint it trembled toward nothingness.
"I'm not made to live this way. This way. There’s nothing for us now.
Everyone will know, everyone will. Even when you killed him and I lay
asleep last night, I dreamed. I knew I realized. We both knew, we both
realized that these would be our last days, our last hours. Because
while I've lived with your weakness and I've lived with your lies, I
can't live with something that kills and hurts in killing. There's no
way to go on from here. How can I live alongside such knowledge?.."

Fabian held her into the sunlight which shone dimly though the small
dressing-room window. She looked at him and there was nothing in her
eyes. His hand shook and shaking made the marionette tremble, too.

Her mouth close and opened, closed and opened, closed and opened, again
and again and again.

Silence.

Fabian moved his fingers unbelievingly to his own mouth. A film slid
across his eyes. He looked like a man lost in the street, trying to
remember the number of a certain house, trying to find a certain window
with a certain light He swayed about, staring at the walls, at Krovitch,
at the doll, at his free hand, turning the fingers over, touching his
throat, opening his mouth. He listened.

Miles away in a cave, a single wave came in from the sea and whispered
down in foam. A gull moved soundlessly, not beating its wings — a
shadow. "She's gone. She's gone. I can't find her. She's run off. I
can’t find her. I can’t find her. I try, I try, but she's run away off
far. Will you help me? Will you help me find her? Will you help me find
her? Will you please help me find her?"

Riabouchinska slipped bonelessly from his limp hand, folded over and
glided noiselessly down to lie upon the cold floor, her eyes closed, her
mouth shut.

Fabian did not look at her as Krovitch led him out the door.
