prose_contemporaryRayBradburyThe Lifework of Juan DíazcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
The Lifework of Juan Díaz
Filomena flung the plank door shut with such violence the candle blew
out; she and her crying children were left in darkness. The only things
to be seen were through the window – the adobe houses, the cobbled
streets, where now the gravedigger stalked up the hill, his spade on his
shoulder, moonlight honing the blue metal as he turned into the high
cold graveyard and was gone.
‘Mamacita, what’s wrong?’ Filepe, her oldest son, just nine, pulled at
her. For the strange dark man had said nothing, just stood at the door
with the spade and nodded his head and waited until she banged the door
in his face. ‘Mamacita?’
‘That gravedigger.’ Filomena’s hands shook as she relit the candle. ‘The
rent is long overdue on your father’s grave. Your father will be dug up
and placed down in the catacomb, with a wire to hold him standing
against the wall, with the other mummies.’
‘No, Mamacita!’
‘Yes.’ She caught the children to her. ‘Unless we find the money. Yes.’
‘I – I will kill that gravedigger!’ cried Filepe.
‘It is his job. Another would take his place if he died, and another and
another after him.’
They thought about the man and the terrible high place where he lived
and moved and the catacomb he stood guard over and the strange earth
into which people went to come forth dried like desert flowers and
tanned like leather for shoes and hollow as drums which could be tapped
and beaten, an earth which made great cigar-brown rustling dry mummies
that might languish forever leaning like fence poles along the catacomb
halls. And, thinking of all this familiar but unfamiliar stuff, Filomena
and her children were cold in summer, and silent though their hearts
made a vast stir in their bodies. They huddled together for a moment
longer and then:
‘Filepe,’ said the mother, ‘come.’ She opened the door and they stood in
the moonlight listening to hear any far sound of a blue metal spade
biting the earth, heaping the sand and old flowers. But there was a
silence of stars ‘You others,’ said Filomena, ‘to bed.’
The door shut. The candle flickered.
The cobbles of the town poured in a river of gleaming moon-silver stone
down the hills, past green parks and little shops and the place where
the coffin maker tapped and made the clock sounds of death-watch beetles
all day and all night, forever in the life of these people. Up along the
slide and rush of moonlight on the stones, her skirt whispering of her
need, Filomena hurried with Filepe breathless at her side. They turned
in at the Official Palace.
The man behind the small, littered desk in the dimly lit office glanced
up in some surprise. ‘Filomena, my cousin!’
‘Ricardo.’ She took his hand and dropped it. ‘You must help me.’
‘If God does not prevent. But ask.’
‘They—’ The bitter stone lay in her mouth; she tried to get it out.
‘Tonight they are taking Juan from the earth.’
Ricardo, who had half risen, now sat back down, his eyes growing wide
and full of light, and then narrowing and going dull. ‘If not God, then
God’s creatures prevent. Has the year gone so swiftly since Juan’s
death? Can it truly be the rent has come due?’ He opened his empty palms
and showed them to the woman. ‘Ah, Filomena, I have no money.’
‘But if you spoke to the gravedigger. You are the police.’
‘Filomena, Filomena, the law stops at the edge of the grave.’
‘But if he will give me ten weeks, only ten, it is almost the end of
summer. The Day of the Dead is coming. I will make, I will sell, the
candy skulls, and give him the money, oh, please, Ricardo.’
And here at last, because there was no longer a way to hold the coldness
in and she must let it free before it froze her so she could never move
again, she put her hands to her face and wept. And Filepe, seeing that
it was permitted, wept, too, and said her name over and over.
‘So,’ said Ricardo, rising. ‘Yes, yes. I will walk to the mouth of the
catacomb and spit into it. But, ah, Filomena, expect no answer. Not so
much as an echo. Lead the way.’ And he put his official cap, very old,
very greasy, very worn, upon his head.
The graveyard was higher than the churches, higher than all the
buildings, higher than all the hills. It lay on the highest rise of all,
overlooking the night valley of the town.
As they entered the vast ironwork gate and advanced among the tombs, the
three were confronted by the sight of the gravedigger’s back bent into
an ever-increasing hole, lifting out spade after spade of dry dirt onto
an ever-increasing mound. The digger did not even look up, but made a
quiet guess as they stood at the grave’s edge.
‘Is that Ricardo Albañez, the chief of police?’
‘Stop digging!’ said Ricardo.
The spade flashed down, dug, lifted, poured. ‘There is a funeral
tomorrow. This grave must be empty, open and ready.’
‘No one has died in the town.’
‘Someone always dies. So I dig. I have already waited two months for
Filomena to pay what she owes. I am a patient man.’
‘Be still more patient.’ Ricardo touched the moving, hunching shoulder
of the bent man.
‘Chief of the police.’ The digger paused to lean, sweating, upon his
spade. ‘This is my country, the country of the dead. These here tell me
nothing, nor does any man. I rule this land with a spade, and a steel
mind. I do not like the live ones to come talking, to disturb the
silence I have so nicely dug and filled. Do I tell you how to conduct
your municipal palace? Well, then. Good night.’ He resumed his task.
‘In the sight of God,’ said Ricardo, standing straight and stiff, his
fists at his sides, ‘and this woman and her son, you dare to desecrate
the husband-father’s final bed?’
‘It is not final and not his, I but rented it to him.’ The spade floated
high, flashing moonlight. ‘I did not ask the mother and son here to
watch this sad event. And listen to me, Ricardo, police chief, one day
you will die. I will bury you. Remember that:I. You will be in my hands.
Then, oh,then.’
‘Then what?’ shouted Ricardo. ‘You dog, do you threaten me?’
‘I dig.’ The man was very deep now, vanishing in the shadowed grave,
sending only his spade up to speak for him again and again in the cold
light. ‘Good night, señor, señora, niño. Good night.’
Outside her small adobe hut, Ricardo smoothed his cousin’s hair and
touched her cheek. ‘Filomena, ah, God.’
‘You did what you could.’
‘That terrible one. When I am dead, what awful indignities might he not
work upon my helpless flesh? He would set me upside down in the tomb,
hang me by my hair in a far, unseen part of the catacomb. He takes on
weight from knowing someday he will have us all. Good night, Filomena.
No, not even that. For the night is bad.’
He went away down the street.
Inside, among her many children, Filomena sat with face buried in her
lap.
Late the next afternoon, in the tilted sunlight, shrieking, the
schoolchildren chased Filepe home. He fell, they circled him, laughing.
‘Filepe, Filepe, we saw your father today, yes!’
‘Where?’ they asked themselves shyly.
‘In the catacomb!’ they gave answer.
‘What a lazy man! He just stands there!’
‘He never works!’
‘He don’t speak! Oh, that Juan Díaz!’
Filepe stood violently atremble under the blazed sun, hot tears
streaming from his wide and half-blinded eyes.
Within the hut, Filomena heard, and the knife sounds entered her heart.
She leaned against the cool wall, wave after dissolving wave of
remembrance sweeping her.
In the last month of his life, agonized, coughing, and drenched with
midnight perspirations, Juan had stared and whispered only to the raw
ceiling above his straw mat.
‘What sort of man am I, to starve my children and hunger my wife? What
sort of death is this, to die in bed?’
‘Hush.’ She placed her cool hand over his hot mouth. But he talked
beneath her fingers. ‘What has our marriage been but hunger and sickness
and now nothing? Ah, God, you are a good woman, and now I leave you with
no money even for my funeral!’
And then at last he had clenched his teeth and cried out at the darkness
and grown very quiet in the warm candleshine and taken her hands into
his own and held them and swore an oath upon them, vowed himself with
religious fervor.
‘Filomena, listen. I will be with you. Though I have not protected in
life, I will protect in death. Though I fed not in life, in death I will
bring food. Though I was poor, I will not be poor in the grave. This I
know. This I cry out. This I assure you of. In death I will work and do
many things. Do not fear. Kiss the little ones. Filomena. Filomena …’
And then he had taken a deep breath, a final gasp, like one who settles
beneath warm waters. And he had launched himself gently under, still
holding his breath, for a testing of endurance through all eternity.
They waited for a long time for him to exhale. But this he did not do.
He did not reappear above the surface of life again. His body lay like a
waxen fruit on the mat, a surprise to the touch. Like a wax apple to the
teeth, so was Juan Díaz to all their senses.
And they took him away to the dry earth which was like the greatest
mouth of all which held him a long time, draining the bright moisture of
his life, drying him like ancient manuscript paper, until he was a mummy
as light as chaff, an autumn harvest ready for the wind.
From that time until this, the thought had come and come again to
Filomena, how will I feed my lost children, with Juan burning to brown
crepe in a silver-tinseled box, how lengthen my children’s bones and
push forth their teeth in smiles and color their cheeks?
The children screamed again outside, in happy pursuit of Filepe.
Filomena looked to the distant hill, up which bright tourists’ cars
hummed bearing many people from the United States. Even now they paid a
peso each to that dark man with the spade so that they might step down
throught his catacombs among the standing dead, to see what the sun-dry
earth and the hot wind did toallbodies in this town.
Filomena watched the tourist cars, and Juan’s voice whispered,
‘Filomena.’ And again: ‘This I cry out. In death I will work … I will
not be poor … Filomena …’ His voice ghosted away. And she swayed and was
almost ill, for an idea had come into her mind which was new and
terrible and made her heart pound. ‘Filepe!’ she cried suddenly.
And Filepe escaped the jeering children and shut the door on the hot
white day and said, ‘Yes, Mamacita?’
‘Sit, niño, we must talk, in the name of the saints, we must!’
She felt her face grow old because the soul grew old behind it, and she
said, very slowly, with difficulty, ‘Tonight we must go in secret to the
catacomb.’
‘Shall we take a knife’ – Filepe smiled wildly –’and kill the dark man?’
‘No, no, Filepe, listen.…’
And he heard the words that she spoke.
And the hours passed and it was a night of churches. It was night of
bells, and singing. Far off in the air of the valley you could hear
voices chanting the evening Mass, you could see children walking with
lit candles, in a solemn file, ’way over there on the side of the dark
hill, and the huge bronze bells were tilting up and showering out their
thunderous crashes and bangs that made the dogs spin, dance and bark on
the empty roads.
The graveyard lay glistening, all whiteness, all marble snow, all
sparkle and glitter of harsh gravel like an eternal fall of hail,
crunched under their feet as Filomena and Filepe took their shadows with
them, ink-black and constant from the unclouded moon. They glanced over
their shoulders in apprehension, but one cried Halt! They had seen the
gravedigger drift, made footless by shadow, down the hill, in answer to
a night summons. Now: ‘Quick, Filepe, the lock!’ Together they inserted
a long metal rod between padlock hasps and wooden doors which lay flat
to the dry earth. Together they seized and pulled. The wood split. The
padlock hasps sprang loose. Together they raised the huge doors and
flung them back, rattling. Together they peered down into the darkest,
most silent night of all. Below, the catacomb waited.
Filomena straightened her shoulders and took a breath.
‘Now.’
And put her foot upon the first step.
In the adobe of Filomena Díaz, her children slept sprawled here or there
in the cool night room, comforting each other with the sound of their
warm breathing.
Suddenly their eyes sprang wide.
Footsteps, slow and halting, scraped the cobbles outside. The door shot
open. For an instant the silhouettes of three people loomed in the white
evening sky beyond the door. One child sat up and struck a match.
‘No!’ Filomena snatched out with one hand to claw the light. The match
fell away. She gasped. The door slammed. The room was solid black. To
this blackness Filomena said at last:
‘Light no candles. Your father has come home.’
The thudding, the insistent knocking and pounding shook the door at
midnight.
Filomena opened the door.
The gravedigger almost screamed in her face. ‘There you are! Thief!
Robber!’
Behind him stood Ricardo, looking very rumpled and very tired and very
old. ‘Cousin, permit us, I am sorry. Our friend here—’
‘I am the friend of no one,’ cried the gravedigger. ‘A lock has been
broken and a body stolen. To know the identity of the body is to know
the thief. I could only bring you here. Arrest her.’
‘One small moment, please.’ Ricardo took the man’s hand from his arm and
turned, bowing gravely to his cousin. ‘May we enter?’
‘There, there!’ The gravedigger leaped in, gazed wildly about and
pointed to a far wall. ‘You see?’
But Ricardo would look only at this woman. Very gently he asked her,
‘Filomena?’
Filomena’s face was the face of one who has gone through a long tunnel
of night and has come to the other end at last, where lives a shadow of
coming day. Her eyes were prepared. Her mouth knew what to do. All the
terror was gone now. What remained was as light as the great length of
autumn chaff she had carried down the hill with her good son. Nothing
more could happen to her ever in her life; this you knew from how she
held her body as she said, ‘We have no mummy here.’
‘I believe you, cousin, but’ – Ricardo cleared his throat uneasily and
raised his eyes –’what stands there against the wall?’
‘To celebrate the festival of the day of the dead ones’ – Filomena did
not turn to look where he was looking –’I have taken paper and flour and
wire and clay and made of it a life-size toy which looks like the
mummies.’
‘Have you indeed done this?’ asked Ricardo, impressed.
‘No, no!’ The gravedigger almost danced in exasperation.
‘With your permission.’ Ricardo advanced to confront the figure which
stood against the wall. He raised his flashlight. ‘So,’ he said. ‘And
so.’
Filomena looked only out the open door into the late moonlight. ‘The
plan I have for this mummy which I have made with my own hands is good.’
‘What plan, what?’ the gravedigger demanded, turning.
‘We will have money to eat with. Would you deny my children this?’
But Ricardo was not listening. Near the far wall, he tilted his head
this way and that and rubbed his chin, squinting at the tall shape which
enwrapped its own shadow, which kept its own silence, leaning against
the adobe.
‘A toy,’ mused Ricardo. ‘The largest death toy I have ever seen. I have
seen man-size skeletons in windows, and man-size coffins made of
cardboard and filled with candy skulls, yes. But this! I stand in awe,
Filomena.’
‘Awe?’ said the gravedigger, his voice rising to a shriek. ‘This is no
toy, this is—’
‘Do you swear, Filomena?’ said Ricardo, not looking at him. He reached
out and tapped a few times on the rust-colored chest of the figure. It
made the sound of a lonely drum. ‘Do you swear this is papier-mâché?’
‘By the Virgin, I swear.’
‘Well, then.’ Ricardo shrugged, snorted, laughed. ‘It is simple. If you
swear by the Virgin, what more need be said? No court action is
necessary. Besides, it might take weeks or months to prove or disprove
this is or is not a thing of flour paste and old newspapers colored with
brown earth.’
‘Weeks, months, prove, disprove!’ The gravedigger turned in a circle as
if to challenge the sanity of the universe held tight and impossible in
these four walls. ‘This “toy” is my property, mine!’
‘The “toy,”’ said Filomena serenely, gazing out at the hills, ‘if it is
a toy, and made by me, must surely belong to me. And even,’ she went on,
quietly communing with the new reserve of peace in her body, ‘even if it
is not a toy, and it is indeed Juan Díaz come home, why, then, does not
Juan Díaz belong first to God?’
‘How can one argue that?’ wondered Ricardo.
The gravedigger was willing to try. But before he had stuttered forth a
half-dozen words, Filomena said, ‘And after God, in God’s eyes, and at
God’s altar and in God’s church, on one of God’s holiest days, did not
Juan Díaz say that he would be mine throughout his days?’
‘Throughout his days – ah, ha, there you are!’ said the gravedigger.
‘But his days are over, and now he is mine!’
‘So,’ said Filomena, ‘God’s property first, and then Filomena Díaz’
property, that is if this toy is not a toy and is Juan Díaz, and anyway,
landlord of the dead, you evicted your tenant, you so much as said you
did not want him, if you love him so dearly and want him, will you pay
the new rent and tenant him again?’
But so smothered by rage was the landlord of silence that it gave
Ricardo time to step in. ‘Grave keeper, I see many months and many
lawyers, and many points, fine points, to argue this way and that, which
include real estate, toy manufactories, God, Filomena, one Juan Díaz
wherever he is, hungry children, the conscience of a digger of graves,
and so much complication that death’s business will suffer. Under the
circumstances are you prepared for these long years in and out of
court?’
‘I am prepared—’ said the gravedigger, and paused.
‘My good man,’ said Ricardo, ‘the other night you gave me some small bit
of advice, which I now return to you. I do not tell you how to control
your dead. You, now, do not say how I control the living. Your
jurisdiction ends at the tombyard gate. Beyond stand my citizens, silent
or otherwise. So …’
Ricardo thumped the upright figure a last time on its hollow chest. It
gave forth the sound of a beating heart, a single strong and vibrant
thump which made the gravedigger jerk.
‘I pronounce this officially fake, a toy, no mummy at all. We waste time
here. Come along, citizen gravedigger. Back to your proper land! Good
night, Filomena’s children, Filomena, good cousin.’
‘What aboutit, what abouthim?’ said the gravedigger, motionless,
pointing.
‘Why do you worry?’ asked Ricardo. ‘It goes nowhere. It stays, if you
should wish to pursue the law. Do you see it running? You do not. Good
night. Good night.’
The door slammed. They were gone before Filomena could put out her hand
to thank anyone.
She moved in the dark to place a candle at the foot of the tall
corn-husk-dry silence. This was a shrine now, she thought, yes. She lit
the candle.
‘Do not fear, children,’ she murmured. ‘To sleep now. To sleep.’ And
Filepe lay down and the others lay back, and at last Filomena herself
lay with a single thin blanket over her on the woven mat by the light of
the single candle, and her thoughts before she moved into sleep were
long thoughts of the many days that made up tomorrow. In the morning,
she thought, the tourist cars will sound on the road, and Filepe will
move among them, telling them of this place. And there will be a painted
sign outside this door: MUSEUM–30 CENTAVOS. And the tourists will come
in, because the graveyard is on the hill, but we are first, we are here
in the valley, and close at hand and easy to find. And one day soon with
these tourists’ money we shall mend the roof, and buy great sacks of
fresh corn flour, and some tangerines, yes, for the children. And
perhaps one day we will all travel to Mexico City, to the very big
schools because of what has happened on this night.
For Juan Díaz is truly home, she thought. He is here, he waits for those
who would come to see him. And at his feet I will place a bowl into
which the tourists will place more money that Juan Díaz himself tried so
hard to earn in all his life.
Juan. She raised her eyes. The breathing of the children was hearthwarm
about her. Juan, do you see? Do you know? Do you truly understand? Do
you forgive, Juan, do you forgive?
The candle flame flickered.
She closed her eyes. Behind her lids she saw the smile of Juan Díaz, and
whether it was the smile that death had carved upon his lips, or whether
it was a new smile she had given him or imagined for him, she could not
say. Enough that she felt him standing tall and alone and on guard,
watching over them and proud through the rest of the night.
A dog barked far away in a nameless town.
Only the gravedigger, wide awake in his tombyard, heard.

