                                 
                                 Bright Phoenix
                                      1963

     One   day  in  April  2022  the  great  library  door  slammed  flat  shut.
Thunder.
Hullo,  I  thought.
At  the  bottom  step glowering up at my desk, in a
United  Legion  uniform which no longer hung as neatly upon him as it had twenty
years  before, stood Jonathan Barnes.
Seeing his bravado momentarily in pause, I
recalled  ten  thousand Veterans’ speeches sprayed from his mouth, the endless
wind-whipped  flag  parades  he  had  hustled,  panted  through, the grease-cold
chicken  and  green-pea  patriot banquets he had practically cooked himself; the
civic  drives  stillborn in his hat.
Now Jonathan Barnes stomped up the creaking
main  library  steps,  giving each the full downthrust of his power, weight, and
new authority. His echoes, rushed back from the vast ceilings, must have shocked
even  him  into  better  manners, for when he reached my desk, I felt his warmly
liquored  breath  stir  mere  whispers  on  my  face.
"I’m here for the books,
Tom.”
I  turned  casually  to  check  some index cards. "When they’re ready,
we’ll call you.”
"Hold on,” he said. "Wait-"
"You’re here to pick up the
Veterans’  Salvage  books  for hospital distribution?”
"No, no,” he cried.
"I’m  here  for  all the books.”
I gazed at him.
"Well,” he said, "most of
them.”
"Most?”  I  blinked  once,  then  bent to riffle the files. "Only ten
volumes  to a person at a time. Let’s see. Here! Why, you let your card expire
when  you  were twenty years old, thirty years ago. See?” I held it up.
Barnes
put  both hands on the desk and leaned his great bulk upon them. "I see that you
are  interfering.”  His face began to color, his breath to husk and rattle. "I
don’t  need  a  card  for my work!”
So loud was his whisper that a myriad of
white  pages  stopped butterflying under far green lamps in the big stone rooms.
Faintly,  a  few  books  thudded shut.
Reading people lifted their serene faces.
Their  eyes,  made  antelope  by the time and weather of this place, pleaded for
silence  to  return,  as  it  always  must when a tiger has come and gone from a
special  fresh-water  spring,  as  this  surely  was. Looking at these upturned,
gentle  faces I thought of my forty years of living, working, even sleeping here
among hidden lives and vellumed, silent, and imaginary people. Now, as always, I
considered  my library as a cool cavern or fresh, ever growing forest into which
men  passed  from  the  heat of the day and the fever of motion to refresh their
limbs  and  bathe  their  minds  an hour in the grass-shade illumination, in the
sound  of  small  breezes  wandered out from the turning and turning of the pale
soft  book  pages.  Then,  better focused, their ideas rehung upon their frames,
their  flesh  made  easy  on  their  bones,  men might walk forth into the blast
furnace of reality, noon, mob-traffic, improbably senescence, inescapable death.
I  had  seen thousands careen into my library starved, and leave well-fed. I had
watched  lost people find themselves. I had known realists to dream and dreamers
to  come  awake  in  this  marble  sanctuary  where silence was a marker in each
book.
"Yes,”  I  said  at last. "But it will only take a moment to re-register
you.  Fill  in  this  new  card.  Give two reliable references-"
"I don’t need
references,”  said Jonathan Barnes, "to burn books!”
"Contrarily,” said I.
"You’ll  need  even  more, to do that.”
"My men are my references. They’re
waiting  outside  for  the  books. They’re dangerous.”
"Men like that always
are.”
"No  no,  I mean the books, idiot. The books are dangerous. Good God, no
two  agree.  All  the damn double-talk. All the lousy babel and slaver and spit.
So,  we’re  out to simplify, clarify, hew to the line. We need-"
"To talk this
over,”  said  I,  taking  up  a  copy of Demosthenes, tucking it under my arm.
"It’s  time  for  my  dinner. Join me, please-"
I was halfway to the door when
Barnes,  wide-eyed, suddenly remembered the silver whistle hung from his blouse,
jammed it to his wet lips, and gave it a piercing blast.
The library doors burst
wide.  A  flood  of  black  charcoal-burned  uniformed men collided boisterously
upstairs.
I called, softly.
They stopped, surprised.
"Quietly,” I said.
Barnes
seized my arm. "Are you opposing due process?”
"No,” I said. "I won’t even
ask  to  see  your  property  invasion  permit.  I  wish  only  silence  as  you
work.”
The  readers at the tables had leaped up at the storm of feet. I patted
the  air.  They  sat  back down and did not glance up again at these men crammed
into  their  tight dark char-smeared suits who stared at my mouth now as if they
disbelieved  my  cautions.  Barnes  nodded.  The  men  moved swiftly, on tiptoe,
through the big library rooms. With extra care, with proper stealth, they raised
the  windows.  Soundlessly, whispering, they collected books from the shelves to
toss  down  toward  the  evening  yard  below. Now and again they scowled at the
readers  who  calmly  went  on  leafing through their books, but made no move to
seize   these  volumes,  and  continued  emptying  the  shelves.
"Good,”  said
I.
"Good?”  asked  Barnes.
"Your men can work without you. Take five.”
And I
was  out in the twilight so quickly he could only follow, bursting with unvoiced
questions.  We  crossed  the  green lawn where a huge portable Hell was drawn up
hungrily, a fat black tar-daubed own from which shot red-orange and gaseous blue
flames  into  which  men were shoveling the wild birds, the literary doves which
soared  crazily  down  to  flop  broken-winged, the precious flights poured from
every  window  to  thump  the  earth,  to  be kerosene-soaked and chucked in the
gulping  furnace.  As  we  passed  this destructive if colorful industry, Barnes
mused.
"Funny.  Should be crowds, a thing like this. But… no crowd. How do you
figure?”
I  left him. He had to run to catch up.
In the small café across the
street  we took a table and Barnes, irritable for no reason he could say, called
out,  "Service!  I’ve  got  to  get  back  to work!”
Walter, the proprietor,
stolled  over,  with some dog-eared menus. Walter looked at me. I winked.
Walter
looked  at  Jonathan  Barnes.
Walter said, "‘Come live with me and by my love;
and   we   will   all   the  pleasures  prove.’”
"What?”  Jonathan  Barnes
blinked.
"’  Call me Ishmael,’” said Walter.
"Ishmael,” I said. "We’ll
have  coffee  to  start.”
Walter  came back with the coffee.
"’Tiger! Tiger!
Burning  bright,’”  he  said.  "’In  the forest of the night.’”
Barnes
stared  after  the  man  who  walked  away casually. "What’s eating him? Is he
nuts?”
"No,”  I  said.  "But  go  on  with  what you were saying back at the
library.  Explain.”
"Explain?”  said  Barnes.  "My  God,  you’re all sweet
reason. All right, I will explain. This is a tremendous experiment. A test town.
If the burning works here, it’ll work anywhere. We don’t burn everything, no
no.  You  noticed,  my  men cleaned only certain shelves and categories? We’ll
eviscerate  about forty-nine point two percent.  Then we’ll report our success
to  the  overall  government  committee-"
"Excellent,” I said.
Barnes eyed me.
"How  can  you be so cheerful?”
"Any library’s problem,” I said. "is where
to  put  the  books.  You’ve  helped  me solve it.”
"I thought you’d be…
afraid.”
"I’ve    been   around   Trash   Men   all   my   life.”
"I   beg
pardon?”
"Burning  is  burning.  Whoever  does  it  is  a Trash Man.”
"Chief
Censor,  Green  Town,  Illinois,  damn it!”
A new man, a waiter, came with the
coffee  pot  steaming.
"Hullo,  Keats,” I said.
"’Season of mists and mellow
fruitfulness,’” said the waiter.
"Keats?” said the Chief Censor. "His name
isn’t  Keats.”
"Silly  of me,” I said. "This is a Greek restaurant. Right,
Plato?”
The  waiter  refilled my cup. "’The people have always some champion
whom they set over them and nurse into greatness…This and no other is the root
from   which   a   tyrant   springs;   when   he   first   appears   he   is   a
protector.’”
Barnes  leaned  forward  to  squint  at the waiter, who did not
move.  Then  Barnes busied himself blowing on his coffee: "As I see it, our plan
is  simple as one and one make two…”
The waiter said, "’I have hardly ever
known  a  mathematician  who was capable of reasoning.’”
"Damn it!” Barnes
slammed  his  cup  down.  "Peace!  Get  away  while  we  eat, you, Keats, Plato,
Holdridge,  that’s  your  name.  I  remember now, Holdridge! What’s all this
other  junk?”
"Just  fancy,”  said  I. "Conceit.”
"Damn fancy, and to hell
with  conceit,  you  can  eat  alone, I’m getting out of this madhouse.” And
Barnes  gulped his coffee as the waiter and proprietor watched and I watched him
gulping  and  across  the  street  the  bright bonfire in the gut of the monster
device burned fiercely. Our silent watching caused Barnes to freeze at last with
the cup in his hand and the coffee dripping off his chin. "Why? Why aren’t you
yelling?  Why aren’t you fighting me?”
"But I am fighting,” I said, taking
the  book  from under my arm. I tore a page from Demosthenes, let Barnes see the
name,  rolled  it  into  a fine Havana cigar shape, lit it, puffed it, and said,
"’Though a man escape every other danger, he can never wholly escape those who
do  not  want  such  a  person  as he is to exist.’”
Barnes was on his feet,
yelling,  the "cigar” was torn from my mouth, stomped on, and the Chief Censor
was out of the door, almost in one motion.
I could only follow.
On the sidewalk,
Barnes  collided  with an old man who was entering the café. The old man almost
fell. I grabbed his arm.
"Professor Einstein,” I said.
"Mr. Shakespeare,” he
said.
Barnes  fled.
*
I  found  him on the lawn by the old and beautiful library
where  the  dark  men,  who  wafted of kerosene perfume from their every motion,
still dumped vast harvestings of gun-shot dead pigeon, dying pheasant books, all
autumn  gold  and  silver  from  the  high windows. But…softly. And while this
still,  almost serene, pantomime continued, Barnes stood screaming silently, the
scream  clenched  in  his teeth, tongue, lips, cheeks, gagged back so none could
hear.  But  the  scream  flew  out  of his wild eyes in flashes and was held for
discharge in his knotted fists, and shuttled in colors about his face, now pale,
now  red  as  he  glared  at  me, at the café, at the damned proprietor, at the
terrible  waiter who now waved amiably back at him. The Baal incinerator rumbled
its  appetite, spark-burned the lawn. Barnes stared full at the blind yellow-red
sun  in  its  raving stomach.
"You,” I called up easily at the men who paused.
"City  Ordinance. Closing time is nine sharp. Please be done by then. Wouldn’t
want to break the law-Good Evening, Mr. Lincoln.”
"’Four Score,’” said a
man,  passing,  "’and  seven years-‘”
"Lincoln?” The Chief Censor turned
slowly.  "That’s  Bowman. Charlie Bowman. I know you, Charlie, come back here,
Charlie, Chuck!”
But the man was gone, and cars drove by, and now and again as
the  burning  progressed men called to me and I called back, and whether it was,
"Mr.  Poe!” or hullo to some small bleak stranger with a name like Freud, each
time  I called in good humor and they replied, Mr. Barnes twitched as if another
arrow had pierced, sunk deep in his quivering bulk and he were dying slowly of a
hidden seepage of fire and raging life. And still no crowd gathered to watch the
commotion.
Suddenly, for no discernable reason, Mr. Barnes shut his eyes, opened
his  mouth  wide,  gathered air, and shouted, "Stop!”
The men ceased shoveling
the  books  out  of  the  window  above.
"But,”  I  said,  "it’s not closing
time…”
"Closing time! Everybody out!” Deep holes had eaten away the center
of  Jonathan  Barnes’ eyes. Within, there was no bottom. He seized the air. He
pushed down. Obediently, all the windows crashed like guillotines, chiming their
panes.
The  dark men, bewildered, came out and down the steps.
"Chief Censor.”
I  handed  him  a  key which he would not take, so I forced his fist shut on it.
"Come  back  tomorrow,  observe  silence, finish up.”
The Chief Censor let his
bullet-hole  gaze, his emptiness, search without finding me.
"How…how long has
this  gone  on…?”
"This?”
"This…and…that…and  them.”
He  tried but
could  not nod at the café, the passing cars, the quiet readers descending from
the  warm  library  now, nodding as they passed into cold dark, friends, one and
all.  His  blind  man’s  rectal  gaze ate holes where my face was. His tongue,
anesthetized,  stirred.  "Do you think you can all fool me, me, me?”
I did not
answer.
"How  can  you  be  sure,” he said. "I won’t burn people, as well as
books?”
I did not answer.
I left him standing in the complete night.
Inside, I
checked out the last volumes of those leaving the library now with night come on
and  shadows  everywhere  and  the great Baal machinery churning smoke, its fire
dying  in  the  spring  grass  where the Chief Censor stood like a poured cement
statue,  not  seeing  his  men drive off. His fist suddenly flew high. Something
swift  and  bright flew up to crack the front-door glass. Then Barnes turned and
walked  after  the  incinerator  as  it  trundled  off,  a fat black funeral urn
unraveling  long  tissues  and scarves of black bunting smoke and fast-vanishing
crepe.
I  sat listening.
In the far rooms, filled with soft jungle illumination,
there  was  a  lovely  autumnal  turning  of  leaves,  faint sifts of breathing,
infinitesimal  quirks,  the  gesture  of  a  hand,  the  glint  of  a  ring, the
intelligent  squirrel blink of an eye. Some nocturnal voyager sailed between the
half-empty  stacks.  In porcelain serenity, the restroom waters flowed down to a
still  and  distant sea. My people, my friends, one by one, passed from the cool
marble,  the green glades, out into a night better than we could ever have hoped
for.
At  nine,  I  went out to pick up the thrown front-door key. I let the last
reader,  an old man, out with me, and as I was locking up, he took a deep breath
of  cool  air,  looked  at the town, the spark-burned lawn, and said, "Will they
come back again, ever?”
"Let them. We’re ready for them, aren’t we?”
The
old  man  took  my  hand.  "’The  wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the
leopard  shall  lie  down  with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the
fatling  together.’”
We  moved  down  the steps.
"Good evening, Isaiah,” I
said.
"Mr. Socrates,” he said. "Good night.”
And each walked his own way, in
the dark.
