prose_contemporaryRayBradburyMassinello PietrocutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Massinello Pietro
He fed the canaries and the geese and the dogs and the cats. Then he
cranked up the rusty phonograph and sang to the hissing ‘Tales from the
Vienna Woods’:
Life goes up, life goes down,
But please smile, do not sigh, do not frown!
Dancing, he heard the car stop before his little shop. He saw the man in
the gray hat glance up and down the storefront and knew the man was
reading the sign which in large, uneven blue letters declared THE
MANGER. EVERYTHING FREE! LOVE AND CHARITY FOR ALL!
The man stepped halfway through the open door and stopped. ‘Mr
Massinello Pietro?’
Pietro nodded vigorously, smiling. ‘Come in. Do you want to arrest me?
Do you want to throw me in jail?’
The man read from his notes. ‘Better known as Alfred Flonn?’ He eyed the
silver bells on Pietro’s shirtsleeves.
‘That’s me!’ Pietro’s eye flashed.
The man was uncomfortable. He looked around a room crammed full of
rustling birdcages and packing crates. Geese rushed in through the back
door, stared at him angrily, and rushed back out. Four parrots blinked
lazily on their high perches. Two Indian lovebirds cooed softly. Three
dachshunds capered around Pietro’s feet, waiting for him to put down
just one hand to pet them. On one shoulder he carried a banana-beaked
mynah bird, on the other a zebra finch.
‘Sit down!’ sang Pietro. ‘I was just having a little music; that’s the
way to start the day!’ He cranked the portable phonograph swiftly and
reset the needle.
‘I know, I know.’ The man laughed, trying to be tolerant. ‘My name’s
Tiffany, from the D.A.’s office. We got a lot of complaints.’ He waved
around the cluttered shop. ‘Public health. All these ducks, raccoons,
white mice. Wrong zone, wrong neighborhood. You’ll have to clean it up.’
‘Sixpeople have told me that.’ Pietro counted them proudly on his
fingers. ‘Two judges, three policemen, and the district attorney
himself!’
‘You were warned a month ago you had thirty days to stop this nuisance
or go to jail,’ said Tiffany, over the music. ‘We’ve been patient.’
‘I,’ said Pietro, ‘have been the patient one. I have waited for the
world to stop being silly. I have waited for it to stop wars. I have
waited for politicians to be honest. I have waited–la la la–for real
estate men to be good citizens. But while I wait, I dance!’ He
demonstrated.
‘Butlookat this place!’ protested Tiffany.
‘Isn’t it wonderful? Do you see my shrine for the Virgin Mary?’ Pietro
pointed. ‘And here, on the wall, a framed letter from the archbishop’s
secretary himself, saying what good I’ve done for the poor! Once, I was
rich, I had property, a hotel. A man took it all away, my wife with it,
oh, twenty years ago. Do you know what I did? I invested what little I
had left in dogs, geese, mice, parrots, who do not change their minds,
who are always friends forever and forever. I bought my phonograph,
which never is sad, which never stops singing!’
‘That’s another thing,’ said Tiffany, wincing. ‘The neighborhood says at
four in the morning, um, you and the phonograph…’
‘Music is better than soap and water!’
Tiffany shut his eyes and recited the speech he knew so well. ‘If you
don’t have these rabbits, the monkey, the parakeets, everything, out by
sundown, it’s the Black Maria for you.’
Mr Pietro nodded with each word, smiling, alert. ‘What have I done? Have
I murdered a man? Have I kicked a child? Have I stolen a watch? Have I
foreclosed a mortgage? Have I bombed a city? Have I fired a gun? Have I
told a lie? Have I cheated a customer? Have I turned from the Good Lord?
Have I taken a bribe? Have I peddled dope? Do I sell innocent women?’
‘No, of course not.’
‘Tell me, then, what have I done? Point to it, lay a hand on it. My
dogs, these are evil, eh? These birds, their song is dreadful, eh? My
phonograph–I suppose that’s bad, too, eh? All right, put me in jail,
throw away the key. You will not separate us.’
The music rose to a great crescendo. He sang along with it:
Tiffa-nee! Hear my plea!
Can’t you smile; sit awhile, be my friend?
The dogs leaped about, barking.
Mr Tiffany drove away in his car.
Pietro felt a pain in his chest. Still grinning, he stopped dancing. The
geese rushed in and pecked gently at his shoes as he stood, bent down,
holding his chest.
At lunchtime, Pietro opened a quart of homemade Hungarian goulash and
refreshed himself. He paused and touched his chest, but the familiar
pain had vanished. Finishing his meal, he went to gaze over the high
wooden fence in the backyard.
There she was! There was Mrs Gutierrez, very fat, and as loud as a
jukebox, talking to her neighbors on the other side of the lot.
‘Lovely lady!’ called Mr Massinello Pietro. ‘Tonight I go to jail! Your
war is fought and won. I give you my saber, my heart, my soul!’
Mrs Gutierrez came ponderously across the dirt yard. ‘What?’ she said,
as if she couldn’t see or hear him.
‘You told the police, the police toldme, and I laughed!’ His hand
flirted on the air, two fingers wiggling. ‘I hope you will be happy!’
‘I didn’t call no police!’ she said indignantly.
‘Ah, Mrs Gutierrez, I will write a song for you!’
‘All of them other people must’ve called in,’ she insisted.
‘And when I leave today for jail, I’ll have a present for you.’ He
bowed.
‘I tell you it wasn’t me!’ she cried. ‘You and your mealy mouth!’
‘I compliment you,’ he said sincerely. ‘You are a civic-minded citizen.
All filth, all noise, all odd things must go.’
‘You, you!’ she shouted. ‘Oh,you!’ She had no more words.
‘I dance for you!’ he sang, and waltzed into the house.
In the late afternoon he put on his red silk bandanna and the huge gold
earrings and the red sash and the blue vest with the golden piping. He
put on his buckle shoes and tight knee breeches. ‘Come along! One last
walk, eh?’ he told his dogs, and out of the shop they went, Pietro
carrying the portable phonograph under his arm, wincing with the weight
of it, for his stomach and body had been sick for some time and there
was something wrong; he couldn’t lift things very easily. The dogs
padded on either side of him, the parakeets shrieked wildly on his
shoulder. The sun was low, the air cool and settled. He looked at
everything as if it was new. He said good evening to everyone, he waved,
he saluted.
In a hamburger stand he set the phonograph whirling and scratching out
the song on top of a stool. People turned to watch as he dived into the
song and came up shining with laughter. He snapped his fingers, dipped
his legs, whistled sweetly, eyes closed, as the symphony orchestra
soared through Strauss. He made the dogs stand in a row while he danced.
He made the parakeets tumble on the floor. He caught the spinning,
flashing dimes from the startled but responsive audience.
‘Get the hell out!’ said the hamburger man. ‘What in hell you think this
is, the opera?’
‘Thank you, good friends!’ Dogs, music, parakeets, Pietro ran into the
night, bells chiming softly.
On a street corner he sang to the sky, to the new stars, and the October
moon. A night wind arose. Faces watched smiling from the shadows. Again
Pietro winked, smiled, whistled, whirled.
For charity, the poor!
Ah sweet, ah demure!
And he saw all the faces, the looking faces. And he saw the silent
houses, with their silent people. And, in his singing, he wondered why
he was the last one singing in the world. Why did no one else dance,
open mouths, wink, strut, flourish? Why was the world a silent world,
silent housed, silent faced? Why were all the people watching people
instead of dancing people? Why were they all spectators and only he the
performer? What had they forgotten that he always and always remembered?
Their houses, small and locked and silent, soundless. His house, his
Manger, his shop, different! Filled with squeaks and stirs and mutters
of bird sound, filled with feather whisper and murmurings of pad and fur
and the sound that animal eyelids make blinking in the dark. His house,
ablaze with votive candles and pictures of rising–flying–saints, the
glint of medallions. His phonograph circling at midnight, two, three,
four in the morning, himself singing, mouth wide, heart open, eyes
tight, world shut out; nothing but sound. And here he was now among the
houses that locked at nine, slept at ten, wakened only from long
silenced hours of slumber in the morn. People in houses, lacking only
black wreaths on door fronts.
Sometimes, when he ran by, people remembered for a moment. Sometimes
they squeaked a note or two, or tapped their feet, self-consciously, but
most of the time the only motion they made to the music was to reach in
their pockets for a dime.
Once, thought Pietro, once I had many dimes, many dollars, much land,
many houses. And it all went away, and I wept myself into a statue. For
a long time I couldn’t move. They killed me dead, taking away and taking
away. And I thought, I won’t ever let anyone kill me again. But how?
What do I have that I can let people take away without hurting? What can
I give that I still keep?
And the answer was, of course, his talent.
My talent! thought Pietro. The more you give away, the better it is, the
more you have. Those with talent must mind the world.
He glanced around. The world was full of statues much like he had been
once. So many could move no longer, knew no way to even begin to move
again in any direction, back, forth, up, down, for life had stung and
bit and stunned and beat them to marble silence. So then, if they could
not move, someone must move for them. You, Pietro, he thought, must
move. And besides, in moving, you don’t look back at what you were or
what happened to you or the statue you became. So keep running and keep
so busy you can make up for all those with good feet who have forgotten
how to run. Run among the self-monuments with bread and flowers. Maybe
they will move enough to stoop, touch the flowers, put bread in their
dry mouths. And if you shout and sing, they may even talk again someday,
and someday fill out the rest of the song with you. Hey! you cry and La!
you sing, and dance, and in dancing perhaps their toes may crack and
knuckle and bunch and then tap and tremble and someday a long time
after, alone in their rooms, because you danced they will dance by
themselves in the mirror of their own souls. For remember, once you were
chipped out of ice and stone like them, fit for display in a fish-grotto
window. But then you shouted and sang at your insides and one of your
eyes blinked! Then the other! Then you sighed in a breath and exhaled a
great cry of Life! and trembled a finger and shuffled a foot and bounded
back into the explosion of life!
Since then, have you ever stopped running?
Never.
Now he ran into a tenement and left white bottles of milk by strange
doors. Outside, by a blind beggar on the hurrying street, he carefully
placed a folded dollar bill into the lifted cup so quietly that not even
the antennae fingers of the old man sensed the tribute. Pietro ran on,
thinking, Wine in the cup and he doesn’tknow…ha!…but, later, he will
drink! And running with his dogs and birds flickering, fluttering his
shoulders, bells chiming on his shirt, he put flowers by old Widow
Villanazul’s door, and in the street again paused by the warm bakery
window.
The woman who owned the bakery saw him, waved, and stepped out the door
with a hot doughnut in her hand.
‘Friend,’ she said, ‘I wish I had your pep.’
‘Madam,’ he confessed, biting into the doughnut, nodding his thanks,
‘only mind over matter allows me to sing!’ He kissed her hand.
‘Farewell.’ He cocked his alpine hat, did one more dance, and suddenly
fell down.
‘You should spend a day or two in the hospital.’
‘No, I’m conscious; and you can’t put me in the hospital unless I say
so,’ said Pietro. ‘I have to get home. People are waiting for me.’
‘Okay,’ said the intern.
Pietro took his newspaper clippings from his pocket. ‘Look at these.
Pictures of me in court, with my pets. Are my dogs here?’ he cried in
sudden concern, looking wildly about.
‘Yes.’
The dogs rustled and whined under the cot. The parakeets pecked at the
intern every time his hand wandered over Pietro’s chest.
The intern read the news clippings. ‘Hey, that’s all right.’
‘I sang for thejudge, they couldn’t stop me!’ said Pietro, eyes closed,
enjoying the ride, the hum, the rush. His head joggled softly. The sweat
ran on his face, erasing the makeup, making the lampblack run in
wriggles from his eyebrows and temples, showing the white hair
underneath. His bright cheeks drained in rivulets away, leaving
paleness. The intern swabbed pink color off with cotton.
‘Herewe are!’ called the driver.
‘What time is it?’ As the ambulance stopped and the back doors flipped
wide, Pietro took the intern’s wrist to peer at the gold watch.
‘Five-thirty! I haven’t much time; they’ll be here!’
‘Take it easy, you all right?’ The intern balanced him on the oily
street in front of the Manger.
‘Fine, fine,’ said Pietro, winking. He pinched the intern’s arm. ‘Thank
you.’
With the ambulance gone, he unlocked the Manger and the warm animal
smells mingled around him. Other dogs, all wool, bounded to lick him.
The geese waddled in, pecked bitterly at his ankles until he did a dance
of pain, waddled out, honking like pressed horn-bulbs.
He glanced at the empty street. Any minute, yes, any minute. He took the
lovebirds from their perches. Outside, in the darkened yard, he called
over the fence, ‘Mrs Gutierrez!’ When she loomed in the moonlight, he
placed the lovebirds in her fat hands. ‘For you, Mrs Gutierrez!’
‘What?’ She squinted at the things in her hands, turning them. ‘What?’
‘Take good care of them!’ he said. ‘Feed them and they will sing for
you!’
‘What can I do with these?’ she wondered, looking at the sky, at him, at
the birds. ‘Oh, please.’ She was helpless.
He patted her arm. ‘I know you will be good to them.’
The back door to the Manger slammed.
In the following hour he gave one of the geese to Mr Gomez, one to
Felipe Diaz, a third to Mrs Florianna. A parrot he gave to Mr Brown, the
grocer up the street. And the dogs, separately, and in sorrow, he put
into the hands of passing children.
At seven-thirty a car cruised around the block twice before stopping. Mr
Tiffany finally came to the door and looked in. ‘Well,’ he said. ‘I see
you’re getting rid of them. Half of them gone, eh? I’ll give you another
hour, since you’re cooperating. That’s the boy.’
‘No,’ said Mr Pietro, standing there, looking at the empty crates. ‘I
will give no more away.’
‘Oh, but look here,’ said Tiffany. ‘You don’t want to go to jail for
these few remaining. Let my boys take these out for you—’
‘Lock me up!’ said Pietro. ‘I am ready!’
He reached down and took the portable phonograph and put it under his
arm. He checked his face in a cracked mirror. The lampblack was
reapplied, his white hair gone. The mirror floated in space, hot,
misshapen. He was beginning to drift, his feet hardly touched the floor.
He was feverish, his tongue thick. He heard himself saying, ‘Let us go.’
Tiffany stood with his open hands out, as if to prevent Pietro from
going anywhere. Pietro stooped down, swaying. The last slick brown
dachshund coiled into his arm, like a little soft tire, pink tongue
licking.
‘You can’t take that dog,’ said Tiffany, incredulous.
‘Just to the station, just for the ride?’ asked Pietro. He was tired
now; tiredness was in each finger, each limb, in his body, in his head.
‘All right,’ said Tiffany. ‘God, you make things tough.’
Pietro moved out of the shop, dog and phonograph under either arm.
Tiffany took the key from Pietro. ‘We’ll clean out the animals later,’
he said.
‘Thanks,’ said Pietro, ‘for not doing it while I’m here.’
‘Ah, for God’s sake,’ said Tiffany.
Everyone was on the street, watching. Pietro shook his dog at them, like
a man who has just won a battle and is holding up clenched hands in
victory.
‘Good-bye, good-bye! I don’t know where I’m going but I’m on my way!
This is a very sick man. But I’ll be back! Here I go!’ He laughed, and
waved.
They climbed into the police car. He held the dog to one side, the
phonograph on his lap. He cranked it and started it. The phonograph was
playing ‘Tales from the Vienna Woods’ as the car drove away.
On either side of the Manger that night it was quiet at one A.M. and it
was quiet at two A.M. and it was quiet at three A.M. and it was such
aloudquietness at four A.M. that everyone blinked, sat up in bed,
andlistened

