                                  
                              Death and the Maiden
                                      1960

     Far  out  in  the country beyond the woods, beyond the world, really, lived
Old  Mam,  and  she had lived there for ninety years with the door locked tight,
not  opening  for anyone, be it wind, rain, sparrow tapping or little boy with a
pailful  of  crayfish  rapping.  If  you  scratched  at her shutters, she called
through:
     "Go away. Death!"
     "I'm not Death!" you might say.
     But  she'd  cry  back, "Death, I know you, you come today in the shape of a
girl. But I see the bones behind the freckles!"
     Or someone else might knock.
     "I see you. Death." would cry Old Mam. "In the shape of a scissors-grinder!
But  the  door is triple-locked and double-barred. I got flypaper on the cracks,
tape on the keyholes, dust mops up the chimney, cobwebs in the shutters, and the
electricity  cut  off so you can't slide in with the juice! No telephones so you
can  call  me to my doom at three in the dark morning. And I got my ears stuffed
with cotton so I can't hear your reply to what I say now. So, Death, get away!"
     That's  how  it  had  been through the town's history. People in that world
beyond  the  wood  spoke of her and sometimes boys doubting the tale would heave
chunks  against  the roof slates just to hear Old Mam wail, "Go on, goodbye, you
in black with the white, white face!"
     And the tale was that Old Mam, with such tactics, would live forever. After
all,  Death  couldn't get in, could he? All the old germs in her house must have
long  since  given  up  and gone to sleep. All the new germs running through the
land with new names every week or ten days, if you believed the papers, couldn't
get  in  past  the  bouquets of rock moss, rue, black tobacco and castor bean at
every door.
     "She'll bury us all," said the town 'way off where the train ran by.
     "I'll  bury  them  all,"  said  Old  Mam,  alone and playing solitaire with
Braille-marked cards, in the dark.
     And that's how it was.
     Years  passed without another visitor, be it boy, girl, tramp or travelling
man,  knocking  at her door. Twice a year a grocery clerk from the world beyond,
seventy  himself,  left  packages that might have been birdseed, could have been
milk-bone biscuit, but were almost certainly stamped into bright steel cans with
yellow  lions and red devils inked on the bright wrappers, and trod off over the
choppy  sea  of lumber on the front porch. The food might stay there for a week,
baked  by  the  sun,  frozen by the moon; a proper time of antisepsis. Then, one
morning, it was gone.
     Old Mam's career was waiting. She did it well, with her eyes closed and her
hands clasped and the hairs inside her ears trembling, listening, always ready.
     So  she  was  not  surprised  when,  on  the  seventh  day of August in her
ninety-first year, a young man with a sunburned face walked through the wood and
stood before her house.
     He  wore a suit like that snow which slides whispering in white linen off a
winter  roof to lay itself in folds on the sleeping earth. He had no car; he had
walked a long way, but looked fresh and clean. He carried no cane to lean on and
wore no hat to keep off the stunning blows of the sun. He did not perspire. Most
important of all, he carried only one thing with him, an eight-ounce bottle with
a bright-green liquid inside. Gazing deeply into this green colour, he sensed he
was in front of Old Mam' s house, and looked up.
     He  didn't  touch  her  door. He walked slowly around her house and let her
feel him making the circle.
     Then, with his X-ray eyes, he let her feel his steady gaze.
     "Oh!"  cried  Old  Mam,  waking with a crumb of graham cracker still in her
mouth. "It's you! I know who you came as this time!"
     "Who?"
     "A  young  man with a face like a pink summer melon. But you got no shadow!
Why's that? Why?"
     "People are afraid of shadows. So I left mine back beyond the wood."
     "So I see, without looking."
     "Oh," said the young man with admiration. "You have Powers."
     "Great Powers, to keep you out and me in!"
     The young man's lips barely moved. "I won't even bother to wrestle you."
     But she heard. "You'd lose, you'd lose!"
     "And I like to win. So - I'll just leave this bottle on your front stoop."
     He heard her heart beating fast through the walls of the house.
     "Wait! What's in it? Anything left on my property, I got a right to know!"
     "Well," said the young man.
     "Go on!"
     "In this bottle," he said, "is the first night and the first day you turned
eighteen."
     "What, what, what!"
     "You heard me."
     "The night I turned eighteen... the day?"
     "That's it."
     "In a bottle?"
     He  held  it high and it was curved and shaped not unlike a young woman. It
took  the  light  of  the  world and flashed back warmth and green fire like the
coals  burning in a tiger's eyes. It looked now serene, now suddenly shifted and
turbulent in his hands.
     "I don't believe it!" cried Old Mam.
     "I'll leave it and go," said the young man. "When I'm gone, try a tea-spoon
of the green thoughts in this bottle. Then you'll know."
     "It's poison!"
     "No."
     "You promise, mother's honour?"
     "I have no mother."
     "What do you swear on?"
     "Myself."
     "It'll kill me, that's what you want."
     "It will raise you from the dead."
     "I'm not dead!"
     The young man smiled at the house.
     "Aren't you?" he said.
     "Wait!  Let  me  ask  myself:  Are  you dead? Are you? Or nearly, all these
years?"
     "The  day and the night you turned eighteen," said the young man. "Think it
over."
     "It's so long ago!"
     Something stirred like a mouse by a coffin-sized window.
     "This will bring it back."
     He  let the sun wash through the elixir that glowed like the crushed sap of
a thousand green blades of summer grass. It looked hot and still as a green sun,
it looked wild and blowing as the sea.
     "This was a good day in a good year of your life."
     "A good year," she murmured, hidden away.
     "A  vintage  year.  Then  there was savour to your life. One swig and you'd
know the taste! Why not try it, eh? Eh?"
     He  held  the bottle higher and farther out and it was suddenly a telescope
which,  peered  through  from either end, brought to focus a time in a year long
gone. A green-and-yellow time much like this noon in which the young man offered
up  the  past  like  a  burning  glass between his serene fingers. He tilted the
bright  flask,  and a butterfly of white-hot illumination winged up and down the
window  shutters,  playing them like gray piano keys, soundlessly. With hypnotic
ease  the  burning  wings  frittered through the shutter slots to catch a lip, a
nose,  an  eye, poised there. The eye snatched itself away, then, curious, relit
itself  from  the beam of light. Now, having caught what he wanted to catch, the
young  man  held  the butterfly reflection steady, save for the breathing of its
fiery  wings,  so that the green fire of that far-distant day poured through the
shutters  of  not only ancient house but ancient woman. He heard her breathe out
her muffled startlement, her repressed delight.
     "No,  no,  you  can't  fool me!" She sounded like someone deep under water,
trying  not  to  drown  in a lazy tide. "Coming back dressed in that flesh, you!
Putting  on that mask I can't quite see! Talking with that voice I remember from
some other year. Whose voice? I don't care! My ouija board here on my lap spells
who you really are and what you sell!"
     "I sell just this twenty-four hours from young life."
     "You sell something else!"
     "No, I can't sell what I am."
     "If I come out you'd grab and shove me six feet under. I've had you fooled,
put off, for years. Now you whine back with new plans, none of which will work!"
     "If you came out the door, I'd only kiss your hand, young lady."
     "Don't call me what I'm not!"
     "I call you what you could be an hour from now."
     "An hour from now..." she whispered, to herself.
     "How long since you been walked through this wood?"
     "Some  other  war,  or  some  peace,"  she  said. "I can't see. The water's
muddy."
     "Young  lady,"  he  said,  "it's  a  fine summer day. There's a tapestry of
golden bees, now this design, now that, in the green church aisle of trees here.
There's honey in a hollow oak flowing like a river of fire. Kick off your shoes,
you  can  crush  wild  mint,  wading  deep.  Wildflowers  like  clouds of yellow
butterflies lie in the valley. The air under these trees is like deep well water
cool and clear you drink with your nose. A summer day, young as young ever was."
     "But I'm old, old as ever was."
     "Not if you listen! Here's my out-and-out bargain, deal, sale - transaction
betwixt you, me and the August weather."
     "What kind of deal, what do I get for my investment?"
     "Twenty-four  long sweet summer hours, starting now. When we've run through
these  woods and picked the berries and eaten the honey, we'll go on to town and
buy  you  the  finest  spider-web-thin  white  summer  dress and lift you on the
train."
     "The train!"
     "The  train to the city, an hour away, where well have dinner and dance all
night. I'll buy you four shoes, you'll need them, wearing out one pair."
     "My bones - I can't move."
     "You'll  run rather than walk, dance rather than run. We'll watch the stars
wheel  over the sky and bring the sun up, flaming. We'll string footprints along
the lake shore at dawn. We'll eat the biggest breakfast in mankind's history and
lie  on the sand like two chicken pies warming at noon. Then, late in the day, a
five-pound  box  of  bonbons on our laps, we'll laugh back on the train, covered
with  the  conductor's  ticket-punch  confettiyblue, green, orange, like we were
married,  and  walk  through town seeing nobody, no one, and wander back through
the sweet dusk-smelling wood into your house..."
     Silence.
     "It's already over," murmured her voice. "And it hasn't begun."
     Then: "Why are you doing this? What's in it for you?!"
     The young man smiled tenderly. "Why, girl, I want to sleep with you."
     She gasped. "I never slept with no one in my life!"
     "You're a... maiden lady?"
     "And proud îf it!"
     The young man sighed, shaking his head. "So it's true - you are, you really
are, a maiden."
     He heard nothing from the house, so listened.
     Softly,  as  if  a secret faucet had been turned somewhere with difficulty,
and  drop by drop an ancient system were being used for the first time in half a
century, the old woman began to cry.
     "Old Mam, why do you cry?"
     "I don't know," she wailed.
     Her  weeping  faded  at  last  and he heard her rock in her chair, making a
cradle rhythm to soothe herself.
     "Old Mam," he whispered.
     "Don't call me that!"
     "All right," he said. "Clarinda."
     "How did you know my name? No one knows!"
     "Clarinda, why did you hide in that house, long ago?"
     "I don't remember. Yes, I do. I was afraid."
     "Afraid?"
     "Strange.  Half  my  years afraid of life. The other half, afraid of death.
Always  some kind of afraid. You! Tell the truth, now! When my twenty-four hours
are  up,  after we walk by the lake and take the train back and come through the
woods to my house, you want to..."
     He made her say it.
     "... sleep with me?" she whispered.
     "For ten thousand million years," he said.
     "Oh." Her voice was muted. "That's a long time."
     He nodded.
     "A  long time," she repeated. "What kind of bargain is that, young man? You
give  me  twenty-four  hours of being eighteen again and I give you ten thousand
million years of my precious time."
     "Don't forget, my time, too," he said. "I'll never go away."
     "You'll lie with me?"
     "I will."
     "Oh, young man, young man. Your voice. So familiar."
     "Look."
     He  saw the keyhole unplugged and her eye peer out at him. He smiled at the
sunflowers in the field and the sunflower in the sky.
     "I'm  blind, half blind," she cried. "But can that be Willy Winchester 'way
out there?"
     He said nothing.
     "But, Willy, you're just twenty-one by the look of you, not a day different
than you were seventy years back!"
     He  set  the  bottle  by the front door and walked back out to stand in the
weeds.
     "Can -" She faltered. "Can you make me look like yourself?"
     He nodded.
     "Oh, Willy, Willy, is that really you?"
     She  waited,  staring  across  the summer air to where he stood relaxed and
happy and young, the sun flashing off his hair and cheeks.
     A minute passed.
     "Well?" he said.
     "Wait!" she cried. "Let me think!"
     And  there in the house he could feel her letting her memories pour through
her mind as sand pours through an hourglass, heaping itself at last into nothing
but  dust  and  ashes. He could hear the emptiness of those memories burning the
sides  of  her  mind as they fell down and down and made a higher and yet higher
mound of sand.
     All that desert, he thought, and not one oasis.
     She trembled at his thought.
     "Well," he said again.
     And at last she answered.
     "Strange," she murmured. "Now, all of a sudden, twenty-four hours, one day,
traded for ten million billion years, sounds fair and good and right."
     "It is, Clarinda," he said. "Oh, yes, it is."
     The  bolts  slid back, the locks rattled, the door cracked. Her hand jerked
out, seized the bottle and flicked back in.
     A minute passed.
     Then,  as  if a gun had been fired off, footsteps pelted through the halls.
The  back  door  slammed  open.  Upstairs,  windows  flew wide, as shutters fell
crumbling  to the grass. Downstairs, a moment later, the same. Shutters exploded
to kindling as she thrust them out. The windows exhaled dust.
     Then  at last, from the front door, flung wide, the empty bottle sailed and
smashed against a rock.
     She  was  on the porch, quick as a bird. The sunlight struck full upon her.
She  stood  as  someone  on a stage, in a single revealing motion, come from the
dark. Then, down the steps, she threw her hand to catch his.
     A  small  boy  passing  on  the  road  below  stopped,  stared and, walking
backward, moved out of sight, his eyes still wide.
     "Why did he stare at me?" she said. "Am I beautiful?"
     "Very beautiful."
     "I need a mirror!"
     "No, no, you don't."
     "Will  everyone  in town see me beautiful? It's not just me thinking so, is
it, or you pretending?"
     "Beauty is what you are."
     "Then I'm beautiful, for that's how I feel. Will everyone dance me tonight,
will men fight for turns?"
     "They will, one and all."
     Down  the  path,  in  the  sound  of  bees and stirring leaves, she stopped
suddenly and looked into his face so like the summer sun.
     "Oh,  Willy,  Willy,  when it's all over and we come back here, will you be
kind to me?"
     He gazed deep into her eyes and touched her cheek with his fingers.
     "Yes," he said gently. "I will be kind."
     "I believe you," she said. "Oh, Willy, I believe."
     And  they  ran  down  the  path  out  of sight, leaving dust on the air and
leaving  the  front door of the house wide and the shutters open and the windows
up  so  the  light  of the sun could Hash in with the birds come to build nests,
raise  families,  and  so petals of lovely summer flowers could blow like bridal
showers  through  the  long  halls  in  a carpet and into the rooms and over the
empty-but-waiting  bed.  And summer, with the breeze, changed the air in all the
great  spaces  of  the  house so it smelled like the Beginning or the first hour
after the Beginning, when the world was new and nothing would ever change and no
one would ever grow old.
     Somewhere rabbits ran thumping like quick hearts in the forest.
     Far off, a train hooted, rushing faster, faster, faster, toward the town.
