THE ILLUSTRATED WOMAN (1961)

When a new patient wanders into the office and stretches out to stutter
forth a compendious ticker tape of free association, it is up to the
psychiatrist immediately beyond, behind-and above to decide at just
which points of the anatomy the client is in touch with the couch.

In other words, where does the patient make contact with reality?

Some people seem to float half an inch above any surface whatsoever.
They have not seen earth in so long, they have become somewhat airsick.

Still others so firmly weight themselves down, clutch, thrust, heave
their bodies toward reality, that long after they are gone you find
their tiger shapes and claw marks in the upholstery.

In the case of Emma Fleet, Dr. George C. George was a long time deciding
which was furniture and which was woman and where what touched which.
For, to begin with, Emma Fleet resembled a couch.

"Mrs. Emma Fleet, Doctor," announced his receptionist.

Dr. George C. George gasped.

For it was a traumatic experience, seeing this woman shunt herself
through the door without benefit of railroad switchman or the ground
crews who rush about under Macy's Easter balloons, heaving on lines,
guiding the massive images to some eternal hangar off beyond.

In came Emma Fleet, as quick as her name, the floor shifting like a huge
scales under her weight.

Dr. George must have gasped again, guessing her at four hundred on the
hoof, for Emma Fleet smiled as if reading his mind. "Four hundred two
and a half pounds, to be exact," she said.

He found himself staring at his furniture.

"Oh, it'll hold all right," said Mrs. Fleet intuitively. She sat down.
The couch yelped like a cur. Dr. George cleared his throat.

"Before you make yourself comfortable," he said. "I feel I should say
immediately and honestly that we in the psychiatrical field have had
little success in inhibiting appetites. The whole problem of weight and
food has so far eluded our ability for coping. A strange admission,
perhaps, but unless we put our frailties forth, we might be in danger of
fooling ourselves and thus taking money under false pretenses. So, if
you are here seeking help for your figure, I must list myself among the
nonplussed."

"Thank you for your honesty, Doctor," said Emma Fleet. "However, I don't
wish to lose. I'd prefer your helping me gain another one hundred or two
hundred pounds."

"Oh, no!" Dr. George exclaimed.

"Oh, yes. But my heart will not allow what my deep dear soul would most
gladly endure. My physical heart might fail at what my loving heart and
mind would ask of it."

She sighed. The couch sighed. "Well, let me brief you. I'm married to
Willy Fleet. We work for the Dillbeck-Horsemann Traveling Shows. I'm
known as Lady Bountiful. And Willy..."

She swooned up out of the couch and glided or rather escorted her shadow
across the floor. She opened the door.

Beyond, in the waiting room, a cane in one hand, a straw hat in the
other, seated rigidly, staring at the wall, was a tiny man with tiny
feet and tiny hands and tiny bright-blue eyes in a tiny head. He was, at
the most, one would guess, three feet high, and probably weighed sixty
pounds in the rain. But there was a proud, gloomy, almost violent look
of genius blazing in that small but craggy face.

"That's Willy Fleet," said Emma lovingly, and shut the door.

The couch, sat on, cried again. Emma beamed at the psychiatrist, who was
still staring, in shock, at the door.

"No children, of course," he heard himself say.

"No children." Her smile lingered. "But that's not my problem, either.
Willy, in a way, is my child. And I, in a way, besides being his wife,
am his mother. It all has to do with size, I imagine, and we're happy
with the way we've balanced things off."

"Well, if your problem isn't children, or your size or his, or
controlling weight, then what ... ?"

Emma Fleet laughed lightly, tolerantly. It was a nice laugh, like a
girl's somehow caught in that great body and throat. "Patience, Doctor.
Mustn't we go back down the road to where Willy and I first met?"

The doctor shrugged, laughed quietly himself and relaxed, nodding. "You
must."

"During high school," said Emma Fleet. "I weighed one-eighty and tipped
the scales at two-fifty when I was twenty-one. Needless to say, I went
on few summer excursions. Most of the time I was left in drydock. I had
many girl friends, however, who liked to be seen with me. They weighed
one-fifty, most of them, and I made them feel svelte. But that's a long
time ago. I don't worry over it any more. Willy changed all that."

"Willy sounds like a remarkable man," Dr. George found himself saying,
against all the rules.

"Oh, he is, he is! He smoulders-with ability, with talent as yet
undiscovered, untapped!" she said, quickening warmly. "God bless him, he
leaped into my life like summer lightning! Eight years ago I went with
my girl friends to the visiting Labor Day carnival. By the end of the
evening, the girls had all been seized away from me by the running boys
who, rushing by, grabbed and took them off into the night. There I was
alone with three Kewpie Dolls, a fake alligator handbag and nothing to
do but make the Guess Your Weight man nervous by looking at him every
time I went by and pretending like at any moment I might pay my money
and dare him to guess."

"But the Guess Your Weight man wasn't nervous! After I had passed three
times I saw him staring at me. With awe, yes, with admiration! And who
was this Guess Your Weight man? Willy Fleet, of course. The fourth time
I passed he called to me and said I could get a prize free if only I'd
let him guess my weight. He was all feverish and excited. He danced
around. I'd never been made over so much in my life. I blushed. I felt
good. So I sat in the scales chair. I heard the pointer whizz up around
and I heard Willy whistle with honest delight.

"Two hundred and eighty-nine pounds!" he cried. "Oh boy oh boy, you're
lovely!"

"I'm what?" I said.

"You're the loveliest woman in the whole world," said Willy, looking me
right in the eye.

I blushed again. I laughed. We both laughed. Then I must have cried, for
the next thing, sitting there, I felt him touch my elbow with concern.
He was gazing into my face, faintly alarmed. "I haven't said the wrong
thing?" he asked.

"No," I sobbed, and then grew quiet. "The right thing, only the right
thing. It's the first time anyone ever ... "

"What?" he said.

"Ever put up with my fat," I said.

"You're not fat," he said. "You're large, you're big, you're wonderful.
Michelangelo would have loved you. Titian would have loved you. Da Vinci
would have loved you. They knew what they were doing in those days.
Size. Size is everything. I should know. Look at me. I traveled with
Singer's Midgets for six seasons, known as Jack Thimble. And oh my God,
dear lady, you're right out of the most glorious part of the
Renaissance. Bernini, who built those colonnades around the front of St.
Peter's and inside at the altar, would have lost his everlasting soul
just to know someone like you."

"Don't!" I cried. "I wasn't meant to feel this happy. It'll hurt so much
when you stop."

"I won't stop, then," he said. "Miss . . ."

"Emma Gertz."

"Emma," he said, "are you married?"

"Are you kidding?" I said.

"Emma, do you like to travel?"

"I've never traveled!"

"Emma," he said, "this old carnival's going to be in your town one more
week. Come down every night, every day, why not? Talk to me, know me. At
the end of the week, who can tell, maybe you'll travel with me."

"What are you suggesting?" I said, not really angry or irritated or
anything, but fascinated and intrigued that anyone would offer anything
to Moby Dick’s daughter.

"I mean marriage!" Willy Fleet looked at me, breathing hard, and I had
the feeling that he was dressed in a mountaineer's rig, alpine hat,
climbing boots, spikes, and a rope slung over his baby shoulder. And if
I should ask him, "Why are you saying this?" he might well answer,
"Because you're there."

"But I didn't ask, so he didn't answer. We stood there in the night, at
the center of the carnival, until at last I started off down the midway,
swaying.

"I'm drunk!" I cried. "Oh, so very drunk, and I've had nothing to
drink."

"Now that I've found you," called Willy Fleet after me, "you'll never
escape me, remember!"

Stunned and reeling, blinded by his large man's words sung out in his
soprano voice, I somehow blundered from the carnival grounds and trekked
home. The next week we were married."

Emma Fleet paused and looked at her hands.

"Would it bother you if I told about the honeymoon?" she asked shyly.

"No," said the doctor, then lowered his voice, for he was responding all
too quickly to the details. "Please do go on."

"The honeymoon." Emma sounded her vox humana. The response from all the
chambers of her body vibrated the touch, the room, the doctor, the dear
bones within the doctor.

"The honeymoon ... was not usual."

The doctor's eyebrows lifted the faintest touch. He looked from the
woman to the door beyond which, in miniature, sat the image of Edmund
Hillary, he of Everest.

"You have never seen such a rush as Willy spirited me off to his home, a
lovely dollhouse, really, with one large normal-sized room that was to
be mine, or, rather, ours. There, very politely, always the kind, the
thoughtful, the quiet gentleman, he asked for my blouse, which I gave
him, my skirt, which I gave him. Right down the list, I handed him the
garments that he named, until at last. . . Can one blush from head to
foot? One can. One did. I stood like a veritabb hearthfire stoked by a
blush of all-encompassing and evet moving color that surged and resurged
up and down my hod in tints of pink and rose and then pink again.

"My god!" cried Willy, "you’re the loveliest grand camellia that ever
did unfurl!"

Whereupon new tides of blush moved in hidden avalanches within, showing
only to color the tent of my body, the outermost and, to Willy anyway,
most precious skin.

"What did Willy do then? Guess."

"I daren't," said the doctor, flustered himself.

"He walked around and around me."

"Circled you?"

"Around and around, like a sculptor gazing at a huge block of snow-white
granite. He said to himself - granite or marble from which he might
shape images of beauty as yet unguessed. Around and around he walked,
sighing and shaking his head happily at his fortune, his little hands
clasped, his little eyes bright. Where to begin, he seemed to be
thinking, where, where to begin?"

"He spoke at last. "Emma," he asked, "why, why do you think I've worked
for years as the Guess Your Weight man at the carnival? Why? Because I
have been searching my lifetime through for such as you. Night after
night, summer after summer, I've watched those scales jump and twitter!
And now at last I've the means, the way, the wall, the canvas, whereby
to express my genius!" He stopped walking and looked at me, his eyes
brimming over.

"Emma," he said softly, "may I have permission to do anything absolutely
whatsoever at all with you?"

"Oh, Willy, Willy," I cried. 'Anything!"

Emma Fleet paused. The doctor found himself out at the edge of his
chair. "Yes,

yes, and then?"

"And then," said Emma Fleet, "he brought out all his boxes and bottles
of inks and stencils and his bright silver tattoo needles."

"Tattoo needles?", The doctor fell back in his chair. "He ... tattooed
you?"

"He tattooed me."

"He was a tattoo artist. He was, he is, an artist. It only happens that
the form his art takes happens to be the tattoo."

"And you," said the doctor slowly, "were the canvas for which he had
been searching much of his adult life?"

"I was the canvas for which he had searched all of his life."

She let it sink, and did sink, and kept on sinking, into the doctor.
Then when she saw it had struck bottom and stirred up vast quantities of
mud, she went serenely on.

"So our grand life began! I loved Willy and Willy loved me and we both
loved this thing that was larger than ourselves that we were doing
together. Nothing less than creating the greatest picture the world has
ever seen. "Nothing less than perfection!" cried Willy. "Nothing less
than perfection!" cried myself in response."

"Oh, it was a happy time. Ten thousand cozy busy hours we spent
together. You can’t imagine how proud it made me to be the vast share
along which the genius of Willy Fleet ebbed and flowed in a tide of
colors."

"One year alone we spent on my right arm and my left, half a year on my
right leg, eight months on my left, in preparation for the grand
explosion of bright detail which erupted out along my collarbone and
shoulder blades, which fountained upward from my hips to meet in a
glorious July celebration of pinwheels, Titian nudes, Giorgione
landscapes and El Greco cross-indexes of lightning on my facade,
prickling with vast electric fires up and down my spine."

"Dear me, there never has been, there never will be, a love like ours
again, a love where two people so sincerely dedicated themselves to one
task, of giving beauty to the world in equal portions. We flew to each
other day after day, and I ate more, grew larger, with the years, Willy
approved, Willy applauded. Just that much more room, more space for his
configurations to flower in."

"We could not bear to be apart, for we both felt, were certain, that
once the Masterpiece was finished we could leave circus, carnival, or
Vaudeville forever. It was grandiose, yes, but we knew that once
finished, I could be toured through the Art Institute in Chicago, the
Kress Collection in Washington, the Tate Gallery in London, the Louvre,
the Uffizi, the Vatican Museum! For the rest of our lives we would
travel with the sun!"

"So it went, year on year. We didn't need the world or the people of the
world, we had each other. We worked at our ordinary jobs by day, and
then, tin after midnight, there was Willy at my ankle, there was Willy
at my elbow, there was Willy exploring up the incredible slope of my
back toward the snowy-talcumed crest. Willy wouldn't let me see, most of
the time. He didn't like me looking over his shoulder, he didn't like me
looking over my shoulder, for that matter. Months passed before, curious
beyond madness, I would be allowed to see his progress slow inch by inch
as the brilliant inks inundated me and I drowned in the rainbow of his
inspirations."

"Eight years, eight glorious wondrous years. And then at last it was
done, it was finished. And Willy threw himself down and slept for
forty-eight hours straight. And I slept near him, the mammoth bedded
with the black lamb. That was just four weeks ago. Four short weeks
back, our happiness came to an end."

"Ah, yes," said the doctor. "You and your husband are suffering from the
creative equivalent of the 'baby blues,' the depression a mother feels
after her child is born. Your work is finished. A listless and somewhat
sad period invariably follows. But, now, consider, you will reap the
rewards of your long labor, surely? You will tour the world?"

"No," cried Emma Fleet, and a tear sprang to her eye. "At any moment,
Willy will run off and never return. He has begun to wander about the
city. Yesterday I caught him brushing off the carnival scales. Today I
found him working, for the first time in eight years, back at his Guess
Your Weight booth!"

"Dear me," said the psychiatrist. "He's . . ."

"Weighing new women, yes! Shopping for new canvas! He hasn't said, but I
know, I know! This time he'll find a heavier woman yet, five hundred,
six hundred pounds! I guessed this would happen, a month ago, when we
finished the Masterpiece. So I ate still more, and stretched my skin
still more, so that little places appeared here and there, little open
patches that Willy had to repair, fill in with fresh detail. But now I'm
done, exhausted, I've stuffed to distraction, the last fill-in work is
done. There's not a millionth of an inch of space left between my ankles
and my Adams apple where we can squeeze in one last demon, dervish ox
baroque angel. I am, to Willy, work over and done. Now he wants to move
on. He will marry, I fear, four more times in his life, each time to a
larger woman, a greater extension for a greater mural, and the grand
finale of his talent. Then too, in the last week, he has become
critical."

"Of the Masterpiece with a capital M?" asked the doctor.

"Like all artists, he is a superb perfectionist. Now he finds little
flaws, a face here done slightly in the wrong tint or texture, a hand
there twisted slightly askew by my hurried die to gain more weight and
thus give him new space and renew his attentions. To him, above all, I
was a beginning. Now he must move on from his apprenticeship to his true
master works. On, Doctor, I am about to be abandoned. What is there for
a woman who weighs four hundred pounds and laved with illustrations? If
he leaves, what shall I do, where shall I go, who would want me now?
Will I be lost again in the world as I was lost before my wild
happiness?"

"A psychiatrist," said the psychiatrist, "is not supposed to give
advice. But ..."

"But, but, but?" she cried, eagerly.

"A psychiatrist is supposed to let the patient discover an cure himself.
Yet, in this

case. . ."

"This case, yes, go on!"

"It seems so simple. To keep your husband's love.."

"To keep his love, yes?"

The doctor smiled. "You must destroy the Masterpiece."

"What?"

"Erase it, get rid of it. Those tattoos will come off, won't they? I
read somewhere once that--"

"Oh, Doctor!" Emma Fleet leaped up. "That's it! It can be done! And,
best of all, Willy can do it! It will take three months alone to wash me
clean, rid me of the very Masterpiece that irks him now. Then, virgin
white again, we can start another eight years, after that another eight
and another. Oh, Doctor, I know he'll do it! Perhaps he was only waiting
for me to suggest-and I was too stupid to guess! Oh, Doctor, Doctor!"
And she crushed him in her arms. When the doctor broke happily free, she
stood off, turning in a circle.

"How strange," she said. "In half an hour you solve the next three
thousand days and beyond of my life. You're very wise. I’ll pay you
anything!"

"My usual modest fee is sufficient," said the doctor.

"I can hardly wait to tell Willy! But first," she said, "since you've
been so wise, you deserve to see the Masterpiece before it is
destroyed."

"That's hardly necessary, Mrs.-"

"You must discover for yourself the rare mind, eye and artistic hand of
Willy Fleet, before it is gone forever and we start anew!" she cried,
unbuttoning her voluminous coat.

"It isn’t really"

"Merely," she said, and flung her coat wide.

The doctor was somehow not surprised to see that she was stark naked
beneath her coat.

He gasped. His eyes grew large. His mouth fell open. He sat down slowly,
though in reality he somehow wished to stand, as he had in the fifth
grade as a boy, during the salute to the flag, following which three
dozen voices broke in an awed and tremulous song:

O beautiful for spacious skies

For amber waves of grain,

For purple mountain majesties

Above the fruited plain

But, still seated, overwhelmed, he gazed at the continental vastness of
the woman.

Upon which nothing whatsoever was stitched, painted, water-colored or in
any way tattooed.

Naked, unadorned, untouched, unlined, unillustrated. He gasped again.

Now she had whipped her coat back about her with a winsome acrobat's
smile, as if she had just performed a towering feat. Now she was sailing
toward the door.

"Wait-" said the doctor.

But she was out the door, in the reception room, babbling, whispering,
"Willy, Wiffy!" and bending to her husband, hissing in his tiny ear
until his eyes flexed wide, and his mouth firm and passionate dropped
open and he cried aloud and clapped his hands with elation.

"Doctor, Doctor, thank you, thank you!" He darted forward and seized the
doctor's hand and shook it hard. The doctor was surprised at the fire
and rock hardness of that grip. It was the hand of a dedicated artist,
as were the eyes burning up at him darkly from the wildly illuminated
face. "Everything's going to be fine!" cried Willy.

The doctor hesitated, glancing from Willy to the great shadowing balloon
that tugged at him wanting to fly off away. "We won't have to come back
again, ever, Good Lord, the doctor thought, does he think that he has
illustrated her from stem to stem, and does she humor him about it? Is
he mad? Or does she imagine that he has tattooed her from neck to
toe-bone, and does he humor her? Is she mad?

Or, most strange of all, do they both believe that he has swarmed as
across the Sistine Chapel ceiling, covering her with rare and
significant beauties? Do they both believe know, humor each other in
their specially dimensioned world?

"Will we have to come back again?" asked Willy Fleet a second time.

"No." The doctor breathed a prayer. "I think not."

Why? Because, by some idiot grace, he had done the right thing, hadn't
he? By prescribing for a half-seen cause he had made a full cure, yes?

Regardless if she believed or he believed or both believed in the
Masterpiece, by suggesting the pictures be erased, destroyed, the doctor
had made her a clean, lovely and inviting canvas again, if she needed to
be. And if he, on the other hand, wished a new woman to scribble, scrawl
and pretend to tattoo on, well, that worked, too. For new and untouched
she would be. "Thank you, Doctor, oh thank you, thank you!"

"Don't thank me," said the doctor. "I've done nothing."

He almost said, It was all a fluke, a joke, a surprise! I fell
downstairs and landed on my feet! "Goodbye, goodbye!" And the elevator
slid down, the big woman and the little man sinking from sight into the
now suddenly not-tab-solid earth, where the atoms opened to let them
pass. "Goodbye, thanks, thanks ... thanks ..."

Their voices faded, calling his name and praising his intellect long
after they had passed the fourth floor.

The doctor looked around and moved unsteadily back into his office. He
shut the door and leaned against it. "Doctor," he murmured, "heal
thyself."

He stepped forward. He did not feel real. He must lie down, if but for a
moment.

Where? On the couch, of course, on the couch.
