antiqueRayBradburySomething Wicked This Way ComesundRayBradburycalibre
0.8.6522.8.20129f420591-ed18-4358-982d-25ea8d5841fa1.0
        Something Wicked This Way Comes</p>

By
Ray Bradbury
WITH GRATITUDE TO
JENET JOHNSON
who taught me how to write the short story
AND TO
SNOW LONGLEY HOUSH
who taught me poetry at Los Angeles High School
a long time ago
AND TO
JACKGUSS
who helped with this novel not so long ago
They sleep not, except they have done mischief;
And their sleep is taken away,
unless they cause some to fall
For they eat the bread of wickedness,
And they drink the wine of violence.
PROVERBS 4: 16-17
I know not all that may be coming, but be it what
it will, I'll go to it laughing.
STUBB in Moby Dick
PROLOGUE
First of all, it was October, a rare month for boys. Not that all months
aren't rare. But there be bad abd good, as the pirates say. Take
September, a bad month: schoool begins. Consider August, a good month:
school hasn't begun yet. July, well, July's really fine: there's no
chance in the world for school. June, no doubting it, June's best of
all, for the school doors spring wide and September's a billion years
away.
    But you take October, now. School's been on a month and you're
riding easier in the reins, jogging along. You got time to think of the
garbage you'll dump on old man Prickett's porch, or the hairy-ape
costume you'll wear to the YMCA the last night of the month. And if it's
around October twentieth and everything smoky-smelling and the sky
orange and ash grey at twilight, it seems Hallowe'en will never come in
a fall of broomsticks and a soft flap of bedsheets around corners.
    But one strange wild dark long year, Hallowe'en came early.
    One year Hallowe'en came on October 24, three hours after midnight.
    At that time, James Nightshade of 97 Oak Street was thirteen years,
eleven months, twenty-three days old. Next door, William Halloway was
thirteen years, eleven months and twenty-four days old. Both touched
toward fourteen; it almost trembled in their hands.
    And that was the October week when they grew up overnight, and were
never so young any more. . .
I
Arrivals
1
The seller of lightning-rods arrived just ahead of the storm. He came
along the street of Green Town, Illinois, in the late cloudy October
day, sneaking glances over his shoulder. Somewhere not so far back, vast
lightnings stomped the earth. Somewhere, a storm like a great beast with
terrible teeth could not be denied.
    So the salesman jangled and clanged his huge leather kit in which
oversized puzzles of ironmongery lay unseen but which his tongue
conjured from door to door until he came at last to a lawn which was cut
all wrong.
    No, not the grass. The salesman lifted his gaze. But two boys, far
up the gentle slope, lying on the grass. Of a like size and general
shape, the boys sat carving twig whistles, talking of olden or future
times, content with having left their fingerprints on every movable
object in Green Town during summer past and their footprints on every
open path between here and the lake and there and the river since school
began.
    'Howdy, boys!' called the man all dressed in storm-coloured clothes.
'Folks home?'
    The boys shook their heads.
    'Got any money, yourselves?'
    The boys shook their heads.
    'Well - ' The salesman walked about three feet, stopped and hunched
his shoulders. Suddenly he seemed aware of house windows or the cold sky
staring at his neck. He turned slowly, sniffing the air. Wind rattled
the empty trees. Sunlight, breaking through a small rift in the clouds,
minted a last few oak leaves all gold. But the sun vanished, the coins
were spent, the air blew grey; the salesman shook himself from the
spell.
    The salesman edged slowly up the lawn.
    'Boy, ' he said. 'What's your name?'
    And the first boy, with hair as blond-white as milk thistle, shut up
one eye, tilted his head, and looked at the salesman with a single eye
as open, bright and clear as a drop of summer rain.
    'Will,' he said. 'William Halloway.'
    The storm gentleman turned. 'And you?'
        The second boy did not move, but lay stomach down on the autumn
grass, debating as if he might make up a name. His hair was wild, thick,
and the glossy colour of waxed chestnuts. His eyes, fixed to some
distant point within himself, were mint rock-crystal green. At last he
put a blade of dry grass in his casual mouth.
    'Jim Nightshade,' he said.
    The storm salesman nodded as if he had known it all along.
    'Nightshade. That's quite a name.'
    'And only fitting,' said Will Halloway. 'I was born one minute
before midnight, October thirtieth, Jim was born one minute after
midnight, which makes it October thirty-first.'
    'Hallowe'en,' said Jim.
    By their voices, the boys had told the tale all their lives, proud
of their mothers, living house next to house, running for the hospital
together, bringing sons into the world seconds apart; one light, one
dark. There was a history of mutual celebration behind them. Each year
Will lit the candles on a single cake at one minute to midnight. Jim, at
one minute after, with the last day of the month begun, blew them out.
    So much Will said, excitedly. So much Jim agreed to, silently. So
much the salesman, running before the storm, but poised here
uncertainly, heard looking from face to face.
    'Halloway. Nightshade. No money, you say?'
    The man, grieved by his own conscientiousness, rummaged in his
leather bag and seized forth an iron contraption.
    'Take this, free! Why? One of those houses will be struck by
lightning! Without this rod, bang! Fire and ash, roast pork and cinders!
Grab!'
    The salesman released the rod. Jim did not move. But Will caught the
iron and gasped.
    'Boy, it's heavy! And funny-looking. Never seen a lightning-rod like
this. Look, Jim!'
    And Jim, at last, stretched like a cat, and turned his head. His
green eyes got big and then very narrow.
    The metal thing was hammered and shaped half-crescent, half-cross.
Around the rim of the main rod little curlicues and doohingies had been
soldered on, later. The entire surface of the rod was finely scratched
and etched with strange languages, names that could tie the tongue or
break the jaw, numerals that added to incomprehensible sums, pictographs
of insect-animals all bristle, chaff, and claw.
    'That's Egyptian.' Jim pointed his nose at a bug soldered to the
iron. 'Scarab beetle.'
    'So it is, boy!'
    Jim squinted. 'And those there - Phoenician hen tracks,'
    'Right!'
    'Why?' asked Jim.
    'Why?' said the man. 'Why the Egyptian, Arabic, Abyssinian, Choctaw?
Well, what tongue does the wind talk? What nationality is a storm? What
country do rains come from? What colour is lightning? Where does thunder
go when it dies? Boys, you got to be ready in every dialect with every
shape and form to hex the St Elmo's fires, the balls of blue light that
prowl the earth like sizzling cats. I got the only lightning-rods in the
world that hear, feel, know, and sass back any storm, no matter what
tongue, voice, or sign. No foreign thunder so loud this rod can't
soft-talk it!'
    But Will was staring beyond the man now.
    'Which,' he said. 'Which house will it strike?'
    'Which? Hold on. Wait.' The salesman searched deep in their faces.
'Some folks draw lightning, suck it like cats suck babies' breath. Some
folks' polarities are negative, some positive. Some glow in the dark.
Some snuff out. You now, the two. . .I - '
    'What makes you so sure lightning will strike anywhere around here?'
said Jim suddenly, his eyes bright.
    The salesman almost flinched. 'Why, I got a nose, an eye, an ear.
Both those houses, their timbers! Listen!'
    They listened. Maybe their houses leaned under the cool afternoon
wind. Maybe not.
    'Lightning needs channels, like rivers, to run in. One of those
attics is a dry river bottom, itching to let lightning pour through!
Tonight!'
    'Tonight?' Jim sat up happily.
    'No ordinary storm!' said the salesman. 'Tom Fury tells you. Fury,
ain't that a fine name for one who sells lightning-rods? Did I take the
name? No! Did the name fire me to my occupations? Yes! Grown up, I saw
cloudy fires jumping the world, making men hop and hide. Thought: I'll
chart hurricanes, map storms, then run ahead shaking my iron cudgels, my
miraculous defenders, in my fists! I've shielded and made snug-safe one
hundred thousand, count 'em, God-fearing homes. So when I tell you,
boys, you're in dire need, listen! Climb that roof, nail this rod high,
ground it in the good earth before nightfall!'
    'But which house, which!' asked Will.
    The salesman reared off, blew his nose in a great kerchief, then
walked slowly across the lawn as if approaching a huge time-bomb that
ticked silently there.
    He touched Will's front porch newels, ran his hand over a post, a
floorboard, then shut his eyes and leaned against the house to let its
bones speak to him.
    Then, hesitant, he made his cautious way to Jim's house next door.
    Jim stood up to watch.
    The salesman put his hand out to touch, to stroke, to quiver his
fingertips on the old paint.
    'This,' he said at last, 'is the one.'
    Jim looked proud.
    Without looking back, the salesman said, 'Jim Nightshade, this your
place?'
    'Mine,' said Jim.
    'I should've known,' said the man.
    'Hey, what about me?' said Will.
    The salesman snuffed again at Will's house. 'No, no. Oh, a few
sparks'll jump on your rainspouts. But the real show's next
door here, at the Nightshades'! Well!'
    The salesman hurried back across the lawn to seize his huge leather
bag.
    'I'm on my way. Storm's coming. Don't wait, Jim boy. Otherwise -
bamm! You'll be found, your nickels, dimes and Indian-heads fused by
electroplating. Abe Lincolns melted into Miss Columbias, eagles plucked
raw on the backs of quarters, all run to quicksilver in your jeans.
More! Any boy hit by lightning, lift his lid and there on his eyeball,
pretty as the Lord's prayer on a pin, find the last scene the boy ever
saw! A box-Brownie photo, by God, of that fire climbing down the sky to
blow You like a penny whistle, suck your soul back up along the bright
stair! Git, boy! Hammer it high or you're dead come dawn!'
    And jangling his case full of iron rods, the salesman wheeled about
and charged down the walk blinking wildly at the sky, the roof, the
trees, at last closing his eyes, moving, sniffing, muttering. 'Yes, bad,
here it comes, feel it, way off now, but running fast. . .'
    And the man in the storm-dark clothes was gone, his cloud-coloured
hat pulled down over his eyes, and the trees rustled and the sky seemed
very old suddenly and Jim and Will stood testing the wind to see if they
could smell electricity, the lightning-rod fallen between them.
    'Jim,' said Will. 'Don't stand there. Your house, he said. You going
to nail up the rod or ain't you?'
    'No,' smiled Jim. 'Why spoil the fun?'
    'Fun! You crazy? I'll get the ladder! You the hammer, some nails and
wire!'
    But Jim did not move. Will broke and ran. He came back with the
ladder.
    'Jim. Think of your mom. You want her burnt?'
    Will climbed the side of the house, alone, and looked down.
    Slowly, Jim moved to the ladder below and started up.
    Thunder sounded far off in the cloud-shadowed hills.
    The air smelled fresh and raw on top of Jim Nightshade's roof.
    Even Jim admitted that.
2
There's nothing in the living world like books on water-cures,
deaths-of-a-thousand-slices, or pouring white-hot lava off castle walls
on drolls and mountebanks.
    So said Jim Nightshade, that's all he read. If it wasn't how to
burgle the First National, it was, how to build catapults, or shape
black bumbershoots into lurking bat costumes for Cabbage Night.
    Jim breathed it out all fine.
    And Will, he breathed it in.
    With the lightning-rod nailed to Jim's roof, Will proud, and Jim
ashamed of what he considered mutual cowardice, it was late in the day.
Supper over, it was time for their weekly jog to the library.
    Like all boys, they never walked anywhere, but named a goal and lit
for it, scissors and elbows. Nobody won. Nobody wanted to win. It was in
their friendship they just wanted to run forever, shadow and shadow.
Their hands slapped library-door handles together, their chests broke
track tapes together, their tennis shoes beat parallel pony tracks over
lawns, trimmed bushes, squirrelled trees, no one losing, both winning,
thus saving their friendship for other times of loss.
    So it was on this night that blew warm, then cool, as they let the
wind take them downtown at eight o'clock. They felt the wings on their
fingers and elbows flying, then, suddenly plunged in new sweeps of air,
the clear autumn river flung them headlong where they must go.
    Up step, three, six, nine, twelve! Slap! Their palms hit the library
door.
    Jim and Will grinned at each other. It was all so good, these
blowing quiet October nights and the library waiting inside now with its
green-shaded lamps and papyrus dust.
    Jim listened. 'What's that?'
    'What, the wind?'
    'Like music. . .' Jim squinted at the horizon.
    'Don't hear no music.'
    Jim shook his head. 'Gone. Or it wasn't even there. Come on!'
    They opened the door and stepped in.
    They stopped.
    The library deeps lay waiting for them.
    Out in the world, not much happened. But here in the special night,
a land bricked with paper and leather, anything might happen, always
did. Listen! and you heard ten thousand people screaming so high only
dogs feathered their ears. A million folk ran toting cannons, sharpening
guillotines; Chinese, four abreast, marched on forever. Invisible,
silent, yes, but Jim and Will had the gift of ears and noses as well as
the gift of tongues. This was a factory of spices from far countries.
Here alien deserts slumbered. Up front was the desk where the nice old
lady, Miss Watriss, purple-stamped your books, but down off away were
Tibet and Antarctica, the Congo. There went Miss Wills, the other
librarian, through Outer Mongolia, calmly toting fragments of Peiping
and Yokohama and the Celebes. Way down the third book corridor, an
oldish man whispered his broom along in the dark, mounding the fallen. .
. .
    Will stared.
    It was always a surprise - that old man, his work, his name.
    That's Charles William Halloway, thought Will, not grand-father, not
far-wandering, ancient uncle, as some might think, but. . .my father.
    So, looking back down the corridor, was Dad shocked to see he owned
a son who visited this separate 20,000-fathoms-deep world? Dad always
seemed stunned when Will rose up before him, as if they had met a
lifetime ago and one had grown old while the other stayed young, and
this fact stood between. . . .
    Far off, the old man smiled.
    They approached each other, carefully.
    'Is that you, Will? Grown an inch since this morning.' Charles
Halloway shifted his gaze. 'Jim? Eyes darker, cheeks paler; you bum
yourself at both ends, Jim?'
    'Heck.' said Jim.
    'No such place as Heck. But hell's right here under 'A' for
Alighieri.'
    'Allegory's beyond me,' said Jim.
    'How stupid of me,' Dad laughed. 'I mean Dante. Look at this.
Pictures by Mister Doré, showing all the aspects. Hell never looked
better. Here's souls sunk to their gills in slime. There's someone
upside down, wrong side out.'
    'Boy howdy!' Jim eyed the pages two different ways and thumbed on.
'Got any dinosaur pictures?'
    Dad shook his head. 'That's over in the next aisle.' He strolled
them around and reached out. 'Here we are: Pterodactyl, Kite of
Destruction! or what about Drums of Doom: The Saga of the Thunder
Lizards! Pep you up, Jim?'
    'I'm pepped!'
    Dad winked at Will. Will winked back. They stood now, a boy with
corn-coloured hair and a man with moon-white hair, a boy with a
summer-apple, a man with a winter-apple face. Dad, Dad, thought Will,
why, why, he looks. . .like me in a smashed mirror!
    And suddenly Will remembered nights rising at two in the morning to
go to the bathroom and spying across town to see that one single light
in the high library window and know Dad had lingered on late murmuring
and reading alone under these green jungle lamps. It made Will sad and
funny to see that light, to know the old man - he stopped to change the
word - his father, was here in all this shadow.
    'Will,' said the old man who was also a janitor who happened to be
his father, 'what about you?'
    'Huh?' Will shook himself.
    'You need a white-hat or a black-hat book?'
    'Hats?' said Will.
    'Well, Jim - ' they perambulated, Dad running his fingers along the
book spines - 'he wears the black ten-gallon hats and reads books to
fit. Middle name's Moriarty, right, Jim? Any day now he'll move up from
Fu Manchu to Machiavelli here - medium-size dark fedora. Or over along
to Dr Faustus - extra large black Stetson. That leaves the white-hat
boys to you, Will. Here's Gandhi. Next door is St Thomas. And on the
next level, well. . .Buddha.'
    'You don't mind,' said Will, 'I'll settle for The Mysterious
Island.'
    'What,' asked Jim, scowling, 'is all this talk about white and black
hats?'
    'Why - ' Dad handed Jules Verne to Will - 'it's just, a long time
ago, I had to decide, myself, which colour I'd wear.'
    'So,' said Jim, 'which did you pick?'
    Dad looked surprised. Then he laughed uneasily.
    'Since you need to ask, Jim, you make me wonder. Will, tell Mom I'll
be home soon. Get out of here, both of you. Miss Watriss!' he called
softly to the librarian at the desk. 'Dinosaurs and mysterious islands,
coming up!'
    The door slammed.
    Outside, a weather of stars ran clear in an ocean sky.
    'Heck.' Jim sniffed north, Jim sniffed south. 'Where's the storm?
That darn salesman promised. I just got to watch that lightning fizz
down my drainpipes!'
    Will let the wind ruffle and refit his clothes, his skin, his hair.
Then he said, faintly, 'It'll be here. By morning.'
    'Who says?'
    'The huckleberries all down my arms. They say.'
    'Great!'
    The wind flew Jim away.
    A similar kite, Will swooped to follow.
3
Watching the boys vanish away, Charles Halloway suppressed a sudden urge
to run with them, make the pack. He knew what the wind was doing to them
where it was taking them, to all the secret places that were never so
secret again in life. Somewhere in him, a shadow turned mournfully over.
You had to run with a night like this, so the sadness could not hurt.
    Look! he thought. Will runs because running is its own excuse. Jim
runs because something's up ahead of him.
    Yet, strangely, they do run together.
    What's the answer, he wondered, walking through the library, putting
out the lights, putting out the lights, putting out the lights, is it
all in the whorls on our thumbs and fingers? Why are some people all
grasshopper fiddlings, scrapings, all antennae shivering, one big
ganglion eternally knotting, slip-knotting, square-knotting themselves?
They stoke a furnace all their lives, sweat their lips, shine their eyes
and start it all in the crib. Caesar's lean and hungry friends. They eat
the dark, who only stand and breathe.
    That's Jim, all bramble-hair and itchweed.
    And Will? Why he's the last peach, high on the summer tree. Some
boys walk by and you cry, seeing them. They feel good, they look good,
they are good. Oh, they're not above peeing off a bridge, or stealing an
occasional dime-store pencil sharpener; it's not that. It's just, you
know, seeing them pass, that's how they'll be all their life; they'll
get hit, hurt, cut, bruised, and always wonder why, why does it happen?
how can it happen to them?
    But Jim, now, he knows it happens, he watches for it happening, he
sees it start, he sees it finish, he licks the wound he expected, and
never asks why; he knows. He always knew. Someone knew before him, a
long time ago, someone who had wolves for pets and lions for night
conversants. Hell, Jim doesn't know with his mind. But his body knows.
And while Will's putting a bandage on his latest scratch, Jim's ducking,
waving, bouncing away from the knockout blow which must inevitably come.
    So there they go, Jim running slower to stay with Will, Will running
faster to stay with Jim, Jim breaking two windows in a haunted house
because Will's along, Will breaking one instead of none, because Jim's
watching. God how we get our fingers in each other's clay. That's
friendship, each playing the potter to see what shapes we can make of
the other.
    Jim, Will, he thought, strangers. Go on. I'll catch up, some day. .
. .
    The library door gasped open, slammed.
    Five minutes later, he turned into the corner saloon for his nightly
one-and-only drink, in time to hear a man say:
    '. . .I read when alcohol was invented, the Italians thought it was
the big thing they'd been looking for for centuries. The Elixir of Life!
Did you know that?
    'No.' The bartender's back was turned.
    'Sure.' the man went on. 'Distilled wine. Ninth, tenth century.
Looked like water. But it burnt. I mean, it not only burnt the mouth and
stomach, but you could set it on fire. So they thought they'd mixed
water and fire. Fire-water, the Elixir Vitae, by God. Maybe they weren't
so far wrong thinking it was the Cure-all, the thing that worked
miracles. Have a drink!?'
    'I don't need it,' said Halloway. 'But someone inside me does.'
    'Who?'
    The boy I once was, thought Halloway, who runs like the leaves down
the sidewalk autumn nights.
    But he couldn't say that.
    So he drank, eyes shut, listening to hear if that thing inside
turned over again, rustling in the deep bons that were stacked for
burning but never burned.
4
Will stopped. Will looked at the Friday night town.
    It seemed when the first stroke of nine banged from the big
courthouse clock all the lights were on and business humming in the
shops. But by the time the last stroke of nine shook everyone's fillings
in his teeth, the barbers had yanked off the sheets, powdered the
customers, trotted them forth; the druggist's fount had stopped fizzing
like a nest of snakes, the insect neons everywhere had ceased buzzing,
and the vast glittering acreage of the dime store with its ten billion
metal, glass and paper oddments waiting to be fished over, suddenly
blacked out. Shades slithered, doors boomed, keys rattled their bones in
locks, people fled with hordes of torn newspaper mice nibbling their
heels.
    Bang! they were gone!
    'Boy!' yelled Will. 'Folks run like they thought the storm was
here!'
    'It is!' shouted Jim. 'Us!'
    They stomp-pound-thundered over iron grates, steel trap-doors, past
a dozen unlit shops, a dozen half-lit, a dozen dying dark. The city was
dead as they rounded the United Cigar Store corner to see a wooden
Cherokee glide in darkness, by himself.
    'Hey!'
    Mr Tetley, the proprietor, peered over the Indian's shoulder.
    'Scare you, boys?'
    'Naw!'
    But Will shivered, feeling cold tidal waves of strange rain moving
down the prairie as on a deserted shore. When the lightning nailed the
town, he wanted to be layered under
sixteen blankets and a pillow.
    'Mr Tetley?' said Will, quietly.
    For now there were two wooden Indians upright in ripe tobacco
darkness. Mr Tetley, amidst his jest, had frozen, mouth open, listening.
    'Mr Tetley?'
    He heard something far away on the wind, but couldn't say what it
was.
    The boys backed off.
    He did not see them. He did not move. He only listened.
    They left him. They ran.
    In the fourth empty block from the library, the boys came upon a
third wooden Indian.
    Mr Crosetti, in front of his barber shop, his door key in his
trembling fingers, did not see them stop.
    What had stopped them?
    A teardrop.
    It moved shining down Mr Crosetti's left cheek. He breathed heavily.
    'Crosetti, you fool! Something happens, nothing happens, you cry
like a baby!'
    Mr Crosetti took a trembling breath, snuffing. 'Don't you smell it?'
    Jim and Will sniffed.
    'Licorice!'
    'Heck, no. Cotton candy!'
    'I haven't smelled that in years,' said Mr Crosetti.
    Jim snorted. 'It's around.'
    'Yes, but who notices? When? Now, my nose tells me, breathe! And I'm
crying. Why? Because I remember how a long time ago, boys ate that
stuff. Why haven't I stopped to think and smell the last thirty years?'
    'You're busy, Mr Crosetti,' Will said. 'You haven't got time.'
    Mr Crosetti wiped his eyes. 'Where does that smell come from?
There's no place in town sells cotton candy. Only circuses.'
    'Hey,' said Will. 'That's right!'
    'Well, Crosetti is done crying.' The barber blew his nose and turned
to lock his shop door. As he did this, Will watched the barber's pole
whirl its red serpentine up out of nothing, leading his gaze around,
rising to vanish into more nothing. On countless moons Will had stood
here trying to unravel that ribbon, watch it come, go, end without
ending.
    Mr Crosetti put his hand to the light switch under the spinning
pole.
    'Don't,' said Will. Then, murmuring, 'Don't turn it off.' Mr
Crosetti looked at the pole, as if freshly aware of its miraculous
properties. He nodded, gently, his eyes soft. 'Where does it come from,
where does it go, eh? Who knows? Not you, not him, not me. Oh, the
mysteries, by God. So. We'll leave it on!'
    It's good to know, thought Will, it'll be running until dawn,
winding up from nothing, winding away to nothing, while we sleep.
    'Good-night!'
    'Good-night.'
    And they left him behind in a wind that very faintly smelled of
licorice and cotton candy.
5
Charles Halloway put his hand to the saloon's double swing doors,
hesitant, as if the grey hairs on the back of his hand, like antennae,
had felt something beyond slide by in the October night. Perhaps great
fires burned somewhere and their furnace blasts warned him not to step
forth. Or another Ice Age had loomed across the land, its freezing bulk
might already have laid waste a billion people in the hour. Perhaps Time
itself fixed was draining off down an immense glass, with powdered
darkness failing after to bury all.
    Or maybe it was only that man in a dark suit, seen through the
saloon window, across the street. Great paper rolls under one arm, a
brush and bucket in his free hand, the man was whistling a tune, very
far away.
    It was a tune from another season, one that never ceased making
Charles Halloway sad when he heard it. The song was incongruous for
October, but immensely moving, overwhelming, no matter what day or what
month it was sung:
I heard the bells on Christmas Day
Their old, familiar carols play,
And wild and sweet
Their words repeat great
Of peace on earth, good will to men!
Charles Halloway shivered. Suddenly there was the old sense of terrified
elation, of wanting to laugh and cry together when he saw the innocents
of the earth wandering the snowy streets the day before Christmas among
all the tired men and women whose faces were dirty with guilt, unwashed
of sin, and smashed like small windows by life that hit without warning,
ran, hid, came back and hit again.
Then pealed the bells more loud and deep:
'God is not dead, nor doth He sleep!
The Wrong shall fail,
The Right prevail,
With peace on earth, good will to men!'
    The whistling died.
    Charles Halloway stepped out. Far up ahead, the man who had whistled
the tune was motioning his arms by a telegraph pole, silently working.
Now he vanished into the open door of a shop.
    Charles Halloway, not knowing why, crossed the street to watch the
man pasting up one of the posters inside the un-rented and empty store.
    Now the man stepped out the door with his brush, his paste bucket,
his rolled papers. His eyes, a fierce and lustful shine, fixed on
Charles Halloway. Smiling, he gestured an open hand.
    Halloway stared.
    The palm of that hand was covered with fine black silken hair. It
looked like -
    The hand clenched, tight. It waved. The man swept around the corner.
Charles Halloway, stunned, flushed with sudden summer heat, swayed, then
turned to gaze into the empty shop.
    Two sawhorses stood parallel to each other under a single spotlight.
    Placed over these two sawhorses like a funeral of snow and crystal
was a block of ice six feet long. It shone dimly with its own
effulgence, and its colour was light green-blue. It was a great cool gem
resting there in the dark.
    On a little white placard at one side near the window the following
calligraphic message could be read by lamplight:
Cooger & Dark's Pandemonium Shadow Show -
Fantoccini, Marionette Circus, and Your
Plain Meadow Carnival. Arriving
Immediately! Here on Display, one of
our many attractions:
THE MOST BEAUTIFUL WOMAN IN THE WORLD
Halloway's eyes leaped to the poster on the inside of the window.
    And back to the cold long block of ice.
    It was such a block of ice as he remembered from travelling
magician's shows when he was a boy, when the local ice company
contributed a chunk of winter in which, for twelve hours on end, frost
maidens lay embedded, on display while people watched and comedies
toppled down the raw white screen and coming attractions came and went
and at last the pale ladies slid forth all rimed, chipped free by
perspiring sorcerers to be led off smiling into the dark behind the
curtains.
THE MOST BEAUTIFUL WOMAN IN THE WORLD
    And yet this vast chunk of wintry glass held nothing but frozen
river water.
    No. Not quite empty.
    Halloway felt his heart pound one special time.
    Within the huge winter gem was there not a special vacuum? a
voluptuous hollow, a prolonged emptiness which undulated from tip to toe
of the ice? and wasn't this vacuum, this emptiness waiting to be filled
with summer flesh, was it not shaped somewhat like a. . .woman?
    Yes.
    The ice. And the lovely hollows, the horizontal flow of emptiness
within the ice. The lovely nothingness. The exquisite flow of an
invisible mermaid daring the ice to capture it.
    The ice was cold.
    The emptiness within the ice was warm.
    He wanted to go away from here.
    But Charles Halloway stood in the strange night for a long time
looking in at the empty shop and the two sawhorses and the cold waiting
arctic coffin set there like a vast Star of India in the dark. . . .
6
Jim Nightshade stopped at the comer of Hickory and Main, breathing
easily, his eyes fixed tenderly on the leafy darkness of Hickory Street.
    'Will. . .?'
    'No!' Will stopped, surprised at his own violence.
    'It is just there. The fifth house. Just one minute, Will,' Jim
pleaded, softly.
    'Minute. . .?' Will glanced down the street.
    Which was the street of the Theatre.
    Until this summer it had been an ordinary street where they stole
peaches, plums and apricots, each in its day. But late in August, while
they were monkey-climbing for the sourest apples, the 'thing' happened
which changed the houses, the taste of the fruit, and the very air
within the gossiping trees.
    'Will! it's waiting. Maybe something's happening!' hissed Jim.
    Maybe something is. Will swallowed hard, and felt Jim's hand pinch
his arm.
    For it was no longer the street of the apples or plums or apricots,
it was the one house with a window at the side and this window, Jim
said, was a stage, with a curtain - the shade, that is - up. And in that
room, on that strange stage, were the actors, who spoke mysteries,
mouthed wild things, laughed, sighed, murmured so much; so much of it
was whispers Will did not understand.
    'Just one last time, Will.'
    'You know it won't be last!'
    Jim's face was flushed, his cheeks blazing, his eyes green-glass
fire. He thought of that night, them picking the apples, Jim suddenly
crying softly, 'Oh, there!'
    And Will, hanging to the limbs of the tree, tight-pressed, terribly
excited, staring in at the Theatre, that peculiar stage where people,
all unknowing, flourished shirts above their heads, let fall clothes to
the rug, stood raw and animal-crazy, naked, like shivering horses, hands
out to touch each other.
    'What're they doing I thought Will. Why are they laughing? What's
wrong with them, what's wrong!?
    He wished the light would go out.
    But he hung tight to the suddenly slippery tree and watched the
bright window Theatre, heard the laughing and numb at last let go, slid,
fell, lay dazed, then stood in dark gazing up at Jim, who still clung to
his high limb. Jim's face, hearth-flushed, cheeks fire-fuzzed, lips
parted, stared in. 'Jim, Jim come down!' But Jim did not hear. 'Jim!'
And when Jim looked down at last he saw Will as a stranger below with
some silly request to give off living and come down to earth. So Will
ran off, alone, thinking too much, knowing what to think.
    'Will, please. . .'
    Will looked at Jim now, with the library books in his hands.
    'We been to the library. Ain't that enough?'
    Jim shook his head. 'Carry these for me.'
    He handed Will his books and trotted softly off under the hissing
whispering trees. Tlree houses down he called back: 'Will? Know what you
are? A darn old dimwit Episcopal Baptist!'
    Then Jim was gone.
    Will seized the books tight to his chest. They were wet from the
hands.
    Don't look back! he thought.
    I won't! I won't!
    And looking only toward home, he walked that way.
    Quickly.
7
Halfway home, Will felt a shadow breathing hard behind him.
    'Theatre dosed?' said Will, not looking back.
    Jim walked in silence beside him for a long while and then said,
'Nobody home.'
    'Swell!'
    Jim spat. 'Dam Baptist preacher, you!'
    And around the corner a tumbleweed slithered, a great cotton ball of
pale paper which bounced, then clung shivering to Jim's legs.
    Will grabbed the paper, laughing, pulled it off, let it fly! He
stopped laughing.
    The boys, watching the pale throwaway rattle and flit through the
trees, were suddenly cold.
    'Wait a minute. . .' said Jim, slowly.
    All of a sudden they were yelling, running, leaping. 'Don't tear it!
Careful!
    The paper fluttered like a snare drum in their hands.
    'COMING, OCTOBER TWENTY-FOURTH!'
    Their lips moved, shadowing the words set in rococo type.
    'Cooger and Dark's. . .'
    'Carnival!'
    'October twenty-fourth! That's tomorrow!'
    'It can't be,' said Will. 'All carnivals stop after Labour Day - '
    'Who cares? A thousand and one wonders! See! MEPHISTOPHELES, THE
LAVA DRINKER! MR ELECTRICO! THE MONSTER MONTGOLFIER?'
    'Balloon,' said Will. 'A Montgolfier is a balloon.'
    MADEMOISELLE TAROT!' read Jim. 'THE DANGLING MAN. THE DEMON
GUILLOTINE! THE ILLUSTRATED MAN! Hey!'
    'That's just an old guy With tattoos.'
    'No.' Jim breathed warm on the paper. 'He's illustrated. Special.
See! Covered with monsters! A menagerie!' Jim's eyes jumped. 'SEE! THE
SKELETON! Ain't that fine, Will? Not Thin Man, no, but SKELETON! SEE!
THE DUST WITCH! What's a Dust Witch, Will?'
    'No.' Jim squinted off, seeing things. 'A Gypsy that was born in the
Dust, raised in the Dust, and some day winds up back in the Dust. Here's
more: EGYPTIAN MIRROR MAZE! SEE YOURSELF TEN THOUSAND TIMES! SAINT
ANTHONY'S TEMPLE 0F TEMPTATION!'
    THE MOST BEAUTIFUL - ' read Will.
    ' - wOMAN IN THE WORLD,' finished JIM.
    They looked at each other.
    'Can a carnival have the Most Beautiful Woman on Earth in its
side-show, Will?'
    'You ever seen carnival ladies, Jim?'
    'Grizzly bears. But how come this handbill claims - '
    'Oh, shut up!'
    'You mad at me, Will?'
    'No, it's just - get it!
    The wind had tom the paper from their hands.
    The handbill blew over the trees and away in an idiot caper, gone.
    'It s not true, anyway,' Will gasped. Carnivals don't come this late
in the year. Silly darn-sounding thing. Who'd go to it?
    'Me.' Jim stood quiet in the dark.
    Me, thought Will, seeing the guillotine flash, the Egyptian mirrors
unfold accordions of light, and the sulphur-skinned devil-man sipping
lava, like gunpowder tea.
    'That music. . .' Jim murmured. 'Calliope. Must be coming tonight!'
    'Carnivals come at sunrise.'
    "Yeah, but what about the licorice and cotton candy we smelled,
close?'
    And Will thought of the smells and the sounds flowing on the river
of wind from beyond the darkening houses, Mr Tetley listening by his
wooden Indian friend, Mr Crosetti with the single tear shining down his
cheek, and the barber's pole sliding its red tongue up and around
forever out of nowhere and away to eternity.
    Will's teeth chattered.
    'Let's go home.'
    'We are home!' cried Jim, surprised.
    For, not knowing it, they had reached their separate houses and now
moved up separate walks.
    On his porch, Jim leaned over and called softly.
    'Will. You're not mad?'
    'Heck, no.'
    'We won't go by that street, that house, the Theatre, again for a
month. A year! I swear.'
    'Sure, Jim, sure.'
    They stood with their hands on the doorknobs of their houses, and
Will looked up at Jim's room where the lightning-rod glittered against
the cold stars.
    The storm was coming. The storm wasn't coming.
    No matter which, he was glad Jim had that grand contraption up
there.
    'Night!'
    'Night.'
    Their separate doors slammed.
8
Will opened the door and shut it again. Quietly, this time.
    'That's better,' said his mother's voice.
    Framed through the hall door Will saw the only theatre he cared for
now, the familiar stage where sat his father (home already! he and Jim
must have run the long way round!) holding a book but reading the empty
spaces. In a chair by the fire mother knitted and hummed like a
tea-kettle.
    He wanted to be near and not near them, he saw them close, he saw
them far. Suddenly they were awfully small in too large a room in too
big a town and much too huge a world. In this unlocked place they seemed
at the mercy of anything that might break in from the night.
    Including me, Will thought. Including me.
    Suddenly he loved them more for their smallness than he ever had
when they seemed tall.
    His mothers fingers twitched, her mouth counted, the happiest woman
he had ever seen. He remembered a greenhouse on a winter day, pushing
aside thick jungle leaves to find a creamy pink hothouse rose poised
alone in the wilderness. That was mother, smelling like fresh milk,
happy, to herself, in this room.
    Happy? But how and why? Here, a few feet off, was the janitor, the
library man, the stranger, his uniform gone, but his face still the face
of a man happier at night alone in the deep marble vaults, whispering
his broom in the draughty corridors.
    Will watched, wondering why this woman was so happy and this man so
sad.
    His father stared deep in the fire, one hand relaxed. Half-cupped in
that hand lay a crumpled paper ball.
    Will blinked.
    He remembered the wind blowing the pale handbill skittering in the
trees. Now the same colour paper lay crushed, its rococo type hidden, in
his father's fingers.
    'Hey!'
    Will stepped into the parlour.
    Immediately Mom opened a smile that was like lighting a second fire.
    Dad stricken, looked dismayed, as if caught in a criminal act.
    Will wanted to say, 'Hey, what'd you think of the handbill. . .?
    But Dad was crammmg the handbill deep in the chair upholstery.
    And mother was leafing the library books.
    'Oh, these are fine, Willy!'
    So Will just stood with Cooger and Dark on his tongue and said:
    'Boy, the wind really flew us home. Streets full of paper blowing.'
    Dad did not flinch at this.
    'Anything new, Dad?'
    Dad's hand still lay tucked in the side of the chair. He lifted a
grey, slightly worried, very tired gaze to his son:
    'Stone lion blew off the library steps. Prowling the town now
looking for Christians. Won't find any. Got the only one no in captivity
here, and she's a good cook.'
    'Bosh,' said Mom.
    Walking upstairs, Will heard what he half expected to hear.
    A soft fluming sigh as something fresh was tossed on the fire. In
his mind, he saw Dad standing at the hearth looking down as the paper
crinkled to ash:
    '. . .COOGER . . . DARK . . . CARNIVAL . . . WITCH . . . WONDERS. .
.'
    He wanted to go back down and stand with Dad hands out, to be warmed
by the fire.
    Instead he went slowly up to shut the door of his room.
    Some nights, abed, Will put his ear to the wall to listen, and if
his folks talked things that were right, he stayed, and if not right he
turned away. If it was about time and passing years or himself or town
or just the general inconclusive way God ran the world, he listened
warmly, comfortably, secretly, for it was usually Dad talking. He could
not often speak with Dad anywhere in the world, inside or out, but this
was different. There was a thing in Dad's voice, up, over, down, easy as
a hand winging soft in the air like a white bird describing flight
pattern, made the ear want to follow and the mind's eye to see.
    And the odd thing in Dad's voice was the sound truth makes being
said. The sound of truth, in a wild roving land of city or plain country
lies, will spell any boy. Many nights Will drowsed this way, his senses
like stopped clocks long before that half-singing voice was still. Dad's
voice was a midnight school, teaching deep fathom hours, and the subject
was life.
    So it was this night, Will's eyes shut, head leaned to the cool
plaster. At first Dad's voice, a Congo drum, boomed softly, horizons
away. Mother's voice, she used her water-bright soprano in the Baptist
choir, did not sing, yet sang back replies. Will imagined Dad sprawled
talking to the empty ceiling:
    '. . .Will. . .makes me feel so old. . .a man should play baseball
with his son. . .'
    'Not necessary,' said the woman's voice, kindly. 'You're a good
man.'
    ' - in a bad season. Hell, I was forty when he was born! And you!
Who's your daughter? people say. God, when you lie down your thoughts
turn to mush. Hell!'
    Will heard the shift of weight as Dad sat up in the dark. A match
was being struck, a pipe was being smoked. The wind rattled the windows.
    '. . .man with poster under his arm. . .'
    '. . .carnival. . . ' said his mother's voice, '. . .this late in
the year?'
    Will wanted to turn away, but couldn't.
    '. . .most beautiful. . .woman. . .in the world,' Dad's voice
murmured.
    Mother laughed softly. 'You know I'm not.'
    No! thought Will, that's from the handbill! Why doesn't Dad tell!!?
    Because, Will answered himself. Something's going on. Oh, something
is going on!
    Will saw that paper frolicked in the trees, its words THE MOST
BEAUTIFUL WOMAN, and fever prickled his cheeks. He thought: Jim, the
street of the Theatre, the naked people in the stage of that Theatre
window, crazy as Chinese opera, darn odd crazy as old Chinese opera,
judo, ju-jitsu, Indian puzzles, and now his father's voice, dreaming
off, sad, sadder, saddest, much too much to understand. And suddenly he
was scared because Dad wouldn't talk about the handbill he had secretly
burned. Will gazed out the window. There! Like a milkweed plume! White
paper danced in the air.
    'No,' he whispered, 'no carnival's coming this late. It can't!' He
hid under the covers, switched on his flashlight, opened a book. The
first picture he saw was a prehistoric reptile trap-drumming a night sky
a million years lost.
    Heck, he thought, in the rush I got Jim's book he's got one of mine.
    But it was a pretty fine reptile.
    And flying toward sleep, he thought he heard his father, restless,
below. The front door shut. His father was going back to work late, for
no reason, with brooms, or books, downtown, away. . .away. . .
    And mother asleep, content, not knowing he had gone.
9
No one else in the world had a name came so well off the tongue.
    'Jim Nightshade. That's me.'
    Jim stood tall and now lay long in bed, strung together by
marsh-grass, his bones easy in his flesh, his flesh easy on his bones.
The library books lay unopened-by his relaxed right hand.
    Waiting, his eyes were dark as twilight, with shadows under the eyes
from the time, his mother said, he had almost died when he was three and
still remembered. His hair was dark autumn chestnut and the veins in his
temples and brow and in his neck and ticking in his wrists and on the
backs of his slender hands, all these were dark blue. He was marbled
with dark, was Jim Nightshade, a boy who talked less and smiled less as
the years increased.
    The trouble with Jim was he looked at the world and could not look
away. And when you never look away all your life, by the time you are
thirteen you have done twenty years taking in the laundry of the world.
    Will Halloway, it was in him young to always look just beyond, over
or to one side. So at thirteen he had saved up only six years of
staring.
    Jim knew every centimetre of his shadow, could have cut it out of
tar paper, furled it, and run it up a flagpole - his banner.
    Will, he was occasionally surprised to see his shadow following him
somewhere, but that was that.
    'Jim? You awake?'
    'Hi, Mom.'
    A door opened and now shut. He felt her weight on the bed.
    'Why, Jim, your hands are ice. You shouldn't have the window so
high. Mind your health.'
    'Sure.'
    'Don't say "sure" that way. You don't know until you've had three
children and lost all but one.'
    'Never going to have any,' said Jim.
    'You just say that.'
    'I know it. I know everything.'
    She waited a moment. 'What do you know?'
    'No use making more People. People die.'
    His voice was very calm and quiet and almost sad.
    'That's everything.'
    'Almost everything. You're here, Jim. If you weren't, I'd have given
up long ago.'
    'Mom.' A long silence. 'Can you remember Dad's face? Do I look like
him?'
    'The day you go away is the day he leaves forever.'
    'Who's going away?'
    'Why, just lying there, Jim, you run so fast. I never saw anyone
move so much, just sleeping. Promise me, Jim. Wherever you go and come
back, bring lots of kids. Let them run wild. Let me spoil them, some
day.
    'I'm never going to own anything can hurt me.'
    'You going to collect rocks, Jim? No, some day, you've got to be
hurt.'
    'No, I don't'
    He looked at her. Her face had been hit a long time ago. The bruises
had never gone from around her eyes.
    'You'll live and get hurt,' she said, in the dark. 'But when it's
time, tell me. Say good-bye. Otherwise, I might not let you go. Wouldn't
that be terrible, to just grab ahold?'
    She rose up suddenly and went to put the window down.
    'Why do boys want their windows open wide?'
    'Warm blood.'
    'Warm blood.' She stood alone. 'That's the story of all our sorrows.
And don't ask why.
    The door shut.
    Jim alone, raised the window, and leaned into the absolutely clear
night.
    Storm, he thought, you there?
    Yes.
    Feel. . .away to the west. . .a real humdinger, rushing along!
    The shadow of the lightning-rod lay in the drive below.
    He sucked in cold air, gave out a vast exhilaration of heat.
    Why, he thought, why don't I climb up, knock that lightning-rod
loose, throw it away?
    And then see what happens?
    Yes.
    And then see what happens!
10
Just after midnight.
    Shuffling footsteps.
    Along the empty street came the lightning-rod salesman, his leather
valise swung almost empty in his baseball-mitt hand, his face at ease.
He turned a corner and stopped.
    Paper-soft white moths tapped at an empty store window, looking in.
    And in the window, like a great coffin boat of star-coloured glass,
beached on two sawhorses lay a chunk of Alaska Snow Company ice chopped
to a size great enough to flash in a giant's ring.
    And sealed in this ice was the most beautiful woman in the world.
    The lightning-rod salesman's smile faded.
    In the dreaming coldness of ice like someone fallen and slept in
snow avalanches a thousand years, forever young, was this woman.
    She was as fair as this morning and fresh as tomorrow's flowers and
lovely as any maid when a man shuts up his eyes and traps her, in cameo
perfection, on the shell of his eyelids. The lightning-rod salesman
remembered to breathe.
    Once, long ago, travelling among the marbles of Rome and Florence,
he had seen women like this, kept in stone instead of Ice. Once,
wandering in the Louvre, he had found women like this, washed in summer
colour and kept in paint. Once, as a boy, sneaking the cool grottoes
behind a motion picture theatre screen, on his way to a free seat, he
had glanced up and there towering and flooding the haunted dark seen a
women's face as he had never seen it since, of such size and beauty
built of milk-bone and moon-flesh, at to freeze him there alone behind
the stage, shadowed by the, motion of her lips, the bird-wing flicker of
her eyes, the snow-pale-death-shimmering illumination from her cheeks.
    So from other years there jumped forth images which flowed and found
new substance here within the ice.
    What colour was her hair? It was blonde to whiteness and might take
any colour, once set free of cold.
    How tall was she?
    The prism of the ice might well multiply her size or diminish her as
you moved this way or that before the empty store, the window, the
night-soft rap-tapping ever-fingering, gently probing moths.
    Not important.
    For above all - the lightning-rod salesman shivered - he knew the
most extraordinary thing.
    If by some miracle her eyelids should open within that sapphire and
she should look at him, he knew what colour her eyes would be.
    He knew what colour her eyes would be.
    If one were to enter this lonely night shop -
    If one were to put forth one's hand, the warmth of that hand would.
. .what?
    Melt the ice.
    The lightning-rod salesman stood there for a long moment, his eyes
quickened shut.
    He let his breath out.
    It was warm as summer on his teeth.
    His hand touched the shop door. It swung open. Cold arctic air blew
out round him. He stepped in.
    The door shut.
    The white snowflake moths tapped at the window.
11
Midnight then and the town clocks chiming on toward one and two and then
three in the deep morning and the peals of the great clocks shaking dust
off old toys in attics and shedding silver off old mirrors in yet higher
attics and s up dreams about docks in all beds where children slept.
    Will heard it.
    Muffled away in the prairie lands, the chuffing of an engine, the
slow-slow-following dragon-glide of a train.
    Will sat up in bed.
    Across the way, like a mirror image, Jim sat up, too.
    A calliope began to play oh so softly, grieving to itself, a million
miles away.
    In one single motion, Will leaned from his window, as did Jim.
Without a word they gazed over the trembling surf of trees.
    Their rooms were high, as boys' rooms should be. From these gaunt
windows they could rifle-fire their gaze artillery distances past
library, city hall, depot, cow barns, farmlands to empty prairie!
    There, on the world's rim, the lovely snail-gleam of the railway
tracks ran, flinging wild gesticulations of lemon or cherry-coloured
semaphore to the stars.
    There, on the precipice of earth, a small steam feather uprose like
the first of a storm cloud yet to come.
    The train itself appeared, link by link, engine, coal-car, and
numerous and numbered all-asleep-and-slumbering-dream filled cars that
followed the firefly-sparked chum, chant, drowsy autumn hearthfire roar.
Hellfires flushed the stunned hills. Even at this remote view, one
imagined men with buffalo-haunched arms shovelling black meteor falls of
coal into the open boilers of the engine.
    The engine!
    Both boys vanished, came back to life binoculars.
    'The engine!'
    'Civil War! No other stack like that since 1900!'
    'The rest of the train, all of it's old'
    'The flags! The cages! It's the carnival!'
    They listened. At first Will thought he heard the air whistling fast
in his nostrils. But no - it was the train, and the calliope sighing,
weeping, on that train.
    'Sounds like church music!'
    'Hell. Why would a carnival play church music?'
    'Don't say hell,' hissed Will.
    'Hell.' Jim ferociously leaned out. 'I've saved up all day.
Everyone's asleep so - hell!'
    The music drifted by their windows. Goose pimples rose bid as boils
on Will's arms.
    'That is church music. Changed.'
    'For cri-yi, I'm froze, let's go watch them set up!'
    'At three a.m.?'
    'At three a.m.!'
    Jim vanished.
    For a moment, Will watched Jim dance around over there, shirt
uplifted, pants going on, while off in night country, panting, churning
was this funeral train, all black-plumed cars, licorice-coloured cages,
and a sooty calliope clamouring, banging three different hymns mixed and
lost, maybe not there at all.
    'Here goes nothing!'
    Jim slid down the drainpipe on his house, toward the sleeping lawns.
    'Jim! Wait!'
    Will thrashed into his clothes.
    'Jim, don't go alone!'
    And followed after.
12
Sometimes you see a kite so high, so wise it almost knows the wind. It
travels, then chooses to land in one spot and no other and no matter how
you yank, run this way or that, it will simply break its cord, seek its
resting place and bring you, blood-mouthed, running.
    'Jim! Wait for me!'
    So now Jim was the kite, the wild twine cut, and whatever wisdom was
his taking him away from Will who could only run, earthbound, after one
so high and dark silent and suddenly strange.
    'Jim, here I come!'
    And running, Will thought, Boy, it's the same old thing. I talk. Jim
runs. I tilt stones, Jim grabs the cold junk under the stones and -
lickety-split! I climb hills. Jim yells off church steeples. I got a
bank account. Jim's got the hair on his head, the yell in his mouth, the
shirt on his back and the tennis shoes on his feet. How come I think
he's richer? Because, Will thought, I sit on a rock in the sun and old
Jim, he prickles his arm-hairs by moonlight and dances with hop-toads. I
tend cows, Jim tames Gila monsters. Fool! I yell at Jim. Coward! he
yells back. And here we - go!
    And they ran from town, across fields and both froze under a rail
bridge with the moon ready beyond the hills and the meadows trembling
with a fur of dew.
    WHAM!
    The carnival train thundered the bridge, The calliope wailed.
    'There's no one playing it!' Jim stared up.
    'Jim, no jokes!'
    'Mother's honour, look!'
    Going away, away, the calliope pipes shimmered with star explosions,
but no one sat at the high keyboard. The wind, sluicing air-water air in
the pipes, made the music.
    The boys ran. The train curved away, gonging it's under-sea funeral
bell, sunk, rusted, green-mossed, tolling, tolling. Then the engine
whistle blew a great steam whiff and Will broke out in pearls of ice.
    Way late at night Will had heard - how often? - train whistles
jetting steam along the rim of sleep, forlorn, alone and far, no matter
how near they came. Sometimes he woke to find tears on his cheek, asked
why, lay back, listened and thought, Yes! they make me cry, going east,
going west, the trains so far gone in country deeps they drown in tides
of sleep that escape the towns.
    Those trains and their grieving sounds were lost forever between
stations, not remembering, where they had been, not guessing where they
might go, exhaling their last pale breaths over the horizon, gone. So it
was with all trains, ever.
    Yet this train's whistle!
    The wails of a lifetime were gathered in it from other nights in
other slumbering years; the howl of moon-dreamed dogs, the seep of
river-cold winds through January porch screens which stopped the blood,
a thousand fire sirens weeping, or worse! the outgone shreds of breath,
the protests of a billion people dead or dying, not wanting to be dead,
their groans, their sighs, burst over the earth!
    Tears jumped to Will's eyes. He lurched. He knelt. He pretended to
lace one shoe.
    But then he saw Jim's hands clap his ears, his eyes wet, too. The
whistle screamed. Jim screamed against the scream. The whistle shrieked.
Will shrieked against the shriek.
    Then the billion voices ceased, instantly, as if the train had
plunged in a fire storm off the earth.
    The train skimmed on softly, slithering, black pennants fluttering,
black confetti lost on its own sick-sweet candy wind, down the hill,
with the boys pursuing., the air so cold they ate ice cream with each
breath.
    They climbed a last rise to look down.
    'Boy,' whispered Jim.
    The train had pulled off into Rolfe's moon meadow, so-called because
town couples came out to see the moon rise here over a land so wide, so
long, it was like an inland sea, filled with grass in spring., or hay in
late, summer or snow  in winter, it was fine walking here along its
crisp shore with the moon coming up to tremble in its tides.
    Well, the carnival train was crouched there now in the autumn grass
on the old spur near the Woods and the boys crept and lay down under a
bush, waiting.
    'It's so quiet, whispered Will.
    The train just stood in the middle of the dry autumn field, no one
in the locomotive no one in the tender, no one in any of the cars
behind, all black under the moon, and just the small sounds of its metal
cooling, ticking on the rails.
    "Ssst,' said Jim. 'I feel them moving in there.'
    Will felt the cat-fuzz on his body bramble up by the thousands.
    'You think they mind us watching?'
    'Maybe,' said Jim, happily.
    'Then why the noisy calliope?'
    "When I figure that,' Jim said, 'I'll tell you. Look!'
    Whisper.
    As if exhaling itself straight down from the sky, a vast moss-green
balloon touched at the moon.
    It hovered two hundred yards above and away, quietly riding the
wind.
    'The basket under the balloon, someone in it!'
    But then a tall man stepped down from the train caboose platform
like a captain assaying the tidal weathers of this inland sea. All dark
suit, shadow-faced, he waded to the centre of the meadow, his shirt as
black as the gloved hands he now stretched to the sky.
    He gestured, once.
    And the train came to life.
    At first a head lifted in one window, then an arm, then another head
like a puppet in a marionette theatre. Suddenly two men in black were
carrying a dark tent-pole out across the hissing grass.
    It was the silence that made Will pull back, even as Jim leaned
forward eyes moon-bright.
    A carnival should be all growls, roars like, timberlands stacked,
bundled, rolled and crashed, great explosions of lion dust, men ablaze
with working anger, pop bottles jangling, horse buckles shivering,
engines and elephants in full stampede through rains of sweat while
zebras neighed and trembled like cage trapped in cage.
    But this was like old movies, the silent theatre haunted with
black-and-white ghosts, silvery mouth opening to let moon-light smoke
out, gestures made in silence so hushed you could hear the wind fizz the
hair on your cheeks. More shadows rustled from the train, passing the
animal cages where darkness prowled with unlit eyes and the calliope
stood mute save for the faintest idiot tune the breeze piped wandering
up the flues.
    The ringmaster stood in the middle of the land. The balloon like a
vast mouldy green cheese stood fixed to the sky. Then darkness came.
    The last thing Will saw was the balloon swooping down, as clouds
covered the moon.
    In the night he felt the men rush to unseen tasks. He sensed the
balloon, like a great fat spider, fiddling with the lines and poles,
rearing a tapestry in the sky.
    The clouds arose. The balloon sifted up.
    In the meadow stood the skeleton main poles and wires of the main
tent, waiting for its canvas skin.
    More clouds poured over the white moon. Shadowed, Will shivered. He
heard Jim crawling forward, seized his ankle, felt him stiffen.
    'Wait! ' said Will. 'They're bringing out the canvas l'
    'No,' said Jim. 'Oh, no. . .'
    For somehow instead, they both knew, the wires high-flung on the
poles were catching swift clouds, ripping them free from the wind in
streamers which, stitched and sewn by some great monster shadow, made
canvas and more canvas as the tent took shape. At last there was the
clear-water sound of vast flags blowing.
    The motion stopped. The darkness within darkness was still.
    Will lay, eyes shut, hearing the beat of great oil-black wings as if
a huge, ancient bird had drummed down to live, to breathe, to survive in
the night meadow.
    The clouds blew away.
    The balloon was gone.
    The men were gone.
    The tents rippled like black rain on their poles.
    Suddenly it seemed a long way to town.
    Instinctively, Will glanced behind himself.
    Nothing but grass and whispers.
    Slowly he looked back at the silent, dark seemingly empty tents.
    'I don't like it he said.
    Jim could not tear his eyes away.
    'Yeah,' he whispered. 'Yeah.'
    Will stood up. Jim lay on the earth.
    "Jim!' said Will.
    Jim jerked his head as if slapped. He was on his knees, he swayed
up. His body turned, but his eyes were fastened to those black flags,
the great side-show signs swarming with unguessed wings, horns, and
demon smiles.
    A bird screamed.
    Jim jumped. Jim gasped.
    Cloud shadows panicked them over the hills to the edge of town.
    From there, the two boys ran alone.
13
The air was cold blowing in through the wide-open library window.
    Charles Halloway had stood there for a long time.
    Now, he quickened.
    Along the street below fled two shadows, two boys above them
matching shadow stride for stride. They softly printed the night air
with treads.
    'Jim!' cried the old man. 'Will!'
    But not aloud.
    The boys went away towards home.
    Charles Halloway looked out into the country.
    Wandering alone in the library, letting his broom tell him things no
one else could hear, he had heard the whistle and the
disjointed-calliope hymns.
    'Three,' he now said, half-aloud. 'Three in the morning. . .'
    In the meadow the tents, the carnival waited. Waited for someone,
anyone to wade along the grassy surf. The great tents filled like
bellows. They softly issued forth exhalations of air that smelled like
ancient yellow beasts.
    But only the moon looked in at the hollow dark, the deep caverns.
Outside, night beasts hung in midgallop on a carousel. Beyond lay
fathoms of Mirror Maze which housed a multifold series of empty vanities
one wave on another, still, serene, silvered with age, white with time.
Any shadow, at the entrance, might stir reverberations the colour of
fright, unravel deep-buried moons.
    If a man stood here would he see himself unfolded away a billion
times to eternity? Would a billion images look back, each face and the
face after and the face after that old, older, oldest? Would he find
himself lost in a fine dust away off deep down there, not fifty but
sixty, not sixty but seventy, not seventy but eighty, ninety,
ninety-nine years old?
    The maze did not ask.
    The maze did not tell.
    It simply stood and waited like a great arctic floe.
    'Three o'clock. . .'
    Charles Halloway was cold. His skin was suddenly a lizard's skin.
His stomach filled with blood turned to rust. His mouth tasted of night
damps.
    Yet he could not turn from the library window.
    Far off, something glittered in the meadow.
    It was moonlight, flashing on a great glass.
    Perhaps the light said something, perhaps it spoke in code.
    I'll go there, thought Charles Halloway, I won't go there.
    I like it, he thought, I don't like it.
    A moment later the library door slammed.
    Going home, he passed the empty store window.
    Inside stood two abandoned sawhorses.
    Between lay a pool of water. In the water floated a few shards of
ice. In the ice were a few long strands of hair.
    Charles Halloway saw but chose not to see. He turned and was gone.
The street was soon as empty as the hardware-store window.
    Far away, in the meadow, shadows flickered in the Mirror Maze, as if
parts of someone's life, yet unborn, were trapped there, waiting to be
lived.
    So the maze waited, its cold gaze ready, for so much as a bird to
come look, see, and fly away shrieking.
    But no bird came.
14
'Three,' a voice said.
    Will listened, cold but warming, glad to be in with a roof above,
floor below, wall and door between too much exposure, too much freedom,
too much night.
    'Three. . .'
    Dad's voice, home now, moving down the hall, speaking to itself.
    'Three. . .'
    Why, thought Will, that's when the train came. Had Dad seen, heard,
followed?
    No, he mustn't! Will hunched himself. Why not? He trembled. What did
he fear?
    The carnival rushing in like a black stampede of storm waves on the
shore out beyond? Of him and Jim and Dad knowing, of the town asleep,
not knowing, was that it?
    Yes. Will buried himself, deep. Yes. . .
    'Three. . .'
    Three in the morning, thought Charles Halloway, seated on the edge
of his bed. Why did the train come at that hour?
    For, he thought, it's a special hour. Women never wake then, do
they? They sleep the sleep of babes and children. But men in middle age?
They know that hour well. Oh God, midnight's not bad, you wake and go
back to sleep, one or two's not bad, you toss but sleep again. Five or
six in the morning's not bad there's hope, for dawn's just under the
horizon. But three, now, Christ, three a.m.! The blood moves slow.
You're the nearest to dead you'll ever be save dying. Sleep is a patch
of death, but three in the morn, full wide-eyed staring, is living
death! You dream with your eyes open. God, if you had strength to rouse
up, you'd slaughter your half dreams with buckshot! But no, you lie
pinned to a deep well-bottom that's burned dry. The moon rolls by to
look at you down there, with its idiot face. It's a long way back to
sunset, a far way on to dawn, so you summon all the fool things of your
life, the stupid lovely things done with people known so very well who
are now so very dead - And wasn't it true, had he read it somewhere,
more people in hospitals die at 3 a.m. than at any other time. . .?
    Stop! he cried silently.
    'Charlie?' his wife said in her sleep.
    Slowly, he took off the other shoe.
    His wife smiled in her sleep.
    Why?
    She's immortal. She has a son.
    Your son, too!
    But what father ever really believes it? He carries no burden, he
feels no pain. What man, like woman, lies down in darkness and gets up
with child? The gentle, smiling ones own the good secret. Oh, what
strange wonderful clocks women are. They nest in Time. They make the
flesh that holds fast and binds eternity. They live inside the gift,
know power, accept, and need not mention it. Why speak of Time when you
are Time, and shape the universal moments, as they pass, into warmth and
action? How men envy and often hate these warm clocks, these wives, who
know they will live forever. So what do we do? We men turn terribly
mean, because we can't hold to the world ourselves or anything. We are
blind to continuity, all breaks down, falls, melts, stops, rots, or runs
away. So, since we cannot shape Time, where does that leave men?
Sleepless. Staring.
    Three a.m. That's our reward. Three in the morn. The soul's
midnight. The tide goes out, the soul ebbs. And a train arrives at an
hour of despair. Why?
    'Charlie. . .?'
    His wife's hand moved to his.
    'You. . .all right. . .Charlie?'
    She drowsed.
    He did not answer.
    He could not tell her how he was.
15
The sun rose yellow as a lemon.
    The sky was round and blue.
    The birds looped clear water songs in the air.
    Will and Jim leaned from their windows.
    Nothing had changed.
    Except the look in Jim's eyes.
    'Last night. . .' said Will. 'Did or didn't it happen?'
    They both gazed toward the far meadows.
    The air was sweet as syrup. They could find no shadows, anywhere,
even under trees.
    'Six minutes!' cried Jim.
    'Five!'
    Four minutes later, cornflakes lurching in their stomachs, they
frisked the leaves to a fine red dust going out of town.
    With a wild flutter of breath, they raised their eyes from the earth
they had been treading.
    And the carnival was there.
    'Hey. . .'
    For the tents were lemon like the sun, brass like wheat fields a few
weeks ago. Flags and banners bright as blue-birds snapped above
lion-coloured canvas. From booths painted cotton-candy colours fine
Saturday smells of bacon and eggs, hot dogs and pancakes swam with the
wind. Everywhere ran boys. Everywhere, sleepy fathers followed.
    'It's just a plain old carnival,' said Will.
    'Like heck,' said Jim. 'We weren't blind last night. Cone on!'
    They marched one hundred yards straight on and deep into the midway.
And the deeper they went, the more obvious it became they would find no
night men cat-treading shadow while strange tents plumed like thunder
clouds. Instead, close up, the carnival was mildewed rope, moth-eaten
canvas, rain-worn, sun-bleached tinsel. The side-show paintings, hung
like sad albatrosses on their poles, flapped and let  fall flakes of
ancient paint, shivering and at the same time revealing the unwondrous
wonders of a thin man, fat-man, needle-head, tattooed man, hula dancer.
. . .
    They prowled on but found no mysterious midnight sphere of evil gas
tied by Mysterious Oriental knots to daggers plunged in dark earth, no
maniac ticket takers bent on terrible revenges. The calliope by the
ticket booth neither screamed deaths nor hummed idiot songs to itself.
The train? Pulled off on a spur in the warming grass, it was old, yes,
and welded tight with rust, but it looked like a titanic magnet that had
collected to itself, from locomotive bone-yards across three continents,
drive shafts, flywheels, smoke stacks, and hand-me-down second-rate
nightmares. It did not cut a black and mortuary silhouette. It asked
permission but to lie dead in autumn strewings, so much tired steam and
iron gunpowder blowing away.
    'Jim! Will!'
    Here came Miss Foley, their seventh-grade schoolteacher, along the
midway, all smiles.
    'Boys,' she said, 'what's wrong? You look as if you lost something.'
    'Well,' said Will, 'last night, did you hear that calliope - '
    'Calliope? No - '
    'Then why're you out here so early, Miss Foley?' asked Jim.
    'I love carnivals.' said Miss Foley, a little woman lost somewhere
in her grey fifties, beaming around. 'I'll buy hot dogs and you eat
while I look for my fool nephew. You seen him?'
    'Nephew?'
    'Robert. Staying with me a few-weeks. Father's dead, mother's sick
in Wisconsin. I took him in. He ran out here early today. Said he'd meet
me. But you know boys! My, you look glum.' She shoved food at them.
'Eat! Cheer up! Rides'll open in ten minutes. Meantime, I think I'll spy
through that Mirror Maze and - '
    'No,' said Will.
    'No what?' asked Miss Foley.
    'No Mirror Maze.' Will swallowed. He stared at fathoms of
reflections. You could never strike bottom there. It was like winter
standing tall, waiting to kill you with a glance. 'Miss Foley,' he said
at last, and wondered to hear his mouth say it, 'don't go in there.'
    'Why not?'
    Jim peered, fascinated, into Will's face. 'Yeah, tell us. Why not?'
    'People get lost,' said Will, lamely.
    'All the more reason. Robert might be wandering, loose, and not find
his way out if I don't grab his ear - '
    'Never can tell - ' Will could not take his eyes off the millions of
miles of blind grass - 'what might be s around in there. . . .'
    'Swimming!' Miss Foley laughed. 'What a lovely mind you have, Willy.
Well, yes, but I'm an old fish. So. . .'
    'Miss Foley!'
    Miss Foley waved, poised, took a step, and vanished into the mirror
ocean. They watched as she settled, wandered, sank deep, deep, and was
finally dissolved, grey among silver.
    Jim grabbed Will. 'What was all that?'
    'Gosh, Jim, it's the mirrors! They're the only things I don't like.
I mean, they're the only things like last night.'
    'Boy, boy, you been out in the sun,' snorted Jim. 'That maze there
is. . . .' His voice trailed off. He sniffed the cold air blowing out as
from an, ice house between the tall reflections.
    'Jim? You were saying?
    But Jim said nothing. After a long time he clapped his hand to the
back of his neck. 'It really does!' he cried in soft amaze.
    'What does?'
    'Hair! I read it all my life. In scary stories, it stands on end!
Mine's doing it - now!'
    'Gosh, Jim. So's mine!'
    They stood entranced with the delicious cold bumps on their necks
and the suddenly stiffened small hairs quilled up over their scalps.
    There was a flourish of light and shadow.
    Bumping through the Mirror Maze they saw two, four, a dozen Miss
Foleys.
    They didn't know which one was real, so they waved to all of them.
    But none of the Miss Foleys saw or waved back. Blind she walked.
Blind, she tacked her nails to cold glass.
    'Miss Foley!'
    Her eyes, flexed wide as from blasts of photographic powder, were
skinned white like a statue's. Deep under the glass, she spoke. She
murmured. She whimpered. Now she cried. Now she shouted. Now she yelled.
She knocked glass with her head, her elbows, tilted drunken as a
light-blind moth, raised her hands in claws. 'Oh God! Help!' she wailed.
'Help, oh God!'
    Jim and Will saw their own faces, pale, their own eyes, wide, in the
mirrors as they plunged.
    'Miss Foley, here!' Jim cracked his brow.
    'This way!' But Will found only cold glass.
    A hand flew from empty space. An old woman's hand, sinking for the
last time. It seized anything to save itself. The anything was Will. She
pulled him under.
    'Will!'
    'Jim! Jim!'
    And Jim held him and he held her and pulled her free of the silently
rushing mirrors coming in from the desolate seas.
    They stepped into sunlight.
    Miss Foley, one hand to her bruised cheek, bleated, muttered, then
laughed quickly, then gasped, and wiped her eyes.
    'Thank you, Will, Jim, oh thank you. I'd of drowned! I mean. . .oh,
Will you were right! My God, did you see her, she's lost, drowned in
there, poor girl!. oh the poor lost sweet. . .save her, oh, we must save
her!'
    'Miss Foley, boy, you're hurting.' Will firmly removed her fists
from clenching the flesh of his arm. 'There's no one in there.'
    'I saw her! Please! Look! Save her!'
    Will jumped to the maze entrance and stopped. The ticket taker gave
him an idle glance of contempt. Will backed away to Miss Foley.
    'I swear, no one went in ahead or after you, ma'am. It's my fault, I
joked about the water, you must've got mixed up, lost, and scared. . .
.'
    But if she heard, she went on biting the back of her hand, her voice
the voice of someone come out of the sea after no air, a long dread time
deep, no hope of life and now set free.
    'Gone? She's at the bottom! Poor girl. I knew her. "I know you!" I
said when I first saw her a minute ago. I waved, she waved. "Hello!" I
ran! - bang! I fell. She fell. A dozen, a thousand of her fell. "Wait!"
I said. Oh, she looked so fine, so lovely, so young. But it scared me.
"What're you doing here?" I said. "Why," I think she said, "I'm real.
You're not!" she laughed, way under water. She ran off in the maze. We
must find her! Before - '
    Miss Foley, Will's arm around her, took a last trembling breath and
grew strangely quiet.
    Jim was staring deep into those cold mirrors, looking for sharks
that could not be seen.
    'Miss Foley,' he said, 'what did she look like?'
    Miss Foley's voice was pale but calm.
    'The fact is. . .she looked like myself, many, many years ago.
    'I'll go home now.' she said.
    'Miss Foley, we'll - '
    'No. Stay. I'm just fine. Have fun, boys. Enjoy.'
    And she walked slowly away, alone, down the midway.
    Somewhere a vast animal made water. Ammonia made the wind turn
ancient as it passed.
    'I'm leaving!' said Will.
    'Will,' said Jim. 'We're staying until sundown, boy, dark sundown,
and figure it all. You chicken?'
    'No,' murmured Will. 'But. . .anybody want to dive back in that
maze?'
    Jim gazed fiercely deep into the bottomless sea, where now only the
pure light glanced back at itself, help up emptiness upon emptiness
beyond emptiness before their eyes.
    'Nobody.' Jim let his heart beat twice. '. . .I guess.'
16
A bad thing happened at sunset.
    Jim vanished.
    Through noon and after noon, they had screamed up half the rides,
knocked over dirty milk-bottles, smashed kewpie-doll winning plates,
smelling, listening, looking their way through the autumn crowd
trampling the leafy sawdust.
    And then quite suddenly Jim was gone.
    And Will, not asking anyone but himself, absolutely silent
certain-sure, walked steadily through the late crowd as the sky was
turning plum coloured until he came to the maze and paid his dime and
stepped up inside and called softly just one time:
    '. . .Jim. . .'
    And Jim was there, half in, half out of the cold glass tides like
someone abandoned on a seashore when a dose friend has gone far out, and
there is wonder if he will ever come back. Jim stood as if he had not
moved so much as an eyelash in five minutes, staring, his mouth
half-open, waiting for the next wave to come in and show him more.
    'Jim! Get outa there!'
    'Will. . .' Jim sighed faintly. 'Let me be.'
    'Like heck!' With one leap, Will grabbed Jim's belt and hauled.
Shuffling backward, Jim did not seem to know he was being dragged from
the maze, for he kept protesting in awe at some unseen wonder: 'Oh,
Will, oh, Willy, Will, oh, Willy. . .'
    'Jim, you nut. I'm taking you home!'
    'What? What? What?'
    They were in cold air. The sky was darker than plums now, with a few
clouds burning late sun-fire above. The sun-fire flamed on Jim's
feverish cheeks, his open lips, his wide and terribly rich green shining
eyes.
    'Jim, what'd you see in there? The same as Miss Foley?'
    'What, what?
    'I'm gonna, bust your nose! Come on!' He hustled, pulled, shoved,
half carried this fever, this elation, unstruggling friend.
    'Can't tell you, Will, wouldn't believe, can't tell you,in there,
oh, in there, in there. . .'
    'Shut up!' Will socked his arm. 'Scare heck outa me, just like she
scared us. Bugs! It's almost suppertime. Folks'll think we're dead and
buried!'
    They were striding now, slashing the autumn grass with their shoes,
beyond the tents in the hay-smelling, leaf-mould fields, Will glaring at
town, Jim staring back at the high now-darkening banners as the last of
the sun hid under the earth.
    'Will, we got to come back. Tonight - '
    'Okay, come back alone.'
    Jim stopped.
    'You wouldn't let me come alone. You're always going to be around,
aren't you, Will? To protect me?'
    'Look who needs protection.' Will laughed and then did not laugh
again, for Jim was looking at him, the last wild light dying in his
mouth, and caught in the thin hollows of his nostrils and in his
suddenly deep-set eyes.
    'You'll always be with me, huh, Will?'
    Jim simply breathed warm upon him and his blood stirred with the
old, the familiar answers: yes, yes, you know it, yes, yes.
    And turning together, they stumbled over a clanking dark mound of
leather bag.
17
They stood for a long moment over the huge leather bag.
    Almost secretively, Will kicked it. It made the sound of iron
indigestion.
    'Why,' said Will, 'that belongs to the lightning-rod salesman!'
    Jim slipped his hand through the leather mouth and hefted forth a
metal shaft clustered with chimeras, Chinese dragons all fang, eyeball
and moss-green armour, all cross and crescent; every symbol around the
world that made men safe, or seemed to, clung there, greaving the boys'
hands with odd weight and meaning.
    'Storm never came. But he went.'
    'Where? And why did he leave his bag?'
    They both looked to the carnival where dusk coloured the canvas
billows. Shadows ran coolly out to engulf them. People in cars honked
home in tired commotions. Boys on skeleton bikes whistled dogs after.
Soon night would own the midway while shadows rode the ferris wheel up
to cloud the stars.
    'People,' said Jim, 'don't leave their whole life lying around. This
is everything that old man owned. Something important - ' Jim breathed
soft fire - 'made him forget. So he just walked off and left this here.'
    'What? What's so important you forget everything?'
    'Why - ' Jim examined his friend, curiously, twilight in his face -
'no one can tell you. You find it yourself. Mysteries and mysteries.
Storm salesman. Storm salesman's bag. If we don't look now, we might
never know.'
    'Jim, in ten minutes - '
    'Sure! Midway'll be dark. Everyone home for dinner. Just us alone.
But won't it feel great? Just us! And here we go, back in!'
    Passing the Mirror Maze, they saw two armies - a billion Jims, a
billion Wills - collide, melt, vanish. And like those armies, so
vanished the real army of people.
    They boys stood alone among the encampments of dusk thinking of all
the boys in town sitting down to warm food in bright rooms.
18
The red-lettered sign said: OUT OF ORDER! KEEP OFF!
    'Sign's been up all day. I don't believe signs,' said Jim.
    They peered in at the, merry-go-round which lay under a dry rattle
and roar of wind-tumbled oak trees. Its horses, goats, antelopes,
zebras, speared through their spines with brass javelins, hung contorted
as in a death rictus, asking mercy with their fright-coloured eyes,
seeking revenge with their panic-coloured teeth.
    'Don't look broke to me.'
    Jim ambled across the clanking chain, leaped to a turntable surface
vast as the moon, among the frantic but forever spelled beasts.
    'Jim!'
    'Will, this is the only ride we haven't looked at. So. . .'
    Jim swayed. The lunatic carousel world stirred atilt with his lean
bulk. He strolled through brass forests amidst animal rousts. He swung
astride a plum-dusk stallion.
    'Ho, boy, git!'
    A man rose from machinery darkness.
    'Jim!'
    Reaching out from the shadows among the calliope tubes and
moon-skinned drums the man hoisted Jim yelling out on the air.
    'Help, Will, help!'
    Will leaped through the animals.
    The man smiled easily, welcomed him handily, swung him high beside
Jim. They stared down at bright flame-red hair, bright flame-blue eyes,
and rippling biceps.
    'Out of order,' said the man. 'Can't you read?'
    'Put them down.' said a gentle voice.
    Hung high, Jim and Will glanced over at a second man standing tall
beyond the chains.
    'Down,' he said again.
    And they were carried through the brass forest of wild but
uncomplaining brutes and set in the dust.
    'We were - ' said Will
    'Curious?' This second man was tall as a lamp post. His pale face,
lunar pockmarks denting it, cast light on those who stood below. His
vest was the colour of fresh blood. His eyes-brows, his hair, his suit
were licorice black, and the sun-yellow gem which stared from the
tie-pin thrust in his cravat was the same unblinking shade and bright
crystal as his eyes. But in this instant, swiftly, and with utter
clearness, it was the suit which fascinated Will. For it seemed woven of
boar-bramble, clock-spring hair, bristle, and a sort of ever-trembling,
ever-glistening dark hemp. The suit caught light and stirred like a bed
of black tweed-thorns, interminably itching, covering the man's long
body with motion so it seemed he should excruciate, cry out, and tear
the clothes free. Yet here he stood, moon-calm, inhabiting his itch-weed
suit and watching Jim's mouth with his yellow eyes. He never looked once
at Will.
    'The name is Dark.'
    He flourished a white calling card. It turned blue.
    Whisper. Red.
    Whisk. A green man dangled from a tree stamped on the card.
    Flit. Shh.
    'Dark. And my friend with the red hair there is Mr Cooger. Of Cooger
and Dark's. . .'
    Flip-flick-shhh.
    Names appeared, disappeared on the white square:
    '. . .Combined Shadow Shows. . .'
    Tick-wash.
    A mushroom-witch stirred mouldering herb pots.
    '. . .and cross-continental Pandemonium Theatre Company. . .'
    He handed the card to Jim. It now read:
    Our speciality: to examine, oil,
    polish, and repair Death Watch
    Beetles.
    Calmly, Jim read it. Calmly, Jim put a fist into his copious and
richly treasured pockets, rummaged, and held out his hand.
    On his palm lay a dead brown insect.
    'Here,' Jim said. 'Fix this.'
     Mr Dark exploded his laugh. 'Superb! I will!' He extended his hand.
His shirt sleeve pulled up.
    Bright purple, black green and lightning-blue eels, worms, and Latin
scrolls slid to view on his wrist.
    'Boy!' cried Will. 'You must be the Tattooed Man!'
    'No.' Jim studied the stranger. 'The Illustrated Man. There's a
difference.'
    Mr Dark nodded, pleased. 'What's your name, boy?'
    Don't tell him! thought Will, and stopped. Why not? he wondered,
why?
    Jim's lips hardly twitched.
    'Simon,' he said.
    He smiled to show it was a lie.
    Mr Dark smiled to show he knew it.
    'Want to see more, "Simon"?'
    Jim would not give him the satisfaction of a nod.
    Slowly, with great mouth-working pleasure, Mr Dark pushed his sleeve
high to his elbow.
    Jim.stared. The arm was like a cobra weaving, bobbing, swaying, to
strike. Mr Dark clenched his fist, wriggled his fingers. The muscles
danced.
    Will wanted to run around and see, but could only watch, thinking
Jim, oh, Jim!
    For there stood Jim and there was this tall man, each examining the
other as if he were a reflection in a shop window late at night. The
tall man's brambled suit, shadowed out now to colourJim's cheeks and
storm over his wide and drinking eyes with a look of rain instead of the
sharp cat-green they always were. Jim stood like a runner who has come a
long way, fever in his mouth, hands open to receive any gift. And right
now it was a gift of pictures twitched in pantomime, as Mr Dark made his
illustrious jerk cold-skinned over his warm-pulsed wrist as the stars
came out above and, Jim stared and Will could not see and a long way off
the last of the town people went away toward town in their warm cars,
and Jim said, faintly, 'Gosh. . .' and Mr Dark rolled down his sleeve.
    'Show's over. Suppertime. Carnival's shut up until seven. Everyone
out. Come back, "Simon," and ride the merry-go-round, when it's fixed.
Take this card. Free ride.'
    Jim stared at the hidden wrist and put the card in his pocket.
    'So long!'
    Jim ran. Will ran.
    Jim whirled, glanced back, leaped, and for the second time in the
hour, vanished.
    Will looked up into the tree where Jim squirmed on a limb, hidden.
    Mr Dark and Mr Cooger were turned away, busy with the
merry-go-round.
    'Quick, Will!'
    'Jim. . .?'
    'They'll see you. Jump!'
    Will jumped. Jim hauled him up. The great tree shook. A wind roared
by in the sky. Jim helped him cling, gasping, among the branches.
    'Jim, we don't belong here!'
    'Shut up! Look!' whispered Jim.
    Somewhere in the carousel machinery there were taps and brass
knockings, a faint squeal and whistle of calliope steam.
    'What was on his arm, Jim?'
    'A picture.'
    'Yeah, but what kind?'
    'It was - Jim shut his eyes. 'It was - a picture of a. . .snake. .
.that's it. . .snake.' But when he opened his eyes, he would not look at
Will.
    'Okay, if you don't want to tell me.'
    'I told you, Will, a snake. I'll get him to show it to you, later,
you want that?'
    No, thought Will, I don't want that.
    He looked down at the billion footprints left in the sawdust on the
empty midway and suddenly it was a lot closer to midnight than to noon.
    'I'm going home. . .'
    'Sure, Will,' go on. Mirror mazes, old teacher-ladies, lost
lightning-rod bags, lightning-rod salesmen disappear, snake pictures
dancing, unbroken merry-go-rounds, and you want to go home!? Sure, old
friend, Will, so long.'
    'I. . .' Will started dwon the tree, and froze.
    'All clear?' cried a voice below.
    'Clear!' someone shouted at the far end of the midway.
    Mr Dark moved, not fifty feet away to a red control box near the
merry-go-round ticket booth. He glared in all directions. He glared into
the tree.
    Will hugged, Jim hugged the limb, tightened into smallness.
    'Start up!'
    With a pop, a bang, a jangle of reins, a lift and downfall, a rise
and descent of brass, the carousel moved.
    But, thought Will, it's broke, out of order!
    He flicked a glance at Jim, who pointed wildly down.
    The merry-go-round was running, yes, but. . .
    It was running backward.
    The small calliope inside the carousel machinery rattle-snapped its
nervous-stallion shivering drums, clashed its harvest-moon cymbals,
toothed its castanets, and throatily choked and sobbed its reeds,
whistles, and baroque flutes.
    The music, Will thought, it's backward, too!
    Mr Dark jerked about, glanced up, as if he had heard Will's
thoughts. A wind shook the trees in black tumults. Mr Dark shrugged and
looked away.
    The carousel wheeled faster, shrieking, plunging, going
roundabout-back!
    Now Mr Cooger, with his flaming red hair and fire-blue eyes, was
pacing the midway, making a last check. He stood under their tree. Will
could have let spit down on him. Then the calliope gave a particularly
violent cry of foul murder which made dogs howl in far counties, and Mr
Cooger, spinning, ran and leaped on the backwhirling universe of animals
who, tail first, head last, pursued an endless circling night toward
unfound and never to be discovered destinations. Hand-slapping brass
poles, he flung himself into a seat where with his bristly red hair,
pink face, and incredible sharp blue eyes he sat silent, going back
around, back around, the music squealing swift back with him like
insucked breath.
    The music, thought Will, what is it? And how do I know it's backside
first? He, hugged the limb, tried to catch the tune, then hum it forward
in his head. But the brass bells, the drums, hammered his chest, revved
his heart so he felt his pulse reverse, his blood turn back in perverse
thrusts through all his flesh, so he was nearly shaken free to fall, so
all he did was clutch, hang pale, and drink the sight of the
backward-turning machine and Mr Dark, alert at the controls, on the
sidelines.
    It was Jim who first noticed the new thing happening, for he kicked
Will, once, Will looked over, and Jim nodded frantically at the man in
the machine as he came around the next time.
    Mr Cooger's face was melting like pink wax.
    His hands were becoming doll's hands.
    His bones sank away beneath his clothes; his clothes then shrank
down to fit his dwindling frame.
    His face flickered going, and each time around he melted more.
    Will saw Jim's head shift, circling.
    The carousel wheeled, a great back-drifting lunar dream the horses
thrusting, the music in-gasped after, while Mr Cooger, as simple as
shadows, as simple as light, as simple as time, got younger. And
younger. And younger.
    Each time he wheeled to view he sat alone with his bones, which
shaped like warm candles burning away to tender years.
    He gazed serenely at the fiery constellations, the
children-inhabited trees, which went away from him as he removed himself
from them and his nose Finished and his sweet wax ears reshaped
themselves to small pink roses.
    Now no longer forty where he had begun his back-spiraled journey, Mr
Cooger was nineteen.
    Around went the reverse parade of horse, pole, music, man become
young man, young man fast rendered down to boy. . . .
    Mr Cooger was seventeen, sixteen. . . .
    Another and another time around under the sky and trees and Will
whispering, Jim counting the times around, around, while the night air
warmed to summer heat by friction of sun-metal brass, the passionate
backturned flight of beasts, wore the wax doll down and down and washed
him clean with the still stranger musics until all ceased, all died away
to stillness the calliope shut up its brassworks, the ironmongery
machines hissed off, and with a last faint whine like desert sands blown
backup Arabian hourglasses, the carousel rocked on seaweed waters and
stood still.
    The figure seated in the carved white wooden sleigh chair was very
small.
    Mr Cooger was twelve years old.
    No. Will's mouth shaped the word. No. Jim's did the same.
    The small shape, stepped down from the silent world, its face in
shadow, but its hands newborn wrinkled pink, held out in raw carnival
lamplight.
    The strange man-boy shot his gaze up, down, smelling fright
somewhere, terror and awe in the vicinity. Will balled himself tight and
shut his eyes. He felt the terrible gaze shoot through the leaves like
brown needle-darts, pass on. Then, rabbit-running, the small shape lit
off down the empty midway.
    Jim was first to stir the leaves aside.
    Mr Dark was gone, too, in the evening hush.
    It seemed to take Jim forever to fall down to earth. Will fell after
and they both stood, clamorous with alarms, shaken by concussions of
silent pantomime, blasted by events all the more numbing because they
ran off into the night unknown. And it was Jim who spoke from their
mutual confusion and trembling as each held to the other's arm, seeing
the small shadow rush, luring them across the meadow.
    'Oh, Will, I wish we could go home, I wish we could eat. But it's
too late, we saw! We got to see more! Don't we?'
    'Lord,' said Will miserably. 'I guess we do.'
    And they ran together, following they didn't know what on out and
away to who could possibly guess where.
19
Out on the highway the last faint water-colours of the sun were gone
beyond the hills and whatever they were chasing was so far ahead as to
be only a swift-fleck now shown in lamplight, now set free, running,
into dark.
    'Twenty-eight!' gasped Jim, 'Twenty-eight times!'
    'The merry-go-round, sure!' Will jerked his head. 'Twenty-eight
times I counted, it went around back!'
    Up ahead the small shape stopped and looked back.
    Jim and Will ducked in by a tree and let it move on.
    'It', thought Will. Why do I think 'it'? He's a boy, he's a man. .
.no. . .it is something that has changed, that's what it is.
    They reached and passed the city limits, and swiftly jogging, Will
said, Jim, there must've been two people on that ride, Mr Cooger and
this boy and - '
    'No. I never took my eyes off him!'
    They ran by the barber shop. Will saw but did not see a sign in the
window. He read but did not read. He remembered, he forgot. He plunged
on.
    'Hey! He's turned on Culpepper Street! Quick!'
    They rounded a corner.
    'He's gone!'
    The street lay long and empty in the lamplight.
    Leaves blew on the hopscotch-chalked sidewalks.
    'Will, Miss Foley lives on this street.'
    'Sure, fourth house, but - '
    Jim strolled, casually whistling, hands in pockets, Will with him.
At Miss Foley's house they glanced up.
    In one of the softly lit front windows, someone stood looking out.
    A boy, no more and no less than twelve years old.
    'Will!' cried Jim, softly. 'That boy - '
    'Her nephew. . .?'
    'Nephew, heck! Keep your head away. Maybe he can read lips. Walk
slow. To the corner and back. You see his face? The eyes, Will! That's
one part of people don't change, young, old, six or sixty! Boy's face,
sure, but the eyes were the eyes of Mr Cooger!'
    'No!'
    'Yes!'
    They both stopped to enjoy the swift pound of each other's heart.
    'Keep moving.' They moved. Jim held Will's arm tight, leading him.
'You did see Mr Cooger's eyes huh? When he held us up fit to crack our
heads together? You did see the boy, just off the ride? He looked right
up near me, hid in the tree, and boy! It was like opening the door of a
furnace! I'll never forget those eyes! And there they are now, in the
window. Turn around. Now, let's walk back easy and nice and slow. . .
.We got to warn Miss Foley what's hiding in her house, don't we?'
    'Jim, look, you don't give a darn about Miss Foley or what's in her
house!'
    Jim said nothing. Walking arm in arm with Will he just looked over
at his friend and blinked once, let the lids come down over his shiny
green eyes and go up.
    And again Will had the feeling about Jim that he had always had
about an old almost forgotten dog. Some time every year that dog, good
for many months, just ran on out into the world and didn't come back for
days and finally did limp back all burred and scrawny and odorous of
swamps and dumps; he had rolled in the dirty mangers and foul
dropping-places of the world, simply to turn home with a funny little
smile pinned to his muzzle. Dad had named the dog Plato, the wilderness
philosopher, for you saw by his eyes there was nothing he didn't know.
Returned, the dog would live in innocence again, tread patterns of
grace, for months, then vanish, and the whole thing start over. Now,
walking here he thought he heard Jim whimper under his breath. He could
feel the bristles stiffen all over Jim. He felt Jim's ears flatten, saw
him sniff the new dark. Jim smelled smells that no one knew, heard ticks
from clocks that told another time. Even his tongue was strange now,
moving along his lower, and now his upper lip as they stopped in front
of Miss Foley's house again.
    The front window was empty.
    'Going to walk up and ring the bell,' said Jim.
    'What, meet him face to face?!'
    'My aunt's eyebrows, Will We got to check, don't we? Shake his paw,
stare him in his good eye or some such ,and if it is him - '
    'We don't warn, Miss Foley right in front of him, do we?'
    'We'll phone her later, dumb. Up we go!'
    Will sighed and let himself be walked up the steps wanting but not
wanting to know if the boy in this house had Mr Cooger hid but showing
like a firefly between his eyelashes.
    Jim rang the bell.
    'What if he answers?' Will demanded. 'Boy, I'm so scared I could
sprinkle dust. Jim, why aren't you scared, why?'
    Jim examined both of his untrembled hands. I'll be darned,' he
gasped. 'You're right! I'm not!'
    The door swung wide.
    Miss Foley beamed out at them.
    'Jim! Will! How nice.'
    'Miss Foley,' blurted Will. 'You okay?
    Jim glared at him. Miss Foley laughed.
    'Why shouldn't I be?'
    Will flushed. 'All those darn carnival mirrors - '
    'Nonsense, I've forgotten all about it. Well, boys, are you coming
in?
    She held the door wide.
    Will shuffled a foot and stopped.
    Beyond Miss Foley, a beaded curtain hung like a dark blue thunder
shower across the parlour entry.
    Where the coloured rain touched the floor, a pair of dusty small
shoes poked out. Just beyond the downpour the evil boy loitered.
    Evil? Will blinked. Why evil? Because. 'Because' was reason enough.
A boy, yes, and evil.
    'Robert?' Miss Foley turned, calling through the dark blue
always-falling beads of rain. She took Will's hand and gently pulled him
inside. 'Come meet two of my students.'
    The rain poured aside. A fresh candy-pink hand broke through, all by
itself, as if testing the weather in the hall.
    Good grief, thought Will, he'll look me in the eye! see the
merry-go-round and himself on it moving back, back. I know it's printed
on my eyeball like I been struck by lightning!
    'Miss Foley!' said Will.
    Now a pink face stuck out through the dim frozen necklaces of storm.
    'We got to tell you a terrible thing.'
    Jim struck Will's elbow, hard, to shut him.
    Now the body came out through the dark watery flow of beads. The
rain shushed behind the small boy.
    Miss Foley leaned toward him, expectant. Jim gripped his elbow,
fiercely. He stammered, flushed, then spat it out:
    'Mr Crosetti!'
    Quite suddenly, clearly  he saw the sign in the barber's window. The
sign seen but not seen as they ran by:
CLOSED ON ACCOUNT OF ILLNESS.
    'Mr Crosetti!' he repeated, and added swiftly. 'He's. . .dead!'
    'What. . .the barber?'
    'The barber?' echoed Jim.
    'See this haircut?' Will turned, trembling, his hand to his head.
'He did it. And we just walked by there and the sign was up and people
told us - '
    'What a shame.' Miss Foley was reaching out to fetch the strange boy
forward: 'I'm so sorry. Boys, this is Robert, my nephew from Wisconsin.'
    Jim stuck out his hand. Robert the Nephew examined it, curiously.
'What are you looking at?' he asked.
    'You look familiar,' said Jim.
    Jim! Will yelled to himself.
    'Like an uncle of mine,' said Jim, all sweet and calm.
    The nephew flicked his eyes to Will, who looked only at the floor,
afraid the boy would see his eyeballs whirl with the remembered
carousel. Crazily, he wanted to hum the backward music.
    Now, he thought, face him!
    He looked up straight at the boy.
    And it was wild and crazy and the floor sank away beneath for there
was the pink shiny Hallowe'en mask of a small pretty boy's face, but
almost as if holes were cut where the eyes of Mr Cooger shone out, old,
old, eyes as bright as sharp blue stars and the light from those stars
taking a million years to get here. And through the little nostrils cut
in the shiny mask, Mr Cooger's breath went in steam, came out ice. And
the Valentine candy tongue moved small behind those trim white
candy-kernel teeth.
    Mr Cooger, somewhere behind the eye-slits, went blink-click with his
insect-Kodak pupils. The lenses exploded like suns, then burnt chilly
and serene again.
    He swivelled his glance to Jim. Blink-click. He had Jim flexed,
focused, shot, developed, dried, filed away in the dark. Blink-click.
    Yet this was only a boy standing in a hall with two other boys and a
women. . .
    And all the while Jjm gazed steadily, back, feathers unruffled,
taking his own pictures of Robert.
    'Have you boys had supper?', asked Miss Foley. 'We're just sitting
down - '
    'We got to go!'
    Everyone looked at Will as if amazed he didn't want to stick here
forever.
    'Jim - ' he stammered. 'Your mom's home alone - '
    'Oh, sure,' Jim said, reluctantly.
    'I know what.' The nephew paused for their attention. When their
faces turned, Mr Cooger inside the nephew went silently blink-click,
blink-click, listening through the toy ears, watching through the
toy-charm eyes, whetting the doll's mouth with a Pekingese tongue. 'Join
us later for dessert, huh?'
    'Dessert?'
    'I'm taking Aunt Willa to the carnival.' The boy stroked Miss
Foley's arm until she laughed nervously.
    'Carnival?' cried Will, and lowered his voice. 'Miss Foley, you said
- '
    'I said I was foolish and scared myself,' said Miss Foley. 'It's
Saturday night the best night for tent shows and showing my nephew the
sights.'
    'Join us?' asked Robert, holding Miss Foley's hand. 'Later?'
    'Great!' said Jim.
    'Jim.' said Will. 'We been out all day. Your mom's sick.'
    'I forgot.' Jim, flashed him a look filled with purest snake-poison.
    Flick. The nephew made an X-ray of both, showing them, no doubt, as
cold bones trembling in warm flesh. He stuck out his hand.
    'Tomorrow, then. Meet you by the side-shows.'
    'Swell!' Jim grabbed the small hand.
    'So long!' Will jumped out the door, then turned with a last
agonized appeal to the teacher.
    'Miss Foley. . .?'
    'Yes, Will?'
    Don't go with that boy, he thought. Don't go near the shows. Stay
home, oh please! But then he said:
    'Mr Crosetti's dead.'
    She nodded, touched, waiting for his tears. And while she waited, he
dragged Jim outside and the door swung shut on Miss Foley and the pink
small face with the lenses in it going blink-click, snapshotting two
incoherent boys, and them fumbling down the steps in October dark, while
the merry-go-round started again in Will's head, rushing while the
leaves in the trees above cracked and fried with wind. Aside, Will
spluttered, 'Jim, you shook hands with him! Mr Cooger! You're not going
to meet him!?'
    'It's Mr Cooger, all right. Boy, those eyes. If I met him tonight,
we'd solve the whole shooting match. What's eating you, Will?'
    'Eating me!' At the bottom of the steps now, they tussled in fierce
and frantic whispers, glancing up at the empty windows where, now and
again, a shadow passed. Will stopped. The music turned in his head.
Stunned, he squinched his eyes. 'Jim, the music that the calliope played
when Mr Cooger got younger - '
    'Yeah?'
    'It was the "Funeral March"! Played backward!'
    'Which "Funeral March"?
    'Which! Jim, Chopin only wrote one tune! The "Funeral March"!'
    'But why played backward?'
    'Mr Cooger was marching away from the grave, not toward it, wasn't
he, getting younger, smaller, instead of older and dropping dead?'
    'Willy, you're terrific!'
    'Sure, but - ' Will stiffened. 'He's there, The window, again. Wave
at him. So long! Now, walk and whistle something. Not Chopin, for gosh
sakes - '
    Jim waved. Will waved. Both whistled, 'Oh, Susanna.'
    The shadow gestured small in the high window.
    The boys hurried off down the street.
20
Two suppers were waiting in two houses.
    One parent yelled at Jim, two parents yelled at Will.
    Both were sent hungry upstairs.
    It started at seven o'clock It was done by seven-three.
    Doors slammed. Locks Clanked.
    Clocks ticked.
    Will stood by the door. The telephone was locked away outside. And
even if he called, Miss Foley wouldn't answer. By now she'd be gone
beyond town. . .good grief? Anyway, what could he say? Miss Foley, that
nephew's no nephew? That boy's no boy? Wouldn't she laugh? She would.
For the nephew was a nephew, the boy was a boy, or seemed such.
    He turned to the window. Jim, across the way, stood facing the same
dilemma, in his room. Both struggled. It was too early to raise the
windows and stage-whisper to each other. Parents below were busy growing
crystal-radio peach-fuzz in their ears, alert.
    The boys threw themselves on their separate beds in their separate
houses, probed mattresses for chocolate chunks put away against the lean
years, and ate moodily.
    Clocks ticked.
    Nine. Nine-thirty. Ten.
    The knob rattled, softly, as Dad unlocked the door.
    Dad! thought Will. Come in! We got to talk!
    But Dad chewed his breath in the hall. Only his confusion, his
always puzzled, half-bewildered face could be felt beyond the door.
    He won't come in, thought Will. Walk around, talk around, back off
from a thing, yes. But come sit, listen? When had he, when would he,
ever?
    'Will. . .?
    Will quickened.
    "Will. . .' said Dad, 'be careful.'
    'Careful?' cried mother, coming along the hall. 'Is that all you're
going to say?'
    'What else?' Dad was going downstairs now. 'He jumps, I creep. How
can you get two people together like that? He's too young, I'm too old.
God, sometimes I wish we'd never. . .'
    The door shut. Dad was walking away on the sidewalk.
    Will wanted to fling up the window and call. Suddenly, Dad was so
lost in the night. Not me, don't worry about me, Dad, he thought, you,
Dad, stay in! It's not safe! Don't go!
    But he didn't shout. And when he softly raised the window at last,
the street was empty, and he knew it would be just a matter of time
before that light went on in the library across town. When rivers
flooded, when fire fell from the sky, what a fine place the library was,
the many rooms, the books. With luck, no one found you. How could they!
- when you were off to Tanganyika in '98, Cairo in 1812, Florence in
1492!?
    '. . .careful. . .'
    What did Dad mean? Did he smell the panic, had he heard the music,
had he prowled near the tents? No. Not Dad ever.
    Will tossed a marble over at Jim's window.
    Tap. Silence.
    He imagined Jim seated alone in the dark, his breath like
phosphorous on the air, ticking away to himself.
    Tap. Silence.
    This wasn't like Jim. Always before, the window slid up, Jim's head
popped out, ripe with yells, secret hissings, giggles, riots and rebel
charges.
    'Jim, I know you're there!'
    Tap.
    Silence.
    Dad's out in the town. Miss Foley's with you-know-who! he thought.
Good gosh, Jim, we got to do something! Tonight!
    He threw a last marble.
    . . .tap. . .
    It fell to the hushed grass below.
    Jim did not come to the window.
    Tonight, thought Will. He bit his knuckles. He lay back cold
straight stiff on his bed.
21
In the alley behind the house was a huge old-fashioned pine-plank
boardwalk. It had been there ever since Will remembered, since
civilization unthinkingly poured forth the dull hard unresisting cement
sidewalks. His grandfather, a man of strong sentiment and wild impulse,
who let nothing go without a roar, had flexed his muscles in favour of
this vanishing landmark, and with a dozen handymen had toted a good
forty feet of the walk into the alley where it had lain like the
skeleton of some indefinable monster through the years, baked by sun,
lushly rotted by rains.
    The town clock struck ten.
    Lying abed, Will realized he had been thinking about Grandfather's
vast gift from another time. He was waiting to hear the boardwalk speak.
In what language? Well. . .
    Boys have never been known to go straight up to houses to ring bells
to summon forth friends. They prefer to chunk dirt at clapboards, hurl
acorns down roof shingles, or leave mysterious notes flapping from kites
stranded on attic window sills.
    So it was with Jim and Will.
    Late nights, if there were gravestones to be leapfrogged or dead
cats to be hurled down sour people's chimneys, one or the other of the
boys would prowl out under the moon and xylophone-dance on that old
hollow-echoing musical boardwalk.
    Over the years, they had tuned the walk, prising up an A board and
nailing it here, lifting up an F board and pounding it back down there
until the walk was as near onto being melodious as weather and two
entrepreneurs could fashion it.
    By the tune treaded out, you could tell the night's venture. If Will
heard Jim tramping hard on seven or eight notes of 'Way Down Upon the
Swanee River,' he scrambled out knowing it was moon-trail time on the
creek leading to the river caves. If Jim heard Will out leaping about
like a scalded airedale on the timbers and the tune remotely suggested
'Marching Through Georgia,' it meant plums, peaches, or apples were ripe
enough to get sick on out beyond town.
    So this night Will held his breath waiting for some tune to call him
forth.
    What kind of tune would Jim play to represent the carnival, Miss
Foley, Mr Cooger, and/or the evil nephew?
    Ten-fifteen. Ten-thirty.
    No music.
    Will did not like Jim sitting in his room thinking what? Of the
Mirror Maze? What had he seen there? And, seeing, what did he plan?
    Will stirred, restively.
    Especially he did not like to think of Jim with no father between
him and the tent shows and all that lay dark in the meadows. And a
mother who wanted him around so very much, he just had to get away, get
out, breathe free night air, know free night waters running toward
bigger freer seas.
    Jim! he thought. Let's have the music!
    And at ten-thirty-five, it came.
    He heard, or thought he heard, Jim out in the starlight leaping way
up and coming flat down like a spring tomcat on the vast xylophone. And
the tune! Was or wasn't it like the funeral dirge played backward by the
old carousel calliope?!!
    Will started to raise his window to be sure. But suddenly, Jim's
window slid quietly up.
    He hadn't been down on the boards! It was just Will's wild wish that
made the tune! Will started to whisper, but stopped.
    For Jim, without a word, scuttled down the drainpipe.
    Jim! Will thought.
    Jim, on the lawn, stiffened as if hearing his name.
    You're not going without me, Jim?
    Jim glanced swiftly up.
    If he saw Will, he made no sign.
    Jim, Will thought, we're still pals, smell things nobody else
smells, hear things no one else hears, got the same blood, run the same
way. Now this first time ever, you're sneaking out! Ditching me!
    But the driveway was empty.
    A salamander flicking the hedge, there went Jim.
    Will was out the window, down the trellis, and over the hedge,
before he thought: I'm alone. If I lose Jim, it's the first time I'll be
out alone at night, too. And where am I going? Wherever Jim goes.
    Lord, let me keep up!
    Jim skimmed like a dark owl after a mouse. Will loped like a
weaponless hunter after the owl. They sailed their shadows over October
lawns.
    And when they stopped. . .
    There was Miss Foley's house.
22
Jim glanced back.
    Will became a bush behind a bush, a shadow among shadows, with two
starlight rounds of glass, his eyes, holding the image of Jim calling up
in a whisper toward the second-floor windows.
    'Hey there. . .hey. . .'
    Good grief, thought Will, he wants to be slit and stuffed with
broken Mirror Maze glass.
    'Hey!' called Jim, softly. 'You. . .!'
    A shadow uprose on a dim-lit shade, above. A small shadow. The
nephew had brought Miss Foley home, they were in their separate rooms or
- Oh Lord, thought Will, I hope she's safe home. Maybe, like the
lightning-rod salesman, she -
    'Hey. . .!'
    Jim gazed up with that funny warm look of breathless anticipation he
often had nights in summer at the shadow-show window Theatre in that
house a few streets over. Looking up with love, with devotion, like a
cat Jim waited for some special dark mouse to run forth. Crouched, now
slowly he seemed to grow taller, as if his bones were pulled by the in
the window above, which now suddenly vanished.
    Will ground his teeth.
    He felt the shadow sift down through the house like a cold breath.
He could wait no longer. He leaped forth.
    'Jim!'
    He seized Jim's arm.
    'Will, what you doing here?!'
    'Jim, don't talk to him! Get out of here. My gosh, he'll chew and
spit out your bones!'
    Jim writhed himself free.
    'Will, go home! You'll spoil everything!'
    'He scares me, Jim, what you want from him!? This afternoon. . .in
the maze, did you see something!!?'
    '. . .Yes. . .'
    'For gosh sakes, what!'
    Will grabbed Jim's shirt front, felt his heart bang under the chest
bones. 'Jim - '
    'Let go.' Jim was terribly quiet. 'If he knows you're here, he won t
come out. Willy, if you don't let go, I'll remember when - '
    'When what!'
    'When I'm older, darn it, older!'
    Jim spat.
    As if he was struck by lightning, Will jumped back.
    He looked at his empty hands and put one up to wipe the spittle off
his cheek.
    'Oh, Jim,' he mourned.
    And he heard the merry-go-round motioning, gliding on black night
waters around, around, and Jim on a black stallion riding off and about,
circling in tree-shadow and he wanted to cry out, Look! the
merry-go-round I you want it to go forward, don't you, Jim? forward
instead of back! and you on it, around once and you're fifteen, circling
and you're sixteen, three times more and nineteen! music! and you're
twenty and off, standing tall! not Jim any more, still thirteen, almost
fourteen on the empty midway, with me small, me young, me scared!
    Will hauled off and hit Jim, hard, on the nose.
    Then he jumped Jim, wrapped him tight, and toppled him rolling down,
yelling, in the bushes. He slapped Jim's mouth, stuffed it, mashed it
full of fingers to snap and bite at, suffocating the angry grunts and
yells.
    The front door opened.
    Will crushed the air out of Jim, lay heavy on him, fisting his mouth
tight.
    Something stood on the porch. A tiny shadow scanned the town,
searching for but not finding Jim.
    But it was just the boy Robert, the friendly nephew, come almost
casually forth, hands in pockets, whistling under his breath, to breathe
the night air as boys do, curious for adventures that they themselves
must make, that rarely happen by. Threshed tight, mortally locked and
bound to Jim, staring up, Will was all the more shaken to see the normal
boy, the airy glance, the unassuming poise, the small, the easy self in
which no man at all was revealed by street light.
    At any moment, Robert, in full cry, might leap to play with them,
tangle legs, lock arms, bark-snap like pups in May, the whole thing end
with them strewn in laughing tears on the lawn, the terror spent, the
fear melted off in dew, a dream of nothings quickly gone such as dreams
go when the eye snaps wide. For there indeed stood the nephew, his face
round fresh, and cream-smooth as a peach.
    And he was smiling down at the two boys he now saw locked limb in
limb on the grass.
    Then, swiftly, he darted in. He must have run upstairs, scrabbled
about, and hurtled down again, for suddenly as the two boys out-thrashed
out-gripped, outraged each other, there was a rain of tinkling, rattling
glitter on the lawn.
    The nephew leaped the porch rail and landed panther-soft, imbedded
in his shadow, on the grass. His hands were delicious with stars. These
he liberally sprinkled. They thudded, slithered, winked at Jim's side.
Both boys lay stricken by the rain of gold and diamond fire that pelted
them.
    'Help, police!' cried Robert.
    Will was so shocked he let go Jim.
    Jim was so shocked he let go Will.
    Both reached at the same time for the cold strewn ice.
    'Good grief, a bracelet!'
    'A ring! A necklace!'
    Robert kicked. Two trash cans at the curb fell thundering.
    A bedroom light, above, flicked on.
    'Police!' Robert threw one last spray of glitter at their feet, shut
up his fresh-peach smile like locking an explosion away in a box, and
shot away down the street.
    'Wait!' Jim jumped. 'We won't hurt you!'
    Will tripped him, Jim fell.
    The window upstairs opened. Miss Foley leaned out. Jim, on his
knees, held a woman's wrist watch. Will blinked at a necklace in his
hands.
    'Who's there!' she cried. 'Jim? Will? What's that you got?!
    But Jim was running. Will stopped only long enough to see the window
empty itself with a wail as Miss Foley pulled in to see her room. When
he heard her full scream, he knew she had discovered the burglary.
    Running, Will knew he was doing just what the nephew wanted. He
should turn back, pick up the jewels, tell Miss Foley what happened. But
he must save Jim!
    Far back, he heard Miss Foley's new cries turn on more lights! Will
Halloway! Jim Nightshade! Night runners! Thieves! That's us, thought
Will, oh my Lord! That's us! No one'll believe anything we say from now
on! Not about carnivals, not about carousels, not about mirrors or evil
nephews, not about nothing!
    And so they ran, three animals in starlight. A black otter. A
tomcat. A rabbit.
    Me, thought Will, I'm the rabbit.
    And he was white, and much afraid.
23
They hit the carnival grounds at a good twenty miles an hour, give or
take a mile, the nephew in the lead, Jim close behind, and Will further
back, gasping, shotgun blasts of fatigue in his feet, his head, his
heart.
    The nephew, running scared, looked back, not smiling.
    Fooled him, thought Will, he figured I wouldn't follow, figured I'd
call the police, get stuck, not be believed, or run hide. Now he's
scared I'll beat the tar out of him, and wants to jump on that ride and
run around getting older and bigger than me. Oh, Jim, Jim, we got to
stop him, keep him young, tear his skin off!
    But he knew from Jim's running there'd be no help from Jim. Jim
wasn't running after nephews. He was running toward free rides.
    The nephew vanished around a tent far ahead. Jim followed. By the
time Will reached the midway, the merry-go-round was popping to life. In
the pulse, the din, the squeal-around of music the small fresh-faced
nephew rode the great platform in a swirl of midnight dust.
    Jim, ten feet back, watched the horses leap, his eyes striking fire
from the high-jumped stallion's eyes.
    The merry-go-round was going forward!
    Jim leaned at it.
    'Jim!' cried Will.
    The nephew swept from sight borne around by the machine. Drifted
back again he stretched out pink fingers urging softly: '. . .Jim. . .?'
    Jim twitched one foot forward.
    'No!' Will plunged.
    He knocked, seized, held Jim; they toppled; they fell in a heap.
    The nephew, surprised, whisked on in darkness, one year older. One
year older, thought Will, on the earth, one year taller, bigger, meaner!
    'Oh God, Jim, quick!' He jumped up, ran to the control box, the
complex mysteries of brass switch and porcelain covering and sizzling
wires. He struck the switch. But Jim, behind, babbling, tore at Will's
hands.
    'Will, you'll spoil it! No!'
    Jim knocked the switch full back.
    Will spun and slapped his face. Each clenched the other's elbows,
rocked, failed. They fell against the control box.
    Will saw the evil boy, a year older still, glide around into night.
Five or six more times around and he'd be bigger than the two of them!
    'Jim, he'll kill us!'
    'Not me, no!'
    Will felt a sting of electricity. He yelled, pulled back, hit the
switch handle. The control box spat. Lightning jumped to the sky. Jim
and Will, flung by the blast, lay watching the merry-go-round run wild.
    The evil boy whistled by, clenched to a brass tree. He cursed. He
spat. He wrestled with wind, with centrifuge. He was trying to clutch
his way through the horses, the poles, to the outer rim of the carousel.
His face came, went, came, went. He clawed. He brayed. The control box
erupted blue showers. The carousel jumped and bucked. The nephew
slipped. He fell. A black stallion's steel hoof kicked him. Blood
printed his brow.
    Jim hissed, rolled., thrashed Will riding him hard, pressing him to
grass, trading yell for yell, both fright-pale, heart ramming heart.
Electric bolts from the switch flushed up in white stars a gush of
fireworks. The carousel spun thirty, spun forty - 'Will, let me up!' -
spun fifty times. The calliope howled, boiled steam, ran ancient dry,
then played nothing, its keys gibbering as only chitterings boiled up
through the vents. Lightning unravelled itself over the sweated outflung
boys, delivered flame to the silent horse stampede to light their way
around, around with the figure lying on the platform no longer a boy but
a man, no longer a man but more than a man and even more and even more,
much more than that, around, around.
    'He's he's, oh he's, oh look, Will, he's - ' gasped Jim, and began
to sob, because it was the only thing to do, locked down, nailed tight.
'Oh God, Will, get up! We got to make it run backward!'
    Lights flashed on in the tents.
    But no one came out.
    Why not? Will thought crazily. The explosions? The electric storm?
Do the freaks think the whole world's jumping through the midway?
Where's Mr Dark? In town? Up to no good? What, where, why?
    He thought he heard the agonized figure sprawled on the carousel
platform drum his heart superfast, then slow, fast, slow, very fast,
very slow, incredibly fast, then as slow as the moon going down the sky
on a white night in winter.
    Someone, something, on the carousel wailed faintly.
    Thank God it's dark, thought Will. Thank God, I can't see. There
goes someone. Here comes something. There, whatever it is, goes again.
There. . . there. . .
    A black shadow on the shuddering machine tried to stagger up, but it
was late, late, later still, very late, latest of all, oh, very late.
The shadow crumbled. The carousel, like the earth spinning, whipped away
air, sunlight, sense and sensibility, leaving only dark, cold, and age.
    In a final vomit, the switch box blew itself completely apart.
    All the carnival lights blinked out.
    The carousel slowed itself through the cold night wind.
    Will let Jim go.
    How many times, thought Will, did it go around? Sixty, eighty. .
.ninety. . .?
    How many times? said Jim's face, all nightmare, watching the dead
carousel shiver and halt in the dead grass, a stopped world now which
nothing, not their hearts, hands or heads, could send back anywhere.
    They walked slowly to the merry-go-round, their shoes whispering.
    The shadowy figure lay on the near side, on the plank floor, its
face turned away.
    One hand hung off the platform.
    It did not belong to a boy.
    It seemed a huge wax hand shrivelled by fire.
    The man's hair was long, spidery, white. It blew like milkweed in
the breathing dark.
    They bent to see the face.
    The eyes were mummified shut. The nose was collapsed upon gristle.
The mouth was a ruined white flower, the petals twisted into a thin wax
sheath over the clenched teeth through which faint bubblings sighed. The
man was small inside his clothes small as a child, but tall, strung out,
and old, so old, very old, not ninety, not one hundred, no, not one
hundred and ten, but one hundred and twenty or one hundred and
impossible years old.
    Will touched.
    The man was cold as an albino frog.
    He smelled of moon swamps and old Egyptian bandages. He was
something found in museums, wrapped in nicotine linens, sealed in glass.
    But he was alive, puling like a babe, and shrivelling unto death,
fast, very fast, before their eyes.
    Will was sick over the side of the carousel.
    Then, falling against each other, Jim and Will sledge-hammered the
insane leaves, the unbelievable grass, the insubstantial earth with
their numbed shoes, fleeing off down the midway. . .
24
Moths ticked off the high tin-shaded arc light which swung abandoned
above the crossroads. Below, in a deserted gas station in the midst of
country wilderness there was another ticking. In a coffin-sized phone
booth speaking to people lost somewhere across night hills, two
white-faced boys were crammed, holding to each other at every flit of
bat, each sliding of cloud across the stars.
    Will hung up the phone. The police and an ambulance were coming.
    At first he and Jim had shout-whispered-wheezed at each other,
pumping along, stumbling: they should go home, sleep, forget - no! they
should take a freight train west! - no! for Mr Cooger, if he survived
what they'd done to him, that old man, that old old old man, would
follow them over the world until he found them and tore them apart!
Arguing, shivering, they ended up in a phone booth, and now saw the
police car bouncing along the road, its siren moaning, with the
ambulance behind. All the men looked out at the two boys whose teeth
chattered in the moth-flicked light.
    Three minutes later they all advanced down the dark midway, Jim
leading the way, talking, gibbering.
    'He's alive. He's got to be alive. We didn't mean to do it! We're
sorry!' He stared at the black tents. 'You hear? We're sorry!'
    'Take it easy, boy,' said one of the policemen. 'Go on.'
    The two policemen in midnight blue, the two internes like ghosts,
the two boys, made the last turn past the ferris wheel and reached the
merry-go-round.
    Jim groaned.
    The horses trampled the night air, in midplunge. Starlight glittered
on the brass poles. That was all.
    'He's gone. . . .'
    'He was here, we swear!' said Jim. 'One hundred and fifty, two
hundred years old, and dying of it!'
    'Jim' said Will.
    The four men stirred uneasily.
    'They must've taken him in a tent.' Will started off. A policeman
took his elbow.
    'Did you say one hundred and fifty years old?' he asked Jim. 'Why
not three hundred?'
    'Maybe he was! Oh God.' Jim turned, yelling. 'Mr Cooger! We brought
help!'
    Lights blinked on in the Freak Tent. The huge banners out front
rumbled and lashed as arc lights flushed over them. The police glanced
up. MR SKELETON, THE DUST WITCH, THE CRUSHER, VESUVIO THE LAVA SIPPFR!
danced soft, big, painted each on its separate flag.
    Jim paused by the rustling freak show entry.
    'Mr Cooger?' he pleaded. 'You. . .there?'
    The tent flaps mouthed out a warm lion air.
    'What?' asked a policeman.
    Jim read the moving flaps.
    'They said "yes." They said, "Come in."
    Jim stepped through. The others followed.
    Inside they squinted through crisscrossed tent pole shadows to the
high freak platforms and all the world-wandered aliens, crippled of face
of bone, of mind, waiting there.
    At a rickety card table nearby four men sat playing orange,
lime-green, sun-yellow cards printed with moon beasts and winged
sun-symbolled men. Here the akimbo Skeleton one might play like a
piccolo; here the Blimp who could be punctured every night, pumped up at
dawn; here the midget known as The Wart who could be mailed parcel post
dirt-cheap; and next to him an even littler accident of cell and time, a
Dwarf so small and perched in such a way you could not see his face
behind the cards clenched before him in arthritic and tremulous
oak-gnarled fingers.
    The Dwarf! Will started. Something about those hands! Familar,
familiar. Where? Who? What? But his eyes snapped on.
    There stood Monsieur Guillotine, black tights, black long stockings,
black hood over head, arms crossed over his chest, stiff straight by his
chopping machine the blade high in the tent sky, a hungry knife all
flashes and meteor shine, much desiring to cleave space. Below, in the
head cradle, a dummy sprawled waiting quick doom.
    There stood the Crusher, all ropes and tendons, all steel and iron
all bone-monger, jaw-cruncher, horseshoe-taffy-puller.
    And there the Lava Sipper, Vesuvio of the chafed tongue, of the
scalded teeth, who spun scores of fireballs up, hissing in a ferris of
flame which streaked shadows along the tent roof.
    Nearby, in booths, another thirty freaks watched the fires fly until
the Lava Sipper glanced, saw intruders, and let his universe fall. The
suns drowned in a water tub.
    Steam billowed. All froze in a tableau.
    An insect stopped buzzing.
    Will glanced swiftly.
    There, on the biggest stage, a tattoo needle poised like a blowgun
dart in his rose-crusted hand, stood Mr Dark, the Illustrated Man.
    His picture crowds flooded raw upon his flesh. Stripped bare to the
navel, he had been stinging himself, adding a picture to his left palm
with this dragonfly contraption. Now with the insect droned dead in his
hand, he wheeled. But Will, staring beyond him, cried:
    'There he is! There's Mr Cooger!'
    The police, the internes, quickened.
    Behind Mr Dark sat the Electric Chair.
    In this chair sat a ruined man, last seen strewn wheezing in a
collapse of bones and albino wax on the broken carousel. Now he was
erected, propped, strapped in this device full of lightning power.
    'That's him! He was. . .dying.'
    The Blimp ascended to his feet.
    The Skeleton spun about, tall.
    The Wart flea-hopped to the sawdust.
    The Dwarf let fall his cards and flirted his now mad, now idiot eyes
ahead, around, over.
    I know him, thought Will. Oh. God, what they've done to him!
    The lightning-rod salesman!
    That's who it was. Squeezed tight, smashed small, convulsed by some
terrible nature into a clenched fist of humanity. . .
    The seller of lightning-rods.
    But now two things happened with beautiful promptitude.
    Monsieur Guillotine cleared his throat.
    And the blade, above, in the canvas sky, like a homing hawk scythed
down. Whisper-whisk-slither-thunder-rush-wham!
    The dummy head, chop-cut, fell.
    And falling, looked like Will's own head, own face, destroyed.
    He wanted, he did not want, to run lift the head turn it to see if
it held his own profile. But how could you ever dare do that? Never,
never in a billion years, could one empty that wicker basket.
    The second happened.
    A mechanic, working at the back of an upright glass-fronted coffin
booth, released a trip wire. This made a last cog click within the
machinery under the sign, MLLE TAROT, THE DUST WITCH. The wax woman's
figure within the glass box nodded her head and fixed the boys with her
pointing nose as the boys passed, leading the men. Her cold wax hand
brushed the Dust of Destiny on a ledge within the coffin. Her eyes did
not see; they were sewn shut with laced black-widow web, dark threads. A
waxworks fright, good and proper, she was, and the policemen beamed,
viewing her, and strolled on, and beamed at Monsieur Guillotine for his
act too, and moving, the police were relaxing now, and seemed not to
mind being called late on a jolly venture into a rehearsing world of
acrobats and seedy magicians.
    'Gentlemen!' Mr Dark and his mob of illustrations surged forward on
the pine platform, a jungle beneath each arm, an Egyptian viper scrolled
on each bicep. 'Welcome! You're just in time! We're rehearsing all our
new acts!' Mr Dark waved and strange monsters gaped their fangs from his
chest, a Cyclops with a navel for a squinted moron eye twitched on his
stomach as he strode.
    Lord, thought Will, is he bringing that crowd with him or is the
crowd pulling him along by his skin?
    From all the creaked platforms, from the muffled sawdust, Will felt
the freaks wheel and fix their eyes, enchanted, as were internes and
police, by this illustrated throng of humanity that in one agglomerative
move dominated and filled the immediate air and tent sky with silent
shootings for attention.
    Now part of the wasp-needle tattooed population spoke. It was Mr
Dark's mouth over and above this calligraphic explosion, this railroad
accident of monsters in tumult upon his sweating skin. Mr Dark chanted
forth the organ tones from his chest. His personal electric blue-green
populations trembled, even as the real freaks on the sawdust tent floor
trembled, even as, hearing in their most secret marrow, Jim and Will
trembled and felt more freak than the freaks themselves.
    'Gentlemen! Boys! We've just perfected the new act! You'll be the
first to see!' cried Mr Dark.
    The first policeman, his hand casually nestled to his pistol
holster, squinted up at that vast corral of beasts and beings. 'This boy
said - '
    'Said?!' The Illustrated Man barked a laugh. The freaks leaped in a
frolic of shock, then calmed as the carnival owner continued with great
ease, patting and soothing his own illustrations, which somehow patted
and soothed the freaks. 'Said? But what did he see? Boys always scare
themselves at sideshows, eh? Run like rabbits when the freaks pop out.
But tonight, especially tonight!'
    The policemen glanced beyond to the Erector-set-papier mâché relic
constricted in the Electric Chair.
    'Who's he?'
    Will saw fire lick up through Mr Dark's smoke-clouded eyes, saw him
just as quickly snuff it out. 'The new act. Mr Electrico.'
    'No! Look at the old man! Look!' Will yelled. The police turned to
appraise his demon cry.
    'Don't you see!' said Will. 'He's dead! Only thing holds him up is
the straps!'
    The internes gazed up at the great flake of winter flung into and
held by the black chair.
    Oh gosh, thought Will, we thought it would all be simple. The old
man, Mr Cooger, dying, so we bring doctors to save him, so he forgives
us, maybe, maybe, the carnival doesn't hurt us, lets us go. But now
this, what's next? He's dead! It's too late! Everyone hates us!
    And Will stood among the others feeling the cold air waft down from
the unearthed mummy, from the cold mouth and cold eyes locked up in
frozen eyelids. Inside the frozen nostrils not a white hair stirred. Mr
Cooger's ribs under his collapsed shirt were stone-rigid and his teeth
under his clay lips were dry-ice cold. Put him out at noon and fog would
steam off him.
    The internes glanced at each other. They nodded.
    The policemen, at this, took one step forward.
    'Gentlemen!'
    Mr Dark scuttled a tarantula hand up an electric brass switchboard.
    'One hundred thousand volts will now bum Mr Electrico's body!
    'No don't let him! Will cried.
    The policemen took another step. The internes opened their mouths to
speak. Mr Dark flicked a swift demanding glance at Jim. Jim cried:
    'No! It's all right!'
    'Jim!'
    'Will, yes, it's okay!'
    'Stand back!' The spider clutched the switch handle. 'This man is in
a trance! As part of our new act, I have hypnotized him! He could suffer
injury if you shocked him from his spell!'
    The internes shut their mouths. The police stopped moving.
    'One hundred thousand volts! Yet he will come forth alive, whole in
sound mind and body!'
    'No!'
    A policeman grabbed Will.
    The Illustrated Man and all the men and beasts asprawl in frenzies
on him now snatched and banged the switch.
    The tent lights snuffed out.
    Policemen, internes, boys jumped up their flesh in cobbles and
boils.
    But now in the swift midnight shuttering, the Electric Chair was a
hearth and on it the old man blazed like a blue autumn tree.
    The police flinched back, the internes leaned ahead, as did the
freaks, blue fire in their eyes.
    The Illustrated Man hand glued to switch, looked upon the old old
old man.
    The old man was flint-rock dead, yes, but electricity alive sheathed
over him. It swarmed on his cold shell ears, it flickered in his
deep-as-an-abandoned-stone-well nostrils. It crept blue eels of power on
his praying-mantis fingers and his grasshopper knees.
    'The Illustrated Man's lips thrust wide., perhaps he yelled, but no
one heard against the immense fry, blast, the slam and sizzle of power
which prowled in around over under about man and prisoning chair. Come
alive! cried the hum! Come alive! cried the storming colour and light.
Come alive! yelled Mr Dark's mouth, which no one heard but Jim, reading
lips, read thunderous loud in his mind, and Will the same, Come alive!
willing the old man to five, start up, tick, hum, work juice, summon
spit, ungum spirit, melt wax soul. . . .
    'He's dead!' But no one heard Will, either, no matter how he pushed
against the lightning clamour.
    Alive! Mr Dark's lips licked and savoured. Alive. Come alive. He
racheted the switch to the last notch. Live, live! Somewhere, dynamos
protested, skirled, shrilled, moaned a bestial energy. The fight turned
bottle-green. Dead dead, thought Will. But live alive! cried machines,
cried flame and fire, cried mouths of crowds of livid beasts on
illustrated flesh.
    So the old man's hair stood up in prickling fumes. Sparks, bled from
his fingernails, dripped seething spatters on pine planks. Green
simmerings wove shuttles through dead eyelids.
    The Illustrated Man bent violently above the old old dead dead
thing, his prides of beasts drowned deep in sweat, his right hand thrust
in hammering demand upon the air: Live, live.
    And the old man came alive.
    Will Yelled himself hoarse.
    And no one heard.
    For now, very slowly, as if roused by thunder, as if the electric
fire were new dawn, one dead eyelid peeled itself slowly open.
    The freaks gaped.
    A long way off in the storm, Jim was yelling, too, for Will had his
elbow tight and felt the yell pouring out through the bones, as the old
man's lips fell apart and frightful sizzles zigzagged between lips and
threaded teeth.
    The Illustrated Man cut the power to a whine. Then, turning, he fell
to his knees, and put out his hand .
    Away off up there on the platform, there was the faintest stir as of
an autumn leaf beneath the old man's shirt.
    The freaks exhaled.
    The old old man sighed.
    Yes, Will thought, they're breathing for him, helping him, making
him to live.
    Inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale - yet it looked like an act. What
could he say, or do?
    '. . .lungs so. . .so. . .so. . .' someone whispered.
    The Dust Witch, back in her glass box?
    Inhale. The freaks breathed. Exhale. Their shoulders slumped.
    The old old man's lips trembled.
    '. . .heart beat. . .one. . .two. . .so. . .so. . .'
    The Witch again? Will feared to look.
    A vein ticked a small watch in the old man's throat.
    Very slowly now that right eye of the old man opened full wide,
fixed, stared like a broken camera. It was like looking through a hole
in space, with no bottom forever. He grew warmer.
    The boys, below, grew colder.
    Now the old and terribly-wise-with-nightmare eye was so wide and so
deep and so alive all to itself in that smashed porcelain face that
there at the bottom of the eye somewhere the evil nephew peered along
and out at the freaks, internes, police, and. . .
    Will.
    Will saw himself, saw Jim, two little pictures posed in reflection
on that single eye. If the old man blinked, the two images would be
crushed by his lid!
    The Illustrated Man on his knees, turned at last and gentled all
with his smile.
    'Gentlemen, boys, here indeed is the man who lives with lightning!
    The second policeman laughed; this motion shook his hand off his
holster.
    Will shuffled to the right.
    The old spittle-eye followed sucking at him with its emptiness.
    Will squirmed left.
    As did the phlegm that was the old man's gaze, while his chill lips
peeled wide to shape, reshape an echoed gasp, a flutter. From deep below
the old man bounced his voice ricocheting off the dank stone walls of
his body until it fell out his mouth:
    '. . .welcome. . .mmmmmm. . .'
    The words fell back in.
    'well. . .cummm. . .mmmm. . .'
    The policemen nudged each other with identical smiles.
    'No!' cried Will, suddenly. 'That's no act! He was dead! He'd die
again if you cut the power - !'
    Will slapped his own hand to his mouth.
    0 Lord, he thought, what am I doing? I want him alive, so he'll
forgive us, let us be! But, oh Lord, even more I want him dead, I want
them all dead, they scare me so much I got hairballs big as cats in my
stomach!
    'I'm sorry. . .he whispered.
    Don't be!' cried Mr Dark.
    The freaks made a commotion of blinks and glares. What next from the
statue in the cold sizzling chair? The old old man's one eye gummed
itself. The mouth collapsed, a bubble of yellow mud in a sulphur bath.
    The Illustrated Man banged the switch a notch grinning wildly at no
one. He thrust a steel sword in the old man's empty glove-like hand.
    A drench of electricity prickled from the sere music-box tines of
the ancient stubbled cheeks. That deep eye showed swift as a bullet
hole. Hungry for Will, it found and ate of his image. The lips steamed:
    'I. . .sssaw. . .the. . .boysssssss. . .ssssneak into. . . hee tent.
. .tttttt. . .'
    The desiccated bellows refilled, then pin-punctured the swamp air
out in faint wails:
    '. . .We. . .rehearsing. . .sssso I thought. . .play. . .thissss
trick. . .pretend to be. . .dead.'
    Again the pause to drink oxygen like ale, electricity like wine.
    '. . .let myself fall. . .like. . .I. . .wasssss. . .dying. . .The.
. .boysssssssss. . .ssscreaming. . .ran!'
    The old man husked out syllable on syllable.
    'Ha.' Pause. 'Ha.' Pause. 'Ha.'
    Electricity hemstitched the whistling lips.
    The Illustrated Man coughed gently. 'This act, it tires Mr
Electrico. . . .'
    'Oh, sure.' One of the policemen started. 'Sorry.' He touched his
cap. 'Fine show.'
    'Fine,' said one of the internes.
    Will glanced swiftly to see the interne's mouth, what it looked like
saying this, but Jim stood in the way.
    'Boys! A dozen free passes!' Mr Dark held them out. 'Here!'
    Jim and Will didn't move.
    'Well?' said one policeman.
    Sheepishly, Will reached up for the flame-coloured tickets, but
stopped as Mr Dark said, 'Your names?'
    The officers winked at each other.
    'Tell him, boys.'
    Silence. The freaks watched.
    'Simon,' said Jim. 'Simon Smith.
    Mr Dark's hand, holding the tickets, constricted.
    'Oliver,' said Will. 'Oliver Brown.'
    The Illustrated Man sucked in a mighty breath. The freaks inhaled!
The vast ingasped sigh might have, seemed to, stir Mr Electrico. His
sword twitched. Its tip leaped to spark-sting Will's shoulder, then
sizzle over in blue-green explosions at Jim. Lightning shot Jim's
shoulder.
    The policemen laughed.
    The old old man's one wide eye blazed.
    'I dub thee. . .asses and foolssssss. . .I dub. . .thee. . .Mr
Sickly. . .and. . .Mr Pale. . . !'
    Mr Electrico finished. The sword tapped them.
    'A. . .sssshort. . .sad life. . .for you both!'
    Then his mouth slit shut, his raw eye glued over. Containing his
cellar breath, he let the simple sparks swarm his blood like dark
champagne.
    'The tickets,' murmured Mr Dark. 'Free rides. Free rides. Come any
time. Come back. Come back.'
    Jim grabbed, Will grabbed the tickets.
    They jumped, they bolted from the tent.
    The police, smiling and waving all around, followed at their
leisure.
    The internes, not smiling, like ghosts in their white suits, came
after.
    They found the boys huddled in the back of the police car.
    They looked as though they wanted to go home.
II
Pursuits
25
She could feel the mirrors waiting for her in each room much the same as
you felt, without opening your eyes, that the first snow of winter has
just fallen outside your window.
    Miss Foley had first noticed, some years ago, that her house crowded
with bright shadows of herself. Best, then, to was ignore the cold
sheets of December ice in the hall, above the bureaus, in the bath. Best
skate the thin ice, lightly. Paused, the weight of your attention might
crack the shell. Plunged through the crust, you might drown in depths so
cold, so remote that all the Past lay carved in tombstone marbles there.
Ice water would syringe your veins. Transfixed at the mirror sill you
would stand forever, unable to lift your gaze from the proofs of Time.
    Yet tonight, with the echo of the running feet of the three boys
dying away, she kept feeling snow fall in the mirrors of her house. She
wanted to thrust through the frames to test their weather. But she was
afraid that doing this might cause all the mirrors to somehow assemble
in billionfold multiplications of self, an army of women marching away
to become girls and girls marching to become Infinitely small children.
So many people, crammed in one house, would provoke suffocation.
    So what must she do about mirrors, Will Halloway, Jim Nightshade,
and. . .the nephew?
    Strange. Why not say my nephew?
    Because, she thought, from the first when he came in the door, he
didn't belong, his proof was not proof, she kept waiting for. . .what?
    Tonight. The carnival. Music, the nephew said, that must be heard,
rides that must be ridden. Stay away from the maze where winter slept.
Swim around with the carousel where summer, sweet as clover,
honey-grass, and wild mint, kept its lovely time.
    She looked out at the night lawn from which she had not yet
retrieved the scattered jewels. Somehow she guessed this was a way the
nephew had of getting rid of the two boys who might stop her using this
ticket she took from the mantel:
    CAROUSEL. ADMIT ONE.
    She had waited for the nephew to come back. With time passing, she
must act on her own. Something must be done not to hurt no, but slow
down interference from such as Jim and Will. No one must stand between
her and nephew, her and carousel, her and lovely gliding ride-around
summer.
    The nephew had said as much, by saying nothing, by just holding her
hands, and breathing baked-apple-pie scent from his small pink mouth
upon her face.
    She lifted the telephone.
    Across town she saw the light in the stone library building, as all
the town had seen it, over the years. She dialled. A quiet voice
answered. She said:
    'Library? Mr Halloway? This is Miss Foley. Will's teacher. In ten
minutes, please, meet me in the police station. . . .Mr Halloway?'
    A pause.
    'Are you still there. . .?
26
'I'd have sworn,' said one interne. 'When we first got there. . .that
old man was dead.
    The ambulance and the police car had pulled up at the same moment at
the crossroads, going back into town. One of the intermes had called
over. Now one of the policemen called back:
    'You're joking!
    The internes sat in their ambulance. They shrugged.
    'Yeah. Sure. Joking.'
    They drove on ahead their faces as quiet and white as their
uniforms.
    The police followed, with Jim and Will huddled in back, trying to
say more, but the police started talking and laughing, retelling
everything that happened to one another, so Will and Jim wound up lying,
giving wrong names again, saying they lived around the comer from the
police station.
    They let the police drop them at two dark houses near the station
and they ran up on those porches and grabbed the doorknobs and waited
for the prowl car to swing off around the corner into the station, and
then they came down and followed and stood looking at the yellow lights
of the station all sun-coloured at midnight and Will glanced over and
saw the whole evening come and go in Jim's face and Jim watching the
police station windows as if at any moment darkness might fill every
room and put the lights out forever.
    On my way back into town, thought Will, I threw away my tickets. But
 - look. . .
    Jim still has his, in his hand.
    Will trembled.
    What did Jim think, want, plan, now that dead men lived and only
lived through the fire of white-hot electric chair machines? Did he
stiff very much love carnivals? Will searched. Faint echoes, yes, they
came, they went in Jim's eyes, for Jim, after all, was Jim, even
standing here with the calm light of Justice falling on his cheekbones.
    'The Chief of Police' Will said. 'He'd listen to us - '
    'Yeah,' said Jim. 'He'd wake just long enough to send for the
butterfly net. Hell, William, hell, even I don't believe what's happened
the last twenty-four hours.'
    'But we got to find someone higher up, keep trying, now we know what
the score is.'
    'Okay, what's the score? What's the carnival done so bad? Scared a
woman with a mirror maze? So, she scared herself the police'd say.
Burgled a house? Okay, where's the burglar? Hiding inside an old man's
skin? Who'd believe that? Who'd believe an old old man was ever a boy of
twelve? What else is the score? Did a lightning-rod salesman disappear?
Sure, and left his bag. But he could've left town - '
    'That dwarf in the side-show - '
    'I saw him, you saw him, looks kinda like the lightning-rod man,
sure, but again, can you prove he was ever big? No, just like you can't
prove Cooger was ever small, so that leaves us right here, Will, on the
sidewalk, no proof except what we saw, and us just kids, the carnival's
word against ours, and the police had a fine time anyway there. Oh gosh,
it's a mess. If only, if only there was still some way to apologize to
Mr Cooger - '
    'Apologize?' Will yelled. 'To a man-eating crocodile? Jehoshaphat!
You still don't see we can't do business with those ulmers and goffs!'
    'Ulmers? Goffs?' Jim gazed upon him thoughtfully, for that was how
the boys talked of the creatures who dragged and swayed and slumped
through their dreams. In the bad dreams of William, the 'ulmers' moaned
and gibbered and had no faces. In the equally bad dreams of Jim, the
'goffs', his peculiar name for them, grew like monster meringue-paste
mushrooms, which fed on rats which fed on spiders which fed, in turn,
because they were large enough, on cats.
    'Ulmers! Goffs!' said Will. 'You need a ten-ton safe to fall on you?
Look what happened to two folks already, Mr Electrico, and that terrible
crazy dwarf! All kinds of things can go wrong with people on that darn
machine. We know, we seen it. Maybe they squashed the lightning-rod man
down that way on purpose, or maybe something went wrong. Fact is, he
wound up in a wine press anyway, got run over by a steam-roller carousel
and's so crazy now he doesn't even know us! Ain't that enough to scare
the Jesus out of you, Jim? Why, maybe even Mr Crosetti - '
    'Mr Crosetti's on vacation.'
    'Maybe yes, maybe no. There's his shop. There's the sign: CLOSED ON
ACCOUNT OF ILLNESS. What kind of illness, Jim? He eat too much candy out
at the show? He get seasick on everybody's favourite ride?'
    'Cut it, Will.'
    'No, sir, I won't cut it. Sure, sure, the merry-go-round sounds
keen. You think I like being thirteen all the time? Not me! But for
cri-yi, Jim, face it, you don't really want to be twenty!'
    What else we talked about all summer?'
    'Talk, sure. But throwing yourself head first in that taffy machine
and getting your bones pulled long, Jim, you wouldn't what to do with
your bones then!'
    'I'd know,' said Jim, in the night. 'I'd know.'
    'Sure. You'd just go away and leave me here, Jim.'
    'Why,' protested the other, 'I wouldn't leave you, Will. We'd be
together.'
    'Together? You two feet taller and going around feeling your
leg-and-arm-bones? You looking down at me, Jim, and what'd we talk
about, me with my pockets full of kite-string and marbles and frog-eyes,
and you with clean nice and empty pockets and making fun, is that what
we'd talk, and you able to run faster and ditch me - '
    'I'd never ditch you, Will - '
    'Ditch me in a minute. Well, go on, Jim, just go on leave me because
I got my pocket knife and there's nothing wrong with me sitting under a
tree playing mumblety-peg while you get yourself plain crazy with the
heat of all those horses racing around, but thank God they're not racing
any more - '
    'And it's your fault!' cried Jim. He stopped.
    Will stiffened and made fists. 'You mean I should've let young
mean-and-terrible get old mean-and-terrible enough to chew our heads
off? Just let him ride around and hock his spit in our eye? and maybe
you with him, waving good-bye, going around again, waving so long! and
all I got to do is wave back, Jim, that what you mean?'
    'Sh,' said Jim. 'Like you say, it's too late. The carousel's broke -
'
    'And when it's fixed, they ride old horrible Cooger back, make him
young enough so he can speak and remember our names, and then they come
like cannibals after us, or just me, if you want to get in good with
them and go tell them my name and where I live - '
    'I wouldn't do that, Will.' Jim touched him.
    'Oh, Jim, Jim, you do see, don't you? Everything in its time, like
the preacher said only last month, everything one by one, not two by
two, will you remember?'
    'Everything, ' said Jim, 'in its time. . .'
    And then they heard voices from the police station. In one of the
rooms to the right of the entrance, a woman was talking now, and men
were talking.
    Will nodded to Jim and they ran quietly over to pick their way
through bushes and look into the room.
    There sat Miss Foley. There sat Will's father.
    'I don't understand,' said Miss Foley. 'To think Will and Jim would
break in my house, steal, run off - '
    'You saw their faces?' asked Mr Halloway.
    'When I screamed, they looked back under the light.' She's not
mentioning the nephew, thought Will. And she won't, of course.
    You see, Jim, he wanted to shout, it was a trap! The nephew waited
for us to come prowling. He wanted to get us in so much trouble, no
matter what we said to anybody, police, parents, that nobody'd listen to
us about carnivals, late hours, merry-go-rounds, because our word'd be
no good!
    'I don't want to prosecute,' said Miss Foley. 'But if they are
innocent, where are the boys?'
    'Here!' someone cried.
    'Will!' said Jim.
    Too late.
    For Will had jumped high and was scrambling through the window.
    'Here,' he said, simply, as he touched the floor.
27
They walked home quietly on the moon-coloured sidewalks, Mr Halloway
between the boys. When they reached home, Will's father sighed.
    'Jim, I don't see any reason to tear your mother to bits at this
hour. If you promise to tell her this whole thing at breakfast, I'll let
you off. Can you get in without waking her up?'
    'Sure. Look what we got.'
    'We?'
    Jim nodded and took them over to fumble among the clusters of thick
moss and leaves on the side of the house until they found the iron rungs
they had secretly nailed and placed to make a hidden ladder up to Jim's
room. Mr Halloway laughed, once, almost with pain, and a strange wild
sadness shook his head.
    'How long has this gone on? No, don't tell. I did it, too, your
age.' He looked up the ivy toward Jim's window. 'Fun being out late,
free as all hell.' He caught himself. 'You don't stay out too long - ?'
    'This week was the very first time after midnight.'
    Dad pondered a moment. 'Having permission would spoil everything, I
suppose? It's sneaking out to the lake, the graveyard, the rail tracks,
the peach orchards summer nights that counts. . . .'
    'Gosh, Mr Halloway, did you once - '
    'Yes. But don't let the women know I told you. Up.' He motioned.
'And don't come out again any night for the next month.'
    'Yes, sir!'
    Jim swung monkeywise to the stars, flashed through his window, shut
it, drew the shade.
    Dad looked up at the hidden rungs coming down out of the starlight
to the running-free world of sidewalks that invited the
one-thousand-yard dash, and the high hurdles of the dark bushes, and the
pole-vault cemetery trellises and walls. . . .
    'You know what I hate most of all, Will? Not being able to run any
more, like you.'
    'Yes, sir,' said his son.
    'Let's have it clear now,' said Dad. 'Tomorrow, go apologize to Miss
Foley again. Check her lawn. We may have missed some of the - stolen
property - with matches and flashlights. Then go to the Police Chief to
report. You're lucky you turned yourself in. You're lucky Miss Foley
won't press charges.'
    'Yes, sir.'
    They walked back to the side of their own house. Dad raked his hand
in the ivy.
    'Our place, too?'
    His hand found a rung Will had nailed away among the leaves.
    'Our place, too.'
    He took out his tobacco pouch, filled his pipe as they stood by the
ivy, the hidden rungs leading up to warm beds, safe rooms, then lit his
pipe and said, 'I know you. You're not acting guilty. You didn't steal
anything.'
    'No.'
    'Then why did you say you did, to the police?'
    'Because Miss Foley - who knows why? - wants us guilty. If she says
we are, we are. You saw how surprised she was to see us come in through
the window? She never figured we'd confess. Well, we did. We got enough
enemies without the law on us, too. I figured if we made a clean breast,
they'd go easy. They did. At the same time, boy, Miss Foley's won, too,
because now we're criminals. Nobody'll believe what we say.'
    'I'll believe.'
    'Will you?' Will searched the shadows on his father's face, saw
whiteness of skin, eyeball, and hair.
    'Dad, the other night, at three o'clock in the morning - '
    'Three in the morning - '
    He saw Dad flinch as from a cold wind, as if he smelled and knew the
whole thing and simply could not move, reach out, touch and pat Will.
    And he knew he could not say it. Tomorrow, yes, some other day, yes,
for perhaps with the sun coming up, the tents would be gone, the freaks
off over the world, leaving them alone, knowing they were scared enough
not to push it, say anything, just keep their mouths shut. Maybe it
would all blow over, maybe. . .maybe. . . .
    'Yes, Will?' said his father, with difficulty, the pipe in his hand
going dead. 'Go on.'
    No, thought Will, let Jim and me be cannibalized, but no one else.
Anyone that knows gets hurt. So no one else must know. Aloud he said:
    'In a couple of days, Dad, I'll tell you everything. I swear. Mom's
honour.'
    'Mom's honour' said Dad, at last, 'is good enough for me.'
28
The night was sweet with the dust of autumn leaves that smelled as if
the fine sands of ancient Egypt were drifting to dunes beyond the town.
How come, thought Will, at a time like this, I can even think of four
thousand years of dust of ancient people sliding around the world, and
me sad because no one notices except me and Dad here maybe, and even us
not telling each other.
    It was indeed a time between, one second their thoughts all brambled
airedale, the next all silken slumbering cat. It was a time to go to
bed, yet still they lingered reluctant as boys to give over and wander
in wide circles to pillow and night thoughts. It was a time to say much
but not all. It was a time after first discoveries but not last ones. It
was wanting to know everything and wanting to know nothing. It was the
new sweetness of men starting to talk as they must talk. It was the
possible bitterness of revelation.
    So while they should have gone upstairs, they could not depart this
moment that promised others on not so distant nights when man and
boy-becoming-man might almost sing. So Will at last said, carefully:
    'Dad? Am I a good person?'
    'I think so. I know so, yes.'
    'Will - will that help when things get really rough?'
    'It'll help.'
    'Will it save me if I need saving? I mean, if I'm around bad people
and there's no one else good around for miles, what then?'
    'It'll help.'
    'That's not good enough, Dad!'
    'Good is no guarantee for your body. It's mainly for peace of mind -
'
    'But sometimes, Dad, aren't you so scared that even - '
    ' - the mind isn't peaceful?' His father nodded, his face uneasy.
    'Dad,' said Will, his voice very faint. 'Are you a good person?'
    'To you and your mother, yes, I try. But no man's a hero to himself.
I've lived with me a lifetime, Will. I know everything worth knowing
about myself - '
    'And, adding it all up. . .?'
    'The sum? As they come and go, and I mostly sit very still and
tight, yes, I'm all right.'
    'Then, Dad,' asked Will, 'why aren't you happy?'
    'The front lawn at let's see. . .one-thirty in the morning. . .is no
place to start a philosophical. . .'
    'I just wanted to know is all.'
    There was a long moment of silence. Dad sighed.
    Dad took his arm, walked him over and sat him down on the porch
steps, relit his pipe. Puffing, he said, 'All right. Your mother's
asleep. She doesn't know we're out here with our tomcat talk. We can go
on. Now, look, since when did you think being good meant being happy?'
    'Since always.'
    'Since now learn otherwise. Sometimes the man who looks happiest in
town, with the biggest smile, is the one carrying the biggest load of
sin. There are smiles and smiles; learn to tell the dark variety from
the light. The seal-barker, the laugh-shouter half the time he's
covering up. He's had his fun and he's guilty. And men do love sin.
Will, oh how they love it, never doubt, in all shapes, sizes, colours,
and smells. Times come when troughs, not tables, suit our appetites.
Hear a man too loudly praising others, and look to wonder if he didn't
just get up from the sty. On the other hand, that unhappy, pale,
put-upon man walking by, who looks all guilt and sin, why, often that's
your good man with a capital G, Will. For being good is a fearful
occupation; men strain at it and sometimes break in two. I've known a
few. You work twice as hard to be a farmer as to be his hog. I suppose
it's thinking about trying to be good makes the crack run up the wall
one night. A man with high standards, too, the least hair falls on him
sometimes wilts his spine. He can't let himself alone, won't lift
himself off the hook if he falls just a breath from grace.
    'Oh, it would be lovely if you could just be fine, act fine, not
think of it all the time. But it's hard, right? with the last piece of
lemon cake waiting in the icebox, middle of the night, not yours, but
you he awake in a hot sweat for it, eh? Do I need tell you? Or, a hot
spring day, noon, and there you are chained to your school desk and away
off there goes the river, cool and fresh over the rock-fall. Boys can
hear clear water like that miles away. So, minute by minute, hour by
hour, a lifetime, it never ends, never stops, you got the choice this
second, now this next, and the next after that, be good, be bad, that's
what the dock ticks, that's what it says in the ticks. Run swim, or stay
hot, run eat or lie hungry. So you stay but once stayed, Will, you know
the secret, don't you? don't think of the river again. Or the cake.
Because if you do, you'll go crazy. Add up all the rivers never swum in,
cakes never eaten, and by the time you get my age, Will, it's a lot
missed out on. But then you console yourself, thinking, the more times
in, the more times possibly drowned, or choken on lemon frosting. But
then, through plain dumb cowardice, I guess, maybe you hold off from too
much, wait, play it safe.
    'Look at me: married at thirty-nine, Will thirty-nine! But I was so
busy wrestling myself two falls out of three, I figured I couldn't marry
until I had licked myself good and forever. Too late, I found you can't
wait to become perfect, you got to go out and fall down and get up with
everybody else. So at last I looked up from my great self-wrestling
match one night when your mother came to the library for a book, and got
me, instead. And I saw then and there you take a man half-bad and a
women half-bad and put their two good halves together and you got one
human all good to share between. That's you, Will, for my money. And the
strange thing is, son, and sad, too, though you're always racing out
there on the rim of the lawn, and me on the roof using books for
shingles, comparing life to libraries, I soon saw you were wiser, sooner
and better, than I will ever be. . . .'
    Dad's pipe was dead. He paused to tap it out and reload it.
    'No, sir,' Will said.
    'Yes,' said his father, 'I'd be a fool not to know I'm a fool. My
one wisdom is: you're wise.'
    'Funny' Will said, after a long pause. 'You've told me more,
tonight, than I've told you. I'll think some more. Maybe I'll tell you
everything, at breakfast. Okay?'
    'I'll be ready, if you are.'
    'Because. . .I want you to be happy, Dad.'
    He hated the tears that sprang to his eyes.
    'I'll be all right, Will.'
    'Anything I could say or do to make you happy, I would.'
    'Willy, William.' Dad lit his pipe again and watched the smoke blow
away in sweet dissolvings. 'Just tell me I'll live forever. That would
do nicely.'
    His voice, Will thought, I never noticed. It's the same colour as
his hair.
    'Pa,' he said, 'don't sound so sad.'
    'Me? I'm the original sad man. I read a book and it makes me sad.
See a film: sad. Plays? they really work me over.'
    'Is there anything,' said Will, 'doesn't make you sad?'
    'One thing. Death.'
    'Boy!' Will started. 'I should think that would!'
    'No' said the man with the voice to match his hair. 'Death makes
everything else sad. But death itself only scares. If there wasn't
death, all the other things wouldn't get tainted.'
    And, Will thought, here comes the carnival, Death like a rattle in
one hand, Life like candy in the other; shake one to scare you, offer
one to make your mouth water. Here comes the side-show, both hands full!
    He jumped to his feet.
    'Dad oh, listen! You'll live forever! Believe me, or you're sunk!
Sure, you were sick a few years ago - but that's over. Sure, you're
fifty-four, but that's young! And another thing - '
    'Yes, Willy?'
    His father waited for him. He swayed. He bit his lips, then blurted
out:
    'Don't go near the carnival.'
    'Strange,' his father said, 'that's what I was going to tell you.'
    'I wouldn't go back to that place for a billion dollars!'
    But, Will thought, that won't stop the carnival searching through
town to visit me.
    'Promise, Dad?'
    'Why don't you want me to go there, Will?'
    'That's one of the things I'll tell tomorrow or next week or next
year. You just got to trust me, Dad.'
    'I do, son.' Dad took his hand. 'It's a promise.'
    As if at a signal, both turned to the house. The time was up, the
hour was late, enough had been said, they properly sensed they must go.
    'The way you came out,' said Dad, 'is the way you go in.'
    Will walked silently to touch the iron rungs hidden under the
rustling ivy.
    'Dad. You won't pull these off. . .?'
    Dad probed one with his fingers.
    'Some day, when you're tired of them, you'll take them off
yourself.'
    'I'll never be tired of them.'
    'Is that how it seems? Yes, to someone your age, you figure you'll
never get tired of anything. All right, son, up you go.'
    He saw how his father looked up along the ivy and the hidden path.
    'You want to come up this way, too?'
    'No, no,' his father said, quickly.
    'Because,' said Will, 'you're welcome.'
    'That's all right. Go on.'
    But he still looked at the ivy stirring in the dark morning light.
    Will sprang up, grabbed the first, the second, the third rungs and
looked down.
    From just this distance, Dad looked as if he were shrinking, there
on the ground. Somehow he didn't want to leave him behind there in the
night, like someone ditched by someone else, one hand up to move, but
not moving.
    'Dad!' he whispered. 'You ain't got the stuff!'
    Who says!? cried Dad's mouth, silently.
    And he jumped.
    And laughing without sound, the boy, the man swung up the side of
the house, unceasingly, hand over hand, foot after foot.
    He heard Dad slip, scrabble, grab.
    Hold tight! he thought.
    'Ah. . .!'
    The man breathed hard.
    Eyes tight, Will prayed: hold. . .there. . .now. . .!!
    The old man gusted out, sucked in, swore in a fierce whisper, then
climbed again.
    Will opened his eyes and climbed and the rest was smooth, high,
higher, fine, sweet, wondrous, done! They swung in and sat upon the
sill, same size, same weight, coloured same by the stars, and sat
embraced once more with grand fine exhaustion, gasping on huge ingulped
laughs which swept their bones together, and for fear of waking God,
country, wife, Mom, and hell, they snug-clapped hands to each other's
mouths, felt the vibrant warm hilarity fountained there and sat one
instant longer, eyes bright with each other and wet with love.
    Then, with a last strong clasp, Dad was gone, the bedroom door shut.
    Drunk on the long night's doings, lolled away from fear toward
better, grander things found in Dad, Will slung off limp-falling clothes
with tipsy arms and delightfully aching legs, and like a fall of timber
chopped himself to bed. . . .
29
He slept for exactly one hour.
    And then, as if remembering something he had only half seen, he
woke, sat up, and peered out at Jim's rooftop.
    'The lightning-rod!' he yelled. 'It's gone!'
    Which indeed it was.
    Stolen? No. Jim take it down? Yes! Why? For the shucks of it.
Smiling, he had climbed to scuttle the iron, dare any storm to strike
his house! Afraid? No. Fear was a new electric-power suit Jim must try
for size.
    Jim! Will wanted to smash his confounded window. Go nail the rod
back! Before morn, Jim, the blasted carnival'll send someone to find
where we live, don't know how they'll come or what they'll look like,
but, Lord, your roof's so empty! the clouds are moving fast, that
storm's rushing at us and. . .
    Will stopped.
    What sort of noise does a balloon make, adrift?
    None.
    No, not quite. It noises itself, it soughs, like the wind billowing
your curtains all white as breaths of foam. Or it makes a sound like the
stars turning over in your sleep. Or it announces itself like moonrise
and moonset. That last is best: like the moon sailing the universal
deeps, so rides a balloon.
    How do you hear it, how are you warned? The ear, does it hear? No.
But the hairs on the back of your neck, and the peach-fuzz in your ears,
they do, and the hair along your arms sings like grasshopper legs
frictioned and trembling with strange music. So you know, you feel, you
are sure, lying abed, that a balloon is submerging the ocean sky.
    Will sensed a stir in Jim's house; Jim, too, with his fine dark
antennae, must have felt the waters part high over town to let a
Leviathan pass.
    Both boys felt a shadow bulk the drive between their houses, both
flung up their windows, both poked their heads out, both dropped their
jaws in surprise at this friendly, this always exquisite timing, this
delightful pantomime of intuition, of apprehension, their tandem
teamwork over the years. Then silver-faced, for the moon was rising,
both glanced up.
    As a balloon wafted over and vanished.
    'Holy cow, what's a balloon doing here!?' Jim asked, but wished no
answer.
    For, peering, they both knew the balloon was searching the best
search ever; no car-motor racket, no tires whining asphalt, no
footstepped street, just the wind clearing a great amazon through the
clouds for a solemn voyage of wicker basket and storm sail riding over.
    Neither Jim nor Will crashed his window or pulled his shade, they
simply had to stay motionless waiting, for they heard the noise again
like a murmur in someone else's dream. . . .
    The temperature dropped forty degrees.
    Because now the storm-bleached balloon whisper-purled, plummet-sank
softly down, its elephant shadow cooling gemmed lawns and sundials as
they flaunted their swift gaze high through that shadow.
    And what they saw was something akimbo and arustle in the down-hung
wicker carriage. Was that head and shoulders? Yes, with the moon like a
silver cloak thrown up behind. Mr Dark! thought Will. The Crusher!
thought Jim. The Wart! thought Will. The Skeleton! The Lava Sipper! The
Hanging Man! Monsieur Guillotine!
    No.
    The Dust Witch.
    The Witch who might draw skulls and bones in the dust, then sneeze
it away.
    Jim looked to Will and Will to Jim; both read their lips: the Witch!
    But why a wax crone flung out in a night balloon to search? thought
Will, why none of the others, with their lizard-venom, wolf-fire,
snake-pit eyes? Why send a crumbled statue with blind-newt lashes sewn
tight with black-widow thread?
    And then, looking up, they knew.
    For the Witch, though peculiar wax, was peculiarly alive. Blind,
yes, but she thrust down rust-splotched fingers which petted, stroked
the sluices of air, which cut and splayed the wind, peeled layers of
space, blinded stars, which hovered and danced, then fixed and pointed
as did her nose.
    And the boys knew even more.
    They knew that she was blind, but special blind. She could dip down
her hands to feel the bumps of the world, touch house roofs, probe attic
bins, reap dust, examine draughts that blew through halls and souls that
blew through people, draughts vented from bellows to thump-whist, to
pound-temples., to pulse-throat, and back to bellows again. Just as they
felt that balloon sift down like an autumn rain, so she could feel their
souls disinhabit, reinhabit their tremulous nostrils. Each soul, a vast
warm fingerprint, felt different, she could roll it in her hand like
clay; smelled different, Will could hear her snuffing his life away;
tasted different, she savoured them with her raw-gummed mouth, her
puff-adder tongue; sounded different, she stuffed their souls in one
ear, tissued them out the other!
    Her hands played down the air, one for Will, one for Jim.
    The balloon shadow washed them with panic, rinsed them with terror.
    The Witch exhaled.
    The balloon, freed of the small sour ballast, uprose. The shadow
passed.
    'Oh God!' said Jim. 'Now they know where we live!'
    Both gasped. Some monstrous baggage brushed and dragged across the
shingles of Jim's house.
    'Will! She's got me!'
    'No! I think - '
    The drag, brush, rustle scurried from bottom to top of Jim's roof.
Then Will saw the balloon whirl up, fly off toward the hills.
    'She's gone, there she goes! Jim, she did something to your roof.
Shove the monkey pole over!'
    Jim slid the long slender clothesline pole over, Will fixed it on
his sill, then swung out, hand over hand, swung until Jim pulled him
through his window and they barefooted it into Jim's clothes closet and
boosted and hoisted each other up inside the attic that smelled like
lumber mills, old, dark, and too silent. Perched out on the high roof,
shivering, Will cried: 'Jim, there it is.'
    And there it was, in the moonlight.
    It was a track like a snail paints on a sidewalk. It glistened It
was silver-slick. But this was a path left by a gigantic snail that, if
it existed at all, weighed a hundred pounds. The silver ribbon was a
yard across. Starting down at the leaf-flued rain trough, the silver
track shimmered to the rooftop, then tremored down the other side.
    'Why?' gasped Jim. 'Why?'
    'Easier than looking for house numbers or street names. She marked
your roof so you can see it for miles around, night or day!'
    'Ohmigosh.' Jim bent to touch the track. A faint evil-smelling glue
covered his finger. 'Will, what'll we do?'
    ' I've got a hunch,' the other whispered, 'they won't be back till
morning. They can't just start a rumpus. They got some plan. Right now -
there's what we do!'
    Coiled across the lawn below like a vast boa constrictor, waiting
for them, was the garden hose.
    Will was gone, down, fast, and didn't knock anything over or wake
anyone up. Jim, on the roof, was surprised, in no time at all, when Will
came scuttling up all panting teeth, the water-fizzing hose in his fist.
    'Will, you're a genius!'
    'Sure! Quick!'
    They dragged the hose to drench the shingles, to wash the silver,
flood the evil mercury paint away.
    Working, Will glanced off at the pure colour of night turning toward
morn and saw the balloon trying to make decisions on the wind. Did it
sense, would it come back? Would she mark the roof again, and they have
to wash it off, and she mark it and they wash it, until dawn? Yes, if
need be.
    If only, thought Will, I could stop the Witch for good. They don't
know our names or where we live, Mr Cooger's too near dead to remember
or tell. The Dwarf - if he is the lightning-rod man - is mad - and, God
willing, won't recollect! And they won't dare bother Miss Foley until
morning. So, grinding their teeth way out in the meadows, they've sent
the Dust Witch to search. . . .
    'I'm a fool,' grieved Jim, quietly, rinsing the roof where the
lightning-rod had been. 'Why didn't I leave it up?'
    'Lightning hasn't struck yet,' Will said. 'And if we jump lively, it
won't. Now - over here!'
    They showered the roof.
    Below, someone put down a window.
    'Mom.' Jim laughed, bleakly. 'She thinks it's raining.'
30
The rain ceased.
    The roof was clean.
    They let the hose snake away to thump on the night grass a thousand
miles below.
    Beyond town, the balloon still paused between unpromising midnight
and promised and hoped-for sun.
    'Why's she waiting?'
    'Maybe she smells what we're up to.'
    They went back down through the attic and soon were in separate
rooms and beds after many fevers and chills of talk quietly separate
listening to hearts and clocks beat and now lay too quickly toward dawn.
    Whatever they do, thought Will, we must do it first. He wished the
balloon might fly back, the Witch might guess they had washed her mark
off and soar down to trace the roof again. Why?
    Because.
    He found himself staring at his Boy Scout archery set, the big
beautiful bow and quiver of arrows arranged on the east wall of his
room.
    Sorry, Dad, he thought, and sat up, smiling. This time it's me out
alone. I don't want her going back to report on us for hours, maybe
days.
    He grabbed the bow and quiver from the wall, hesitated, thinking,
then stealthily ran the window up and leaned out. No need to holler loud
and long, no. But just think real hard. They can't read thoughts, I
know, that's sure, or they wouldn't send her, and she can't read
thoughts, but she can feel body heat and special temperatures and
special smells and excitements, and if I jump up and down and let her
know just by my feeling good about having tricked her, maybe, maybe. . .
    Four o'clock in the morning, said a drowsy clock-chime, off in
another land.
    Witch, he thought, come back.
    Witch, he thought louder and let his blood pound, the roof's clean,
hear!? We made our own rain! You got to come back and re-mark it! Witch.
. .?
    And the Witch moved.
    He felt the earth turn under the balloon.
    Okay, Witch, come on, there's just me, the no-name boy, You can't
read my mind, but here's me spitting on you! and here's me yelling we
tricked you, and the general idea gets through, so come on, come on!
dare! double-dare you!'
    Miles away, there was a gasp of assent rising, coming near. Holy
cow, he thought suddenly, I don't want her back to this house! Come on!
He thrashed into his clothes.
    Clutching his weapons, he aped down the hidden ivy rungs and dogged
the wet grass.
    Witch! Here! He ran leaving patterns, ran feeling crazy fine, wild
as a hare who has chewed some secret, delicious, sweetly poisonous root
that now gallops him berserk. Knees striking his chin, shoes crushing
wet leaves, he soared over a hedge, his hands full of bristly porcupine
weapons, fear and joy a tumble of mixed marbles in his mouth.
    He looked back. The balloon swung near! It inhaled, exhaled itself
along from tree to tree, from cloud to cloud.
    Where am I going? he thought. Wait! The Redman house! Not lived in
in years! Two blocks more.
    There was the swift shush of his feet in the leaves and the big
shush of the creature in the sky, while moonlight snowed everything and
stars glittered.
    He pulled up in front of the Redman house, a torch in each lung,
tasting blood, crying out silently: here! this is my house!
    He felt a great river change its bed in the sky. Good! he thought.
    His hand turned the doorknob of the old house. Oh God, he thought,
what if they are inside, waiting for me?
    He opened a door on darkness.
    Dust came and went in that dark, and a harpstring gesticulation of
spiders. Nothing else.
    Will jumped two at a time up the crumbling stairs, around and out on
the roof where he stashed his weapons behind the chimney and stood tall.
    The balloon, green as slime, printed with titan pictures of winged
scorpions, ancient phoenixes, smokes, fires, clouded weathers, swung its
wicker basket wheezing, down.
    Witch, he thought, here!
    The dank shadow struck him like a batwing.
    Will toppled. He flung up his hands. The shadow was almost black
flesh, striking.
    He fell. He clutched the chimney.
    The shadow draped him, hushing down.
    It was cold as a sea cave in that cloud-dark.
    But suddenly the wind, of itself, veered.
    The Witch hissed in frustration. The balloon swam a washing circle
up around.
    The wind! thought the boy wildy, it's on my side!
    No, don't go! he thought. Come back.
    For he feared she had smelled his plan.
    She had. She itched for his scheme. She snuffed, she gasped at it.
He saw the way her nails filed and scraped the air as if running over
grooved wax to seek patterns. She turned her Palms out and down as ff he
were a small stove burning softly somewhere in a nether world and she
came to warm her hands at him. As the basket swung in an upglided
pendulum he saw her squinched blind-sewn eyes, the ears with moss in
them, the pale wrinkled apricot mouth mummifying the air it drew in,
trying to taste what was wrong with his act, his thought. He was too
good, too rare, too fine, too available to be true! surely she knew
that!
    And knowing it, she held her breath.
    Which made the balloon suspend itself, half between inhale and
exhale.
    Now, tremulously, experimentally, daring to test, the Witch inhaled.
The balloon, so weighted, sank. Exhaled - so freed of vapour - the craft
ascended!
    Now, now, the waiting, the holding of dank sour breath in the wry
tissues of her childlike body.
    Will waggled his fingers, thumb to nose.
    She sucked air. The weight of this one breath skimmed the balloon
down.
    Closer! he thought.
    But, careful, she circled her craft, scenting the sharp adrenalin
wafted from his pores. He wheeled, following as the balloon spun, and
him reeling. You!. he thought, you want me sick! Spin me, will you? Make
me dizzy?
    There was one last thing to try.
    He stood very still with his back to the balloon.
    Witch, he thought, you can't resist.
    He felt the sound of the green slime cloud, the kept bag of sour
air, the squeal and stir of mouse-wicker on wicker as the shadow cooled
his legs, his spine, his neck.
    Close!
    The Witch took air, weight, night burden, star-and-cold-wind
ballast.
    Closer!
    Elephant shadow stroked his ears.
    He nudged his weapons.
    The shadow engulfed him.
    A spider flicked his hair - her hand?
    Choking a scream, he spun.
    The Witch, leaned out, was a mere foot away.
    He bent. He snatched.
    The Witch tried to scream out breath when she smelled, felt, knew
what he held tight.
    But, in reaction, horrified, she seized a breath, sucked weight,
burdened the balloon. It dragged the roof.
    Will pulled the bowstring back, freighted with single destruction.
    The bow broke in two pieces. He stared at the unshot arrow in his
hands.
    The Witch let out her breath in one great sigh of relief and
triumph.
    The balloon swung up. It struck him with its dry rattle-chuckling
heavy-laden basket.
    The Witch shouted again with insane happiness.
    Clutched to the basket rim, Will with one free hand drew back and
with all his strength threw the arrowhead flint up at the balloon flesh.
    The Witch gagged. She tore at his face.
    Then the arrow, a long hour it seemed in flight, razored a small
vent in the balloon. Rapidly the shaft sank as if cutting a vast green
cheese. The surface slit itself further in a wide ripping smile across
the entire surface of the gigantic pear, as the blind Witch gabbled,
moaned, blistered her lips, shrieked in protest, and Will hung fast,
hands gripped to wicker, kicking legs, as the balloon wailed whiffled,
guzzled, mourned its own swift gaseous death, as dungeon air raved out,
as dragon breath gushed forth and the bag, thus driven, retreated up.
    Will let go. Space whistled about him. He turned, hit shingles, fell
skidding down the inclined ancient roof, over down to rim, to rainspout
where, feet first, he spilled into further emptiness, yelling, clawed at
the rain gutter, held, felt it groan, give way, as he swept the sky to
see the balloon whistling, wrinkling, flying up like a wounded beast to
evacuate its terrified exhalations in the clouds; a gunshot mammoth, not
wanting to expire, yet in terrible flux coughing out its stinking winds.
    All this in a flash. Then Will flailed into space, with no time to
be glad for a tree beneath when it netted him, cut him, but broke his
fall with mattress twig, branch and limb. Like a kite he was held face
up to the moon where, at his exhausted leisure, he might hear the last
Witch lamentations for a wake in progress as the balloon spiralled her
away from house, street, town with inhuman mourns.
    The balloon smile, the balloon rip was all-encompassing now as it
wandered in deliriums to die in the meadows from which it had come,
sinking down now beyond all the sleeping, ignorant and unknowing houses.
    For a long while Will could not move. Buoyed in the tree branches,
afraid he might slip through and kill himself on the black earth below,
he waited for the sledgehammer to subside in his head.
    The blows of his heart might jar him loose, crash him down but he
was glad to hear them, know himself alive.
    But then at last, gone calm, he gathered his limbs, most carefully
searched for a prayer, and climbed himself down through the tree.
31
Nothing much else happened, all the rest of that night.
32
At dawn, a juggernaut of thunder wheeled over the stony heavens in a
spark-throwing tumult. Rain fell softly on town cupolas, chuckled from
rainspouts, and spoke in strange subterranean tongues beneath the
windows where Jim and Will knew fitful dreams, slipping out of one,
trying another for size, but finding all cut from the same dark,
mouldered cloth.
    In the rustling drumbeat, a second thing occurred:
    From the sodden carnival grounds, the carousel suddenly spasmed to
life. Its calliope fluted up malodorous steams of music.
    Perhaps only one person in town heard and guessed that the carousel
was working again.
    The door to Miss Foley's house opened and shut; her footsteps
hurried away along the street.
    Then the rain fell hard as lightning did a crippled dance down the
now-totally-revealed, now-vanishing-forever land.
    In Jim's house, in Will's house, as the rain nuzzled the breakfast
windows, there was a lot of quiet talk, some shouting, and more quiet
talk again.
    At nine-fifteen, Jim shuffled out into the Sunday weather, wearing
his raincoat, cap, and rubbers.
    He stood gazing at his roof where the giant snail track was washed
away. Then he stared at Will's door to make it open. It did. Will
emerged. Ms father's voice followed: 'Want me to come along?' Will shook
his head, firmly.
    The boys walked solemnly, the sky washing them toward the police
station where they would talk, to Miss Foley's where they would
apologize again, but right now they only walked, hands in pockets,
thinking of yesterday's fearful puzzles. At last Jim broke the silence:
    'Last night, after we washed off the roof, and I finally got to
sleep, I dreamed a funeral. It came right down Main Street, like a
visit.'
    'Or. . .a parade?'
    'That's it! A thousand people, all dressed in black coats, black
hats, black shoes, and a coffin forty feet long!'
    'Criminentry!'
    'Right! What forty feet long needs to be buried? I thought. And in
the dream I ran up and looked in. Don't laugh.'
    'I don't feel funny, Jim.'
    'In the long coffin was a big long wrinkled thing like a prune or a
big grape lying in the sun. Like a big skin or a giant's head, drying.'
    'The balloon!'
    'Hey.' Jim stopped. 'You must've had the same dream! But. .
.balloons can't die, can they?'
    Will was silent.
    'And you don't have funerals for them, do you?'
    'Jim, I. . .
    'Darn balloon laid out like a hippo someone leaked the wind out of -
'
    'Jim, last night. . .'
    'Black plumes waving, band banging on black velvet-muffled drums
with black ivory bones, boy, boy! Then on top of it, have to get up this
morning and tell Mom, not everything, but enough so she cried and yelled
and cried some more, women sure like to cry, don't they? and called me
her criminal son but - we didn't do anything bad, did we, Will?'
    'Someone almost took a ride on a merry-go-round.'
    Jim walked along in the rain. 'I don't think I want any more of
that.'
    'You don't think! ? After all this!? Good grief, let me tell you!
The Witch, Jim, the balloon! Last night, all alone, I - '
    But there was no time to tell it.
    No time to tell his stabbing the balloon so it gusted away to die in
the lonely country sinking the blind woman with it.
    No time because walking in the cold rain now, they heard a sad
sound.
    They were passing an empty lot deep within which stood a vast
oak-tree. Under it were rainy shadows, and the sound.
    'Jim,' said Will, 'someone's - crying.'
    'No.' Jim moved on.
    'There's a little girl in there.'
    'No.' Jim would not look. 'What would a girl be doing out under a
tree in the rain? Come on.'
    'Jim! You hear her!'
    'No! I don't, I don't!'
    But then the crying came stronger across the dead grass, flew like a
sad bird through the rain, and Jim had to turn, for there was Will
marching across the rubble.
    'Jim - that voice - I know it!'
    'Will, don't go there!'
    And Jim did not move, but Will stumbled and walked until he entered
the shade of the raining tree where the sky fell and was lost in autumn
leaves and crept down at last in shining rivers along the branches and
trunk and there was the little girl, crouched, face buried in her hands,
weeping as if the town were gone and the people in it and herself lost
in terrible woods.
    And at last Jim came edging up and stood at the edge of the shadow
and said, 'Who is it?'
    'I don't know.' But Will felt tears start to his eyes, as if some
part of him guessed.
    'It's not Jenny Holdridge, is it. . .'
    'No.'
    'Jane Franklin?'
    'No.' His mouth felt full of novocaine, his tongue merely stirred in
his numb lips. '. . .no. . . '
    The little girl wept, feeling them near, but not looking up yet.
    '. . .me. . .me. . .help me. . .nobody'll help me. . .me. . .me. .
.I don't like this. . .'
    Then when she had strength enough and was quieter she turned her
face, her eyes almost swollen shut with weeping. She was shocked to see
anyone near, then surprised.
    'Jim! Will! Oh God, it's you!'
    She seized Jim's hand. He writhed back, yelling. "No! I don't know
you, let go!'
    'Will, help me, Jim, oh don't go, don't leave!' she gasped,
brokenly, new tears bursting from her eyes.
    'No, no, don't!' screamed Jim, he thrashed, he broke free fell,
leaped to his feet, one fist raised to strike. He stopped, trembling,
held it to his side. 'Oh, Will, Will, let's get out of here, I'm sorry,
oh God, God.'
    The little girl in the shadow of the tree, flung back, widened her
eyes to fix the two in wetness, moaned, clutched herself and rocked back
and forth, her own child-baby, comforting her elbows. . . soon she might
sing to herself and sing that way, alone beneath the dark tree, forever,
no one able to join or stop the song.
    '. . .someone must help me. . .someone must help her. . .' she
mourned as for one dead, 'someone must help her. . .nobody will. .
.nobody has. . .help her if not me. . .terrible. . .terrible. . .'
    'She knows us!' said Will, hopelessly, half bent down to her, half
turned to Jim. 'I can't leave her!'
    'Lies!' said Jim, wildly. 'Lies! She don't know us! Never saw her
before!'
    'She's gone, bring her back, she's gone, bring her back,' mourned
the girl, eyes shut.
    'Find who?' Will got down on one knee, dared to touch her hand. She
grabbed him. Almost immediately she knew this was wrong for he tried to
tear free, so she let him go, and wept, while he waited near and Jim,
far out in the dead grass, called in for them to go, he didn't like it,
they must, they must go.
    'Oh, she's lost,' sobbed the little girl. 'She ran off in that place
and never come back. Will you find her, please, please. . .?'
    Shivering, Will touched her cheek. 'Hey now,' he whispered. 'You'll
be okay. I'll find help,' he said, gently. She opened her eyes. 'This is
Will Halloway, okay? Cross my heart, we'll be back. Ten minutes. But you
mustn't go away.' She shook her head. 'You'll wait here under the tree
for us?' She nodded, mutely. He stood up. This simple motion frightened
her and she flinched. So he waited and looked at her and said, 'I know
who you are.' He saw the great familiar eyes open grey in the small
wounded face. He saw the long rainwashed black hair and the pale cheeks.
'I know who you are. But I got to check.'
    'Who'll believe?' she wailed.
    'I believe,' Will said.
    And she lay back against the tree, her hands in her lap, trembling,
very thin, very white, very lost, very small.
    'Can I go now?' he said.
    She nodded.
    And he walked away.
    At the edge of the lot, Jim stomped his feet in disbelief, almost
hysterical with outrage and declamation.
    "It can't be!'
    'It is,' said Will. 'The eyes. That's how you tell. Like it was with
Mr Cooger and the evil boy - There's one way to be sure. Come on!'
    And he took Jim through the town and they stopped at last in front
of Miss Foley's house and looked at the unlit windows in the morning
gloom and walked up the steps and rang the bell, once, twice, three
times.
    Silence.
    Very slowly, the front door moved whining back on its hinges.
    'Miss Foley?' Jim called, softly.
    Somewhere off in the house, shadows of rain moved on far
windowpanes.
    'Miss Foley. . .?'
    They stood in the hall by the bead-rain in the entry door, listening
to the great attic beams ashift and astir in the downpour.
    'Miss Foley!' Louder.
    But only the mice in the walls, warmly nested, made sgraffito sounds
in answer.
    'She's gone out to shop,' said. Jim.
    'No.' said Will. 'We know where she is.'
    'Miss Foley, I know you're here!' shouted Jim suddenly, savagely,
dashing upstairs. 'Come on out, you!'
    Will waited for him to search and drag slowly back down. As Jim
reached the bottom of the steps, they both heard the music blowing
through the front door with the smell of fresh rain and ancient grass.
    The carousel calliope, among the hills, piping the 'Funeral March'
backwards.
    Jim opened the door wider and stood in the music, as one stands in
the rain.
    'The merry-go-round. They fixed it!'
    Will nodded. 'She must've heard the music, gone out at sunrise.
Something went wrong. Maybe the carousel wasn't fixed right. Maybe
accidents happen all the time. Like to the lightning-rod man, him
inside-out and crazy. Maybe the carnival likes accidents, gets a kick
out of them. Or maybe they did something to her on purpose. Maybe they
wanted to know more about us, our names, where we live, or wanted her to
help them hurt us. Who knows what? Maybe she got suspicious or scared.
Then they just gave her more than she ever wanted or asked for.'
    'I don't understand - '
    But now, in the doorway, in the cold rain, there was time to think
of Miss Foley afraid of mirror mazes, Miss Foley alone not so long ago
at the carnival, and maybe screaming when they did what they finally did
to her, around and around, around and around, too many years, more years
than she had ever dreamed of shucked away, rubbing her raw, leaving her
naked small, alone, and bewildered because unknown-even-to-herself,
around and around, until all the years were gone and the carousel rocked
to a halt like a roulette wheel, and nothing gained and all lost and
nowhere for her to go, no way to tell the strangeness, and nothing to do
but weep under a tree, alone, in the autumn rain. . . .
    Will thought this. Jim thought it, and said:
    'Oh, the poor. . .the poor. . .'
    'We got to help her, Jim. Who else would believe? If she tells
anyone, "I'm Miss Foley!" "Get away!" they'd say, "Miss Foley's left
town, disappeared!" "Go on, little girl!" Oh, Jim, I bet she'd pounded a
dozen doors this morning wanting help, scared people with her screaming
and yelling, then ran off, gave up, and hid under that tree. Police are
probably looking for her now, but so what? it's just a wild girl crying
and they'll lock her away and she'll go crazy. That carnival, boy, do
they know how to punish so you can't hit back. They just shake you up
and change you so no one ever knows you again and let you run free, it's
okay, go ahead, talk, 'cause folks are too scared of you to listen. Only
we hear, Jim, only you and me, and right now I feel like I just ate a
cold snail raw.'
    They looked back a last time at the shadows of rain crying on the
windows inside the parlour where a teacher had often served them cookies
and hot chocolate and waved to them from the window and moved tall
through the town. Then they stepped out and shut the door and ran back
toward the empty lot.
    'We got to hide her, until we can help - '
    'Help?' panted Jim. 'We can't help ourselves!
    'There's got to be weapons, right in front of us, we're just too
blind - '
    They stopped.
    Beyond the thump of their own hearts, a greater heart thumped. Brass
trumpets wailed. Trombones blared. A herd of tubas made an elephant
charge, alarmed for unknown reasons.
    'The carnival!' gasped Jim. 'We never thought! It can come right
into town. A Parade! Or that funeral I dreamt about, for the balloon?'
    'Not a funeral and only what looks like a parade but's a search for
us, Jim, for us, or Miss Foley, if they want her back! They can march
down any old street, fine and dandy, and spy as they go, drum and bugle!
Jim, we got to get her before they - '
    And breaking off, they flung themselves down an alley, but stopped
suddenly, and leaped to hide in some bushes.
    At the far end of the alley, the carnival band, animal wagons,
clowns, freaks and all, banged and crashed between them and the empty
lot and the great oak tree.
    It must have taken five minutes for the parade to pass. The rain
seemed to move on away, the clouds moving with them. The rain ceased.
The strut of drums faded. The boys loped down the alley, across the
street, and stopped by the empty lot.
    There was no little girl under the tree.
    They circled it, looked up in it, not daring to call a name.
    Then very much afraid, they ran to hide themselves somewhere in the
town.
33
The phone rang.
    Mr Halloway picked it up.
    'Dad, this is Willy, we can't go to the police station, we may not
be home today, tell Mom, tell Jim's mom.'
    'Willy, where are you?'
    'We got to hide. They're looking for us.'
    'Who, for God's sake?'
    'I don't want you in it, Dad. You got to believe, we'll just hide
one day, two, until they go away. If we came home they'd follow and hurt
you or Ma or Jim's mom. I got to go.'
    'Willy, don't!'
    'Oh, Dad,' said Will. 'Wish me luck.'
    Click.
    Mr Halloway looked out at the trees, the houses, the streets,
hearing faraway music.
    'Willy,' he said to the dead phone. 'Luck.'
    And he put on his coat and hat and went out into the strange bright
rainy sunshine that filled the cold air.
34
In front of the United Cigar Store on this before-noon Sunday with the
bells of all churches ringing across here, colliding with each other
there, showering sound from the sky now that the rain was spent, in
front of the cigar store the Cherokee wooden Indian stood, his carved
plumes pearled with water, oblivious to Catholic or Baptist bells,
oblivious to the steadily approaching sun-bright cymbals, the thumping
pagan heart of the carnival band. The flourished drums, the old-womanish
shriek of calliope, the shadow drift of creatures far stranger than he,
did not witch the Indian's yellow hawk-fierce gaze. Still, the drums did
tilt churches and plummet forth mobs of boys curious and eager for any
change mild or wild, so, as the church bells stopped up their silver and
iron rain, pew-stiffened crowds became relaxed parade crowds as the
carnival, a promotion of brass, a flush of velvet, all lion-pacing,
mammoth-shuffling, flag-fluttered by.
    The shadow of the Indian's wooden tomahawk lay on an iron grille
embedded in the sidewalk in front of the cigar store. Over this grille
with faint metallic reverberations, year after year, people passed,
dropping tonnages of mint-gum wrapper, gold cigar-band, matchstub,
cigarette butt or copper penny which vanished below forever.
    Now, with the parade, hundreds of feet rang and clustered on the
grille as the carnival strode by on stilts, roared by in tiger and
volcano sounds and colours.
    Under the grille, two shapes trembled.
    'Above, like a great baroque peacock striding the bricks and
asphalt, the freaks' eyes opened out, to stare, to search office roofs,
church spires, read dentists' and opticians' signs, check dime and dry
goods stores as drums shocked plate glass windows and wax dummies quaked
in facsimiles of fear. A multitude of hot and incredibly bright fierce
eyes, the parade moved, desiring, but not quenching its desire.
    For the things it most wanted were hidden in dark.
    Jim and Will, under the cigar store sidewalk grille.
    Crouch-pressed knee to knee, heads up, eyes alert, they sucked their
breaths like iron Popsicles. Above, women's dresses flowered in a cold
breeze. Above, men tilted on the sky. The band, in a collision of
cymbals, knocked children against their mothers' knees with concussion.
    'There!' exclaimed Jim! 'The parade! It's right out front the cigar
store! What're we doing here, Will? Let's go!'
    'No!' cried Will, hoarsely, clenching Jim's knee. 'It's the most
obvious place, in front of everybody! They'll never think to check here!
Shut up!'
    Thrrrummmmm. . .
    The grille, above, rang with the touch of a man's shoe, and the worn
nails in that shoe.
    Dad! Will almost cried.
    He rose, sank back, biting his lips.
    Jim saw the man above wheel this way, wheel that, searching, so
near, yet so far, three feet away.
    I could just reach up. . .thought Will.
    But Dad, pale, nervous, hurried on.
    And Will felt his soul fall over cold and white-jelly quivering
inside.
    Bang!
    The boys jerked.
    A chewed lump of pink bubble-gum, falling, had hit a pile of old
paper near Jim's foot.
    A five-year-old boy, above, crouched on the grille, peered down with
dismay after his vanished sweet.
    Get! thought Will.
    The boy knelt, hands to the grille.
    Go on! thought Will.
    He had a crazy wish to grab the gum and stuff it back up into the
little boy's mouth.
    A parade-drum thumped one huge time, then - silence.
    Jim and Will glanced at each other.
    The parade, both thought, it's halted!
    The small boy stuck one hand half through the grille.
    Above, in the street, Mr Dark, the Illustrated Man, glanced back
over his river of freaks, cages, at the sunburst tubas and python brass
horns. He nodded.
    The parade fell apart.
    The freaks hurried half to one sidewalk, half to the other, mingling
with the crowd, passing out handbills, eyes fire-crystal, quick,
striking like snakes.
    The small boy's shadow cooled Will's cheek.
    The parade's over, he thought, now the search begins.
    'Look, Ma!' The small boy pointed down through the grille 'There!'
35
In Ned's Night Spot, half a block from the cigar store, Charles
Halloway, exhausted from no sleep, too much thinking, far too much
walking, finished his second coffee and was about to pay when the sharp
silence from the street outside made him uneasy. He sensed rather than
saw the mild intermingled disturbance as the parade melted among the
sidewalk crowds. Not knowing why, Charles Halloway put his money away.
    'Warm it up again, Ned?'
    Ned was pouring coffee when the door swung wide, someone entered,
and splayed his right hand lightly on the counter.
    Charles Halloway stared.
    The hand stared back at him.
    There was a single eye tattooed on the back of each finger.
'Mom! Down there! Look!'
    The boy cried, pointing through the grille.
    More shadows passed and lingered.
    Including - the Skeleton.
    Tall as a dead tree in winter all skull, all scarecrow-stilted
bones, the thin man, the Skeleton, Mr Skull played his xylophone shadow
upon hidden things, cold paper rubbish, warm flinching boys, below.
    Go! thought Will. Go!
    The plump fingers of the child gesticulated through the grille.
    Go.
    Mr Skull walked away.
    Thank God, thought Will, then gasped, 'Oh, no!'
    For the Dwarf as suddenly appeared., waddling along, a fringe of
bells on his dirty shirt jingling softly, his toad-shadow tucked under
him, his eyes like broken splinters of brown marble now
bright-on-the-surface mad, now deeply mournfully
forever-lost-and-gone-buried-away mad looking for something could not be
found, a lost self somewhere, lost boys for an instant, then the lost
self again, two parts of the little squashed man fought to jerk his
flashing eyes here, there, around, up, down, one seeking the past, one
the immediate present.
    'Mama!' said the child.
    The Dwarf stopped and looked at the boy no bigger than himself.
Their eyes met.
    Will flung himself back, tried to gum his body into the concrete. He
felt Jim do the same, not moving but moving his mind, his soul,
thrusting it into darkness to hide from the little drama above.
    'Come on, Junior!' A woman's voice.
    The boy was puffed up and away.
    Too late.
    For the Dwarf was looking down.
    And in his eyes were the lost bits and fitful pieces of a man named
Fury who had sold lightning-rods how many days how many years ago in the
long, the easy, the safe and wondrous time before this fright was born.
    Oh, Mr Fury, thought Will, what they've done to you. Threw you under
a pile-driver, squashed you in a steel press, squeezed the tears and
screams out of you, trapped you in a jack-in-a-box all pressed down
until there's nothing left of you, Mr Fury. . .nothing left but this. .
.
    Dwarf. And the Dwarf's face was less human, more machine now; in
fact, a camera.
    The shuttering eyes flexed, sightless, opening upon darkness. Tick.
Two lenses expanded-contracted with liquid swiftness: a picture-snap of
the grille.
    A snap, also, of what lay beneath?
    Is he staring at the metal, thought Will, or the spaces between the
metal?
    For a long moment, the ruined-squashed clay doll Dwarf squatted
while standing tall. His flash-camera eyes were bulged wide, perhaps
still taking pictures?
    Will, Jim, were not seen really at all, only their shape, their
colour and size were borrowed by these dwarf camera eyes. They were
clapped away in the box-Brownie skull. Later how much later? - the
picture would be developed by the wild, the tiny, the forgetful., the
wandering and lost lightning-rod mind. What lay under the grille would
then be really seen. And after that? Revelation! Revenge! Destruction!
    Click-snap-tick.
    Children ran laughing by.
    The Dwarf-child, drawn by their running joy, was swept along with
them. Madly, he skipped off, remembered himself, and went looking for
something, he knew not what.
    The cloudy sun poured fight through all the sky.
    The two boys, boxed in light-slotted pit, hisstled their breath
softly out through gritted teeth.
    Jim squeezed Will's hand, tight, tight.
    Both waited for more eyes to stride along and rake the steel grille.
    The blue-red-green tattooed eyes, all five of them, fell away from
the counter top.
    Charles Halloway, sipping his third coffee, turned slightly on the
revolving stool.
    The Illustrated Man was watching him.
    Charles Halloway nodded.
    The Illustrated Man did not nod or blink, but stared until the
janitor wanted to turn away, but did not, and simply gazed as calmly as
possible at the impertinent intruder.
    'What'll it be?' asked the café proprietor.
    'Nothing.' Mr Dark watched Will's father. 'I'm looking for two
boys.'
    Who isn't? Charles Halloway rose, paid, walked off. 'Thanks, Ned.'
In passing, he saw the man with the tattoos hold his hands out, palms up
toward Ned.
    'Boys?' said Ned. 'How old?'
    The door slammed.
    Mr Dark watched Charles Halloway walk off outside the window.
    Ned talked.
    But the Illustrated Man did not hear.
    Outside, Will's father moved toward the library, stopped, moved
toward the courthouse, stopped, waited for some better sense to direct
him, felt his pocket, missed his smokes, and turned toward the United
Cigar Store.
    Jim looked up, saw familiar feet, pale faces salt and pepper hair.
'Will! Your dad! Call to him. He'll help us!' Will could not speak.
    'I'll call to him!'
    Will bit Jim's arm., shook his head violently, No!
    Why not? mouthed Jim.
    Because, said Will's lips.
    Because. . .he gazed up. . .Dad looked even smaller up there than he
had last night, seen from the side of the house. It would be like
calling to one more boy passing. They didn't need one more boy, they
needed a general, no, a major general! He tried to see Dad's face at the
cigar counter window, and discover whether it looked really older,
firmer, stronger, than it did last night washed with all the milk
colours of the moon. But all he saw was Dad's fingers twitching
nervously, his mouth working, as if he didn't dare ask his needs from Mr
Tetley. . . .
    'One. . .that is. . .one twenty-five cent cigar.'
    'My God,' said Mr Tetley, above. 'The man's rich!'
    Charles Halloway took his time removing the cellophane, waiting for
some hint, some move on the part of the universe to show him where he
was going, why he had come back this way for a cigar he did not really
want. He thought he heard himself called, twice, glanced swiftly at the
crowds, saw clowns passing with handbills, then lit the cigar he did not
want from the eternal blue-gas flame that burned in a small silver jet
pipe on the counter, and puffing smoke, dropped the cigar band with his
free hand, saw the band bounce on the metal grille, and vanish, his eyes
following it farther down to where. . .
    It lit at the feet of Will Halloway, his son.
    Charles Halloway choked on cigar smoke.
    Two shadows there, yes! And the eyes, terror gazing up out of the
dark well under the street. He almost bent to seize the grate, yelling.
    Instead, incredulous, he only blurted softly., with the crowd
around, and the weather clearing:
    'Jim? Will! What the hell's going on?'
    At which moment, one hundred feet away, the Illustrated Man came out
of Ned's Night Spot.
    'Mr Halloway - ' said Jim.
    'Come up out of there,' said Charles Halloway.
    The Illustrated Man, a crowd among crowds, pivoted slowly, then
walked toward the cigar store.
    'Dad, we can't! Don't look at us down here!'
    The Illustrated Man was some eighty feet away.
    'Boys,' said Charles Halloway. 'The police - '
    'Mr Halloway,' said Jim hoarsely., 'we're dead if you don't look up!
The Illustrated Man, if he - '
    'The what?' asked Mr Halloway.
    'The man with the tattoos!'
    From the café counter, five electric blue-inked eyes fixed Mr
Halloway's memory.
    'Dad, look over at the courthouse clock, while we tell you what
happened - '
    Mr Halloway straightened up.
    And the Illustrated Man arrived.
    He stood studying Charles Halloway.
    'Sir,' said the Illustrated Man.
    'Eleven-fifteen.' Charles Halloway judged the courthouse clock,
adjusted his wrist watch, cigar in mouth. 'One minute slow.'
    'Sir,' said the Illustrated Man.
    Will held Jim, Jim held Will fast in the gum-wrapper,
tobacco-littered pit, as the four shoes rocked, shuffled, tilted above.
    'Sir,' said the man named Dark, probing Charles Halloway's face for
the bones there to compare to other bones in other half-similar people,
'the Cooger-Dark Combined Shows have picked two local boys, two! to be
our special guests during our celebratory visit!'
    'Well, I - ' Will's father tried not to glance at the sidewalk.
    'These two boys - '
    Will watched the tooth-sharp shoe-nails of the Illustrated Man
flash, sparking the grille.
    ' - these boys will ride all rides see each show, shake hands with
every performer, go home with magic kits, baseball bats - '
    'Who,' interrupted Mr Halloway, 'are these lucky boys?'
    'Two selected from photos snapped on our midway yesterday. Identify
them, sir, and you will share their fortune. There are the boys!'
    He sees us down here! thought Will. Oh, God!
    The Illustrated Man thrust out his hands.
    Will's father lurched.
    Tattooed in bright blue ink, Will's face gazed up at him from the
palm of the right hand.
    Ink-sewn to the left palm, Jim's face was indelible and natural as
life.
    'You know them?' The Illustrated Man saw Mr Halloway's throat
clench, his eyelids squinch, his bones struck vibrant as from a
sledgehammer blow. 'Their names?'
    Dad, careful! Will thought.
    'I don't - ' said Will's father.
    'You know them.'
    The Illustrated Man's hands shook, held out to view, asking for the
gift of names, making Jim's face on the flesh, Will's face on the
flesh., Jim's face hidden beneath the street, Will's face hidden beneath
the street, tremble, writhe, pinch.
    'Sir, you wouldn't want them to lose out. . .?'
    'No, but - '
    'But, but, but?' Mr Dark loomed closer, magnificent in his
picture-gallery flesh, his eyes, the eyes of all his beasts and hapless
creatures cutting through his shirt, coat, trousers, fastening the old
man tight, biting him with fire, fixing him with thousandfold
attentions. Mr Dark shoved his two palms near. "But? - '
    Mr Halloway needing something to excruciate, bit his cigar.
    'I thought for a moment - '
    'Thought what?' Grand delight from Mr Dark.
    'One of them looked like - '
    'Like who?'
    Too eager, thought Will. You see that, Dad, don't you?
    'Mister,' said Will's father. 'Why are you so jumpy about two boys?'
    'Jumpy. . .?'
    Mr Dark's smile melted like cotton candy.
    Jim scootched himself down into a dwarf, Will crammed himself down
into a midget, both looking up, waiting.
    'Sir,' said Mr Dark, 'is my enthusiasm that to you? "Jumpy?"'
    Will's father noted the muscles cord along the arms, roping and
unroping themselves with a writhe like the puff adders and sidewinders
doubtless inked and venomous there.
    'One of those pictures,' drawled Mr Halloway, looks like Milton
Blumquist.'
    Mr Dark clenched a fist.
    A blinding ache struck Jim's head.
    'The other,' Will's father was almost bland, 'looks like Avery
Johnson.'
    Oh, Dad, thought Will, you're great!
    The Illustrated Man clenched his other fist.
    Will his head in a vice, almost screamed.
    'Both boys,' finished Mr Halloway, 'moved to Milwaukee some weeks
ago.'
    'You,' said Mr Dark, coldly, 'lie.'
    Will's father was truly shocked.
    'Me? And spoil the prizewinners' fun?'
    'Fact is,' said Mr Dark, 'we found the names of the boys ten minutes
ago. Just want to double-check.'
    'So?' said Will's father, disbelieving.
    'Jim,' said Mr Dark. 'Will.'
    Jim writhed in the dark. Will sank his head deep in his shoulder
blades, eyes tight.
    Will's father's face was a pond into which the two dark stone names
sank without a ripple.
    'First names? Jim? Will? Lots of Jims and Wills, couple hundred,
town like this.'
    Will, crouched and squirming, thought, who told? Miss Foley? But she
was gone, her house empty and full of rain shadows. Only one other
person. . .
    The little girl who looked like Miss Foley weeping under the tree?
The little girl who frightened us so bad? he wondered. In the last half
hour the parade, going by, found her, and her crying for hours, afraid,
and ready to do anything, say anything, if only with music, horses
plunging, world racing, they would grow her old again, grow her around
again, lift her, shut up her crying, stop up the awful thing and make
her as she was. Did the carnival promise, lie to her when they found her
under the tree and ran her off ? The little girl crying, but not telling
all, because -
    'Jim. Will,' said Will's father. 'First names. What about the last?'
    Mr Dark did not know the last names.
    His universe of monsters sweated phosphorus on his hide, soured his
armpits, reeked, slammed between his iron-sinewed legs.
    'Now,' said Will's father, with a strange, and to him
almost-defightful-because-new, calm, 'I think you're lying. You don't
know the last names. Now, why should you, a carnival stranger, lie to me
here on a street in some town on the backside of nowhere?'
    The Illustrated Man clenched his two calligraphic fists very hard.
    Will's father, his face pale, considered these mean, constricted
fingers, knuckles' digging nails, inside which two boys faces, crushed
hard in dark vice, tight, very tight in prison flesh, were kept in fury.
    Two shadows, below, thrashed in agony.
    The Illustrated Man erased his face to serenity.
    But a bright drop fell from his right fist.
    A bright drop fell from his left fist.
    The drops vanished through the steel sidewalk grille.
    Will gasped. Wetness had struck his face. He clapped his hand to it,
then looked at his palm.
    The wetness that had hit his cheek was bright red.
    He glanced from it to Jim, who lay still now also, for the
scarification, real or imagined, seemed over and both flicked their eyes
up to where the Illustrated Man's shoes flint-sparked the grille,
grinding steel on steel.
    Will's father saw the blood ooze from the clenched fists, but forced
himself to look only at the Illustrated Man's face, as he said:
    'Sorry I can't be more help.'
    Beyond the Illustrated Man, rounding the corner, hands weaving the
air, dressed 'm harlequin Gypsy colours, face waxen, eyes hid behind
plum-dark glasses, the Fortune Teller, the Dust Witch, came mumbling.
    A moment later, looking up, Will saw her. Not dead! he thought.
Carried off, bruised, fallen, yes but now back, and mad! Lord, yes, mad,
looking especially for me!
    Will's father saw her. His blood slowed, by instinct alone, to a
pudding in his chest.
    The crowd opened happily, laughing and commenting on her bright if
tattered costume, trying to remember what she rhymed, so as to tell it
later. She moved, fingers feeling the town as if it were an immensely
complicated and lush tapestry. And she sang:
    'Tell you your husbands. Tell you your wives. Tell you your
fortunes. Tell you your lives. See me, I know. See me at the show. Tell
you the colour of his eyes. Tell you the colour of her lies. Tell you
the colour of his goal. Tell you the colour of her soul. Come now, don't
go. See me, see me at the show.'
    Children appalled, children impressed, parents delighted, parents in
high good humour, and still the Gypsy from the dusts of living sang.
Time walked in her murmuring. She made and broke microscopic webs
between her fingers wherewith to feel soot fly up, breath fly out. She
touched the wings of flies, the souls of invisible bacteria, all specks,
mites, and mica-snowings of sunlight filtrated with motion and much more
hidden emotion.
    Will and Jim cracked their bones, cowered down., hearing:
    'Blind, yes, blind. But I see what I see, I see where I be,' said
the Witch, softly. 'There's a man with a straw hat in autumn. Hello. And
- why there's Mr Dark, and. . .an old man. . .an old man.'
    He's not that old! cried Will to himself, blinking up at the three,
as the Witch stopped, her shadow falling moist-frog cool on the hidden
boys.
    '. . .old man. . . '
    Mr Halloway was jolted as by a series of cold knives thrust in his
stomach.
    '. . .old man. . .old man. . .' said the Witch.
    She stopped this. 'Ah. . .' The hairs in her nostrils bristled.
    She gaped her mouth to savour air. 'Ah. . .'
    The Illustrated Man quickened.
    'Wait. . .!' sighed the Gypsy.
    Her fingernails scraped down an unseen blackboard of air.
    Will felt himself yip, bark, whimper like an aggravated hound.
    Slowly her fingers climbed down, feeling the spectrums, weighing the
light. In another moment, a forefinger might thrust to the sidewalk
grille, implying: there! there!
    Dad! thought Will. Do something!
    The Illustrated Man, gone sweetly patient now that his blind but
immensely aware dust lady was here, watched her with love.
    'Now. . .' The Witch's fingers itched.
    'Now!' said Will's father, loud.
    The Witch flinched.
    'Now, this is a fine cigar!' yelled Will's father, turning with
great pomp back to the counter.
    'Quiet. . .' said the Illustrated Man.
    The boys looked up.
    'Now - ' The Witch sniffed the wind.
    'Got to light it again!' Mr Halloway stuck the cigar in the eternal
blue flame.
    'Silence. . .' suggested Mr Dark.
    'Ever smoke, yourself?' asked Dad.
    The Witch, from the concussion of his fiercely erupted and overly
jovial words, dropped one wounded hand to her side, wiped sweat from it,
as one wipes an antenna for better reception, and drifted it up again,
her nostrils flared with wind.
    'Ah!' Will's father blew a dense cloud of cigar smoke. It made a
fine thick cumulus surrounding the woman.
    'Gah!' she choked.
    'Fool!' The Illustrated Man barked, but whether at man or woman, the
boys below could not tell.
    'Here, let's buy you one!' Mr Halloway blew more smoke, handing Mr
Dark a cigar.
    The Witch exploded a sneeze, recoiled, staggered away. The
Illustrated Man snatched Dad's arm, saw that he had gone too far, let
go, and could only follow his Gypsy woman off, in some clumsy and
totally unexpected defeat. But then in going, he heard Will's father
say, 'A fine day to you, sir!'
    No, Dad! thought Will.
    The Illustrated Man came back.
    'Your name, sir?' he asked, directly.
    Don't tell him! thought Will.
    Will's father debated a moment, took the cigar from his mouth,
tapped ash and said, quietly:
    'Halloway. Work in the library. Drop by some time.'
    'You can be sure, Mr Halloway. I will.'
    The Witch was waiting near the corner.
    Mr Halloway whetted his forefinger, tested the wind, and sent a
cumulus her way.
    She flailed back, gone.
    The Illustrated Man went rigid, spun about, and strode off, the ink
portraits of Jim and Will crushed hard iron tight in his fists.
    Silence.
    It was so quiet under the grille, Mr Halloway thought the two boys
had died of fright.
    And Will, below, gazing up, eyes wet, mouth wide, thought, Oh my
gosh, why didn't I see it before?
    Dad's tall. Dad's very tall indeed.
    Still Charles Halloway did not look down at the grille but only at
the small comets of splashed red colour left on the sidewalk, trailed
around the corner, dropped from the clenched hands of the vanished Mr
Dark. He was also gazing with surprise at himself, accepting the
surprise, the new purpose, which was half despair, half serenity, now
that the incredible deed was done. Let no one ask why he had given his
true name; even he could not assay and give its real weight. Now he
could only read the numerals on the courthouse clock and speak to it,
while the boys below, listened.
    'Oh, Jim, Will, something is going on. Can you hide, keep out from
under, the rest of the day? We got to have time. With things like this,
where do you begin? No law's been broken, none on the books, anyway. But
I feel dead and buried a month. My flesh ripples. Hide, Jim, Will, hide.
I'll tell your mothers you've got jobs at the carnival, good excuse for
you not coming home. Stay hid until dark, then come to the library at
seven. Meantime, I'll check police records on carnivals, newspaper files
at the library, books, old folios, everything that might fit. God
willing, by the time you show up, after dark, I'll have a plan. Walk
easy until then. Bless you, Jim. Bless you, Will.'
    The small father who was very tall now walked slowly away.
    Its cigar, unnoticed, fell from his hand, dropped in a spark shower
through the grate.
    It lay in the square pit glowing its single fiery pink eye at Jim
and Will, who looked back and at last snatched to blind and put it out.
36
The, Dwarf, bearing his demented and wildly lighted eyes, made his way
south on Main Street.
    Stopping suddenly, he developed a film strip in his head, scanned
it, bleated and blundered back through the forest of legs to reach for
and pull the Illustrated Man down where a whisper was as good as a
shout. Mr Dark listened, then fled, leaving the Dwarf far behind.
    Reaching the cigar store Indian, the Illustrated Man sank to his
knees. Clutching the steel lattice-grille, he peered down in the pit.
    Below lay yellow newspapers, wilted candy wrappers, burnt cigars,
and gum.
    Mr Dark's cry was muffled fury.
    'Lose something?'
    Mr Tetley blinked over his counter.
    'The Illustrated Man clenched the grate, nodding once.
    'I clean under the grate once a month for the money,' said Mr
Tetley. 'How much you lose? Dime? Quarter? Half dollar?'
    Bing!
    The Illustrated Man glared up.
    In the cash-register window a small fire-red sign jumped high:
    NO SALE.
37
The town clock struck seven.
    The echoes of the great chime wandered in the unlit halls of the
library.
    An autumn leaf, very crisp, fell somewhere in the dark. But it was
only the page of a book, turning.
    Off in one of the catacombs, bent to a table under a
grass-green-shaded lamp, lips pursed, eyes narrowed, sat Charles
Halloway, his hands trembling the pages, lifting, rearranging the books.
Now and then he hurried off to peer into the autumn night, watchful of
the streets. Then again he came back to paper-clip pages, to inset
papers, to scribble out quotations, whispering to himself. His voice
brought forth quick echoes from the library vaults:
    'Look here!'
    '. . .here. . .!' said the night passages.
    'This picture. . .!'
    '. . .picture. . .!' said the halls.
    'And this!'
    '. . .this. . .' The dust settled.
    It had been the longest day of all the days he could remember in his
life. He had mingled with strange and not-so-strange crowds, he had
searched after the searchers, in the wake of the wide-scattering parade.
He had resisted telling Jim's mother, Will's mother, more than they
needed to know for a happy Sunday, and meantime crossed shadows with
Dwarf, traded nods with Pinhead and Fire-eater, kept free of shadowed
alleys, and controlled his panic, when, doubling back, he saw the
basement pit empty under the cigar store grille and knew that the boys
were at hide-and-seek somewhere nearby or somewhere, praise God, very
far away.
    Then, in the crowds, he moved to the carnival ground, stayed out of
tents, stayed free of rides, observed, watched the sun go down, and just
at twilight, surveyed the cold glass waters of the Mirror Maze and saw
just enough on the shore to pull him back before he drowned. Wet all
over, cold to the bone, before night caught him he let the crowd
protect, warm, and bear him away up into town, to the library, and to
most important books which he arranged in a great literary clock on a
table, like someone learning to tell a new time. So he paced round and
round the huge clock squinting at the yellowed pages as if they were
moth-wings pinned dead to the wood.
    Here lay a portrait of the Prince of Darkness. Next a series of
fantastic sketches of the Temptations of St Anthony. Next some etchings
from the Bizarie by Giovan-batista Bracelli, depicting a set of curious
toys, humanlike robots engaged in various alchemical rites. At five
minutes to twelve stood a copy of Dr Faustus, at two lay on Occult
Iconography, at six, under Mr Halloway's trailed fingers now, a history
of circuses, carnivals, shadow shows, puppet menageries inhabited by
mountebanks, minstrels, stilt-walking sorcerers and their fantoccini.
More: A Manual of the Air Kingdoms (Things That Fly Down History). At
nine sharp: By Demons Possessed, lying atop Egyptian Philtres, lying
atop the Torments of the Damned, which in turn crushed flat The Spell of
Mirrors. Very late up the literary clock one named Locomotives and
Trains, The Mystery of Sleep, Between Midnight and Dawn, The Witches'
Sabbath, and Pacts With Demons. It was all laid out. He could see the
face.
    But there were no hands on this clock.
    He could not tell what hour of the night of life it was for himself,
the boys, or the unknowing town.
    For, in sum, what had he to go by?
    A three-o'-clock-in-the-morning arrival, a grotesque-looking glass
maze, a Sunday parade, a tall man with a swarm of electric-blue pictures
itching on his sweaty hide, a few drops of blood falling down through a
pavement grille, two frightened boys staring up out of the earth, and
himself, alone in mausoleum quiet, nudging the puzzle together.
    What was there about the boys that made him believe the simplest
word they whispered up through the grille? Fear itself was proof here,
and he had seen enough fear in his fife to know it, like the smell from
a butcher's shop in summer twilight.
    What was there about the illustrated carnival owner's silences that
spoke thousands of violent, corrupt, and crippling words?
    What was there in that old man he had seen through a tent flap late
this afternoon, seated in a chair with the words MR ELECTRICO bannered
over him, power webbing and crawling on his flesh like green lizards?
    All, all, all of it. And now, these books. This. He touched
Physiognomonie. The secrets of the individual's character as found in
his face.
    Were Jim and Will, then, featured all angelic, pure, half-innocent,
peering up through the sidewalk at marching terror? Did the boys
represent the ideal for your Woman, Man, or Child of Excellent Bearing,
Colour, Balance, and Summer Disposition?
    Conversely. . .Charles Halloway turned a page. . .did the scurrying
freaks, the Illustrated Marvel, bear the foreheads of the Irascible, the
Cruel, the Covetous, the mouths of the Lewd and Untruthful? the teeth of
the Crafty, the Unstable, the Audacious, the Vainglorious, and your
Murderous Beast?
    No. The book slipped shut. If faces were judged, the freaks were no
worse than many he'd seen slipping from the library late nights in his
long career.
    There was only one thing sure.
    Two lines of Shakespeare said it. He should write them in the middle
of the clock of books, to fix the heart of his apprehension:
By the pricking of my thumbs,
Something wicked this way comes.
    So vague, yet so immense.
    He did not want to live with it.
    Yet he knew that, during this night, unless he lived with it very
well, he might have to live with it all the rest of his life.
    At the window he looked out and thought, Jim, Will, are you coming?
will you get here?
    Waiting, his flesh took paleness from his bones.
38
The library, then, at seven-fifteen, seven-thirty, seven-forty-five of a
Sunday night, cloistered with great drifts of silence and transfixed
avalanche of books poised like the cuneiform stones of eternity on
shelves, so high the unseen snows of time fell all year there.
    Outside, the town breathed back and forth to the carnival, hundreds
of people passing near where Jim and Will lay strewn in bushes to one
side of the library, now ducking up, now ducking down to nose raw earth.
    'Cheezit!'
    Both smothered in grass. Across the street there passed what could
have been a boy, could have been a dwarf, could have been a
boy-with-dwarf-mind, could have been anything blown along like the
scuttle-crab leaves on the frost-mica sidewalks. But then whatever it
was went away Jim sat up, Will still lay face buried in good safe dirt.
    'Come on, what's wrong?'
    'The library,' said Will. 'I'm even afraid of it, now.' All the
books, he thought, perched there, hundreds of years old, peeling skin,
leaning on each other like ten million vultures. Walk along the dark
stacks and all the gold titles shine their eyes at you. Between old
carnival, old library and his own father, everything old. . .well. . .
    'I know Dad's in there, but is it Dad? I mean what if they came,
changed him, made him bad, promised him something they can't give but he
thinks they can, and we go in there and some day fifty years from now
someone opens a book in there and you and me drop out, like two dry
moth-wings on the floor, Jim, someone pressed and hid us between pages,
and no one ever guessed where we went - '
    This was too much for Jim, who had to do something to flog his
spirits. Next thing Will knew, Jim was hammering on the library door.
Both hammered, frantic to jump from this night to that warmer
book-breathing night inside. Given a choice of darkness, this one was
the better: the oven smell of books, as the door opened and Dad stood
with his ghost-coloured hair.
    They tiptoed back through the deserted corridors, Will feeling a
crazy urge to whistle as he often did past the graveyard at sundown, Dad
asking what made them late, and they trying to remember all the places
they hid in one day.
    They had hid in old garages, they had hid in old barns, they had hid
in the highest trees they could climb and got bored and boredom was
worse than fear so they came down and reported in to the Police Chief
and had a fine chat which gave them twenty safe minutes right in the
station and Will got the idea of touring churches and they climbed all
the steeples in town and scared pigeons off the belfries and whether or
not it was safer in churches and especially up with the bells or not, no
one could claim, but it felt safe. But there again they began to get
starchy with boredom and fatigued with sameness, and were almost on the
point of giving themselves up to the carnival in order to have something
to do, when quite fortunately the sun went down. From sundown to now it
had taken a wonderful time, creeping upon the library, as if it were a
once friendly fort that might now be manned by Arabs.
    'So here we are,' whispered Jim, and stopped.
    'Why am I whispering? It's after hours. Heck!'
    He laughed, then stopped.
    For he thought he heard a soft tread off in the subterranean vaults.
    But it was only his laughter walking back through the deep stacks on
panther feet.
    So when they talked again, it was still in whispers. Deep forests,
dark caves, dim churches, half-lit libraries were all the same, they
tuned you down, they dampened your ardour, they brought you to murmurs
and soft cries for fear of raising up phantom twins of your voice which
might haunt corridors long after your passage.
    They reached the small room and circled the table on which Charles
Halloway had laid out the books, where he had read many hours, and for
the first time looked in each other's faces and saw a dreadful paleness,
so did not comment.
    'From the beginning.' Will's father pulled out chairs.
    'Please.'
    So, each taking his part, in their own good time, the boys told of
the wandering-by lightning-rod salesman, the predictions of storms to
come, the long-after-midnight train, the suddenly inhabited meadow, the
moonblown tents, the untouched but full-wept calliope, then the light of
noon showering over an ordinary midway with hundreds of Christians
wandering through but no lions for them to be tossed to, only the maze
where time lost itself backward and forward in waterfall mirrors, only
the OUT OF ORDER carousel, the dead supper hour, Mr Cooger, and the boy
with the eyes that had seen all the glistery tripes of the world shaped
like hung-and-dripping sins and all the sins tenterhooked and running
red and verminous, this boy with the eyes of a man who has lived
forever, seen too much, might like, to die but doesn't know how. . . .
    The boys stopped for breath.
    Miss Foley, the carnival again, the carousel run wild, the ancient
Cooger mummy gasping moonlight, exhaling silver dust, dead, then
resurrected in a chair where green lightning struck his skeleton alight,
all of it a storm minus rain, minus thunder, and parade, the cigar store
basement, the hiding, and at last them here, finished, done with the
telling.
    For a long moment, Will's father sat staring blindly into the centre
of the table. Then, his lips moved.
    'Jim. Will,' he said. 'I believe.'
    The boys sank in their chairs.
    'All of it?'
    'All.'
    Will wiped his eyes. 'Boy,' he said gruffly. 'I'm going to start
bawling.'
    'We got no time for that! ' said Jim.
    'No time.' And Will's father stood up, stuffed his pipe with
tobacco, rummaged his pockets for matches, brought out a battered
harmonica, a penknife, a cigarette lighter that wouldn't work, and a
memo pad he had always meant to write some great thoughts down on but
never got around to, and lined up these weapons for a pygmy war that
could be lost before it even started. Probing this idle refuse, shaking
his head, he finally found a tattered matchbox, lit his pipe and began
to muse, pacing the room.
    'Looks like we're going to do a lot of talking about one particular
carnival. Where's it come from, where's it going, what's it up to? We
thought it never hit town before. Yet, by God, look here.'
    He tapped a yellowed newspaper ad dated October 12, 1888, and ran
his fingernail along under this:
    J. C. COOGER AND G. M. DARK PRESENT THE PANDEMONIUM THEATRE CO.
COMBINED SIDE-SHOWS AND UNNATURAL MUSEUMS, INTERNATIONAL!
    'J.C. G.M.' said Jim. 'Those are the same initials as on the
throwaways around town this week. But - it couldn't be the same men. . .
.'
    'No?' Will's father rubbed his elbows. 'My goose pimples run counter
to that.'
    He laid forth other old newspapers.
    '1860. 1846. Same ad. Same names. Same initials. Dark and Cooger,
Cooger and Dark, they came and went, but only once every twenty, thirty,
forty years, so people forgot. Where were they all the other years?
Travelling. And more than travelling. Always in October: October 1846,
October 1860, October 1888, October 1910, and October now, tonight.' His
voice trailed off. '. . .Beware the autumn people. . . .'
    'What?'
    'An old religious tract. Pastor Newgate Phillips, I think. Read it
as a boy. How does it go again?'
    He tried to remember. He licked his lips. He did remember.
    "'For some, autumn comes early, stays late through life where
October follows September and November touches October and then instead
of December and Christ's birth, there is no Bethlehem Star, no
rejoicing, but September comes again and old October and so on down the
years, with no winter, spring, or revivifying summer. For these beings,
fall is the ever normal season, the only weather, there be no choice
beyond. Where do they come from? The dust. Where do they go? The grave.
Does blood stir their veins? No: the night wind. What ticks in their
head? The worm. What speaks from their mouth? The toad. What sees from
their eye? The snake. What hears with their ear? The abyss between the
stars. They sift the human storm for souls, eat flesh of reason, fill
tombs with sinners. They frenzy forth. In gusts they beetle-scurry,
creep, thread, filter, motion, make all moons sullen, and surely cloud
all clear-run waters. The spider-web hears them, trembles - breaks. Such
are the autumn people. Beware of them."'
    After a pause, both boys exhaled at once.
    'The autumn people,' said Jim. 'That's them. Sure!'
    'Then - ' Will swallowed - 'does that make us. . .summer people?'
    'Not quite.' Charles Halloway shook his head. 'Oh, you're nearer
summer than me. If I was ever a rare fine summer person, that's long
ago. Most of us are half-and-half. The August noon in us works to stave
off the November chills. We survive by what little Fourth of July wits
we've stashed away. But there are times when we're all autumn people.'
    'Not you,' Dad.
    'Not you, Mr Halloway!'
    He turned quickly to see both appraising him, paleness next to
paleness, hands on knees as if to bolt.
    'It's a way of speaking. Easy, boys, I'm after the facts. Will, do
you really know your Dad? Shouldn't you know me, and me you, if it's
going to be us'ns against them'ns?'
    'Hey, yeah,' breathed Jim. 'Who are you?'
    'We know who he is, darn it!' Will protested.
    'Do we?' said Will's father. 'Let's see. Charles William Halloway.
Nothing extraordinary about me except I'm fifty-four, which is always
extraordinary to the man inside it. Born in Sweet Water, lived in
Chicago, survived in New York, brooded in Detroit, floundered in lots of
places, arrived here late, after living in libraries around the country
all those years because I liked being alone, liked matching up in books
what I'd seen on the roads. Then in the middle of all the running away,
which I called travel, in my thirty-ninth year, your mother fixed me
with one glance, been here ever since. Still most comfortable in the
library nights, in out of the rain of people. Is this my last stop?
Chances are. Why am I here at all? Right now, it seems, to help you.'
    He paused and looked at the two boys and their fine young faces.
    'Yes,' he said. 'Very late in the game. To help you.'
39
Every night-blind library window clattered with cold.
    The man, the two boys, waited for the wind to pass away.
    Then Will said: 'Dad. You've always helped.'
    'Thanks, but it's not true.' Charles Halloway examined one very
empty hand. 'I'm a fool. Always looking over your shoulder to see what's
coming instead of right at you to see what's here. But then, for what
salve it gives me, every man's a fool. Which means you got to pitch in
all your life, bail out, board over, tie rope, patch plaster, pat
cheeks, kiss brows, laugh, cry, make do, against the day you're the
worst fool of all and shout "Help!" Then all you need is one person's
answer. I see it so clear, across the country tonight lie cities, towns
and mere jerkwater stops of fools. So the carnival steams by, shakes any
tree: it rains jackasses. Separate jackasses, I should say, individuals
with no one, they think, or no one actual, to answer their "Help!"
Unconnected fools, that's the harvest the carnival comes smiling after
with its threshing machine.'
    'Oh gosh,' said Will. 'It's hopeless!'
    'No. The very fact we're here worrying about the difference between
summer and autumn, makes me sure there's a way out. You don't have to
stay foolish and you don't have to be wrong, evil, sinful, whatever you
want to call it. There's more than three or four choices. They, that
Dark fellow and his friends, don't hold all the cards, I could tell that
today, at the cigar store. I'm afraid of him but, I could see, he as was
afraid of me. So there's fear on both sides. Now how can we use it to
advantage?'
    'How?'
    'First things first. Let's bone up on history. If men had wanted to
stay bad forever, they could have, agreed? Agreed. Did we stay out in
the fields with the beasts? No. In the water with the barracuda? No.
Somewhere we let go of the hot gorilla's paw. Somewhere we turned in our
carnivore's teeth and started chewing blades of grass. We been working
mulch as much as blood, into our philosophy, for quite a few life-times.
Since then we measure ourselves up the scale from apes, but not half so
high as angels. It was a nice new idea and we were afraid we'd lose it,
so we put it on paper and built buildings like this one around it. And
we been going in and out of these buildings chewing it over, that one
new sweet blade of grass, trying to figure how it all started, when we
made the move, when we decided to be different. I suppose one night
hundreds of thousands of years ago in a cave by a night, fire when one
of those shaggy men wakened to gaze over the banked coals at his woman,
his children, and thought of their being cold, dead, gone forever. Then
he must have wept. And he put out his hand in the night to the woman who
must die some day and to the children who must follow her. And for a
little bit next morning, he treated them somewhat better, for he saw
that they, like himself, had the seed of night in them. He felt that
seed like slime in his pulse, splitting, making more against the day
they would multiply his body into darkness. So that man, the first one,
knew what we know now: our hour is short, eternity is long. With this
knowledge came pity and mercy, so we spared others for the later, more
intricate, more mysterious benefits of love.
    'So, in sum, what are we? We are the creatures that know and know
too much. That leaves us with such a burden again we have no choice, to
laugh or cry. No other animal does either. We do both, depending on the
season and the need. Somehow, I feel the carnival watches, to see which
we're doing and how and why, and moves in on us when it feels we're
ripe.
    Charles Halloway stopped, for the boys were watching him so intently
he suddenly had to turn, flushing, away.
    'Boy, Mr Halloway,' cried Jim, softly. 'That's great. Go on.'
    'Dad,' said Will, amazed. 'I never knew you could talk.'
    'You should hear me here late nights, nothing but talk! Charles
Halloway shook his head. 'Yes, you should've heard. I should've said
more to you any day you name in the past. Hell. Where was I? Leading up
to love, I think. Yes. . .love.'
    Will looked bored, Jim looked wary of the word.
    And these looks gave Charles Halloway pause.
    What could he say that might make sense to them? Could he say love
was above all, common cause, shared experience?
    That was the vital cement, wasn't it? Could he say how he felt about
their all being here tonight on this wild world running around a big sun
which fell through a bigger space falling through yet vaster immensities
of space, maybe toward and maybe away from Something? Could he say: we
share this billon-mile-an-hour ride. We have common cause against the
night. You start with little common causes. Why love the boy in a March
field with his kite braving the sky? Because our fingers burn with the
hot string singeing our hands. Why love some girl viewed from a train,
bent to a country well? The tongue remembers iron water cool on some
long lost noon. Why weep at strangers dead by the road? They resemble
friends unseen in forty years. Why laugh when clowns are hit by pies? We
taste custard, we taste life. Why love the woman who is your wife? Her
nose breathes in the air of a world that I know; therefore I love that
nose. Her ears hear music I might sing half the night through; therefore
I love her ears. Her eyes delight in seasons of the land; and so I love
those eyes. Her tongue knows quince, peach, chokeberry, mint and lime; I
love to hear it speaking. Because her flesh knows heat, cold,
affliction, I know fire, snow and pain. Shared and once again shared
experience. Billions of prickling textures. Cut one sense away, cut part
of life away. Cut two senses; life halves itself on the instant. We love
what we know, we love what we are. Common cause, common cause, common
cause of mouth, eye, ear, tongue, hand, nose, flesh, heart, and soul.
    But. . .how to say it?
    'Look,' he tried, 'put two men in a rail car, one a soldier, the
other a farmer. One talks war, the other wheat; and bore each other to
sleep. But let one spell long-distance running, and if the other once
ran the mile, why, those men will run all night like boys, sparking a
friendship up from memory. So, all men have one business in common:
women, and can talk that till sunrise and beyond. Hell.'
    Charles Halloway stopped, flushed, self-conscious again, knowing
vaguely there was a target up ahead but not quite how to get there. He
chewed his lips.
    Dad, don't stop, thought Will. When you talk, it's swell in here.
You'll save us. Go on.
    The man read his son's eyes, saw the same look in Jim, and walked
slowly around the table, touching a night beast here, a clutch of ragged
crones there, a star, a crescent moon, an antique sun, an hourglass that
told time with bone dust instead of sand.
    'Have I said anything I started out to say about being good? God, I
don't know. A stranger is shot in the street, you hardly move to help.
But if, half an hour before, you spent just ten minutes with the fellow
and knew a little about him and his family, you might just jump in front
of his killer and try to stop it. Really knowing is good. Not knowing,
or refusing to know, is bad, or amoral, at least. You can't act if you
don't know. Acting without knowing takes you right off the cliff. God,
God, you must think I'm crazy, this talk. Probably think we should be
out duck-shooting, elephant-gunning balloons, like you did, Will, but we
got to know all there is to know about those freaks and that man heading
them up. We can't be good unless we know what bad is, and it's a shame
we're working against time. Show'll close and the crowds go home early
on a Sunday night. I feel we'll have a visit from the autumn people,
then. That gives us maybe two hours.'
    Jim was at the window now, looking out across the town to the far
black tents and the calliope that played by the turning of the world in
the night.
    'Is it bad?' he asked.
    'Bad?' cried Will, angrily. 'Bad. You ask that!?'
    'Calmly,' said Will's father. 'A good question. Part of that show
looks just great. But the old saying really applies: you can't get
something for nothing. Fact is, from them, you get nothing for
something. They make you empty promises, you stick our your neck and -
 wham!'
    'Where'd they come from?' asked Jim. 'Who are they?'
    Will went to the window with his father and they both looked out and
Charles Halloway said, to those far tents:
    'Maybe once it was just one man walking across Europe, jingling his
ankle bells, a lute on his shoulder making a hunchbacked shadow, before
Columbus. Maybe a man walked around in a monkey skin a million years
ago, stuffing himself with other people's unhappiness, chewed their pain
all day like spearmint gum, for the sweet savour., and trotted faster,
revivified by personal disaster. Maybe this son after him refined his
father's deadfalls, mantraps, bone-crunchers, head-achers,
flesh-twitchers, soul-skinners. These laid the scum on lonely ponds from
which came vinegar gnats to snuff up noses, mosquitoes to ride
summer-night flesh and sting forth those bumps that carnival
phrenologists dearly love to fondle and prophesy upon. So from one man
here, one man there, walking as swift as his oily glances, it became
scuttles of dogmen begging gifts of trouble, pandering misery, seeking
under carpets for centipede treads, watchful of night sweats, harkening
by all bedroom doors to hear men twist basting themselves with remorse
and warm-water dreams.
    'The stuff of nightmare is their plain bread. They butter it with
pain. They set their clocks by death-watch beetles, and thrive the
centuries. They were the men with the leather-ribbon whips who sweated
up the Pyramids seasoning it with other people's salt and other people's
cracked hearts. They coursed Europe on the White Horse of the Plague.
They whispered to Caesar that he was mortal, then sold daggers at
half-price in the grand March sale. Some must have been lazing clowns,
foot props for emperors, princes, and epileptic popes. Then out on the
road, Gypsies in time, their populations grew as the world grew, spread,
and there was more delicious variety of pain to thrive on. The train put
wheels under them and here they run down the long road out of the Gothic
and Baroque; look at their wagons and coaches, the carving like medieval
shrines, all of it stuff once drawn by horses, mules, or, maybe, men.'
    'All those years.' Jim's voice swallowed itself. The same people?
You think Mr Cooger, Mr Dark are both a couple hundred years old?'
    'Riding that merry-go-round they can shave off a year or two, any
time they want, right?'
    'Why, then - ' The abyss opened at Will's feet - 'they could live
forever!'
    'And hurt people.' Jim turned it over, again and again. 'But why,
why all the hurt?'
    'Because,' said Mr Halloway. 'You need fuel, gas, something to run a
carnival on, don't you? Women live off gossip, and what's gossip but a
swap of headaches, sour spit, arthritic bones,  ruptured and mended
flesh, indiscretions, storms of madness, calms after the storms? If some
people didn't have something juicy to chew on, their choppers would
prolapse, their souls with them. Multiply their pleasure at funerals,
their chuckling through breakfast, obituaries, add all the cat-fight
marriages where folks spend careers ripping skin off each other and
patching it back upside around, add quack doctors slicing persons to
read their guts like tea leaves, then sewing them tight with
fingerprinted thread., square the whole dynamite factory by ten
quadrillion, and you got the black candlepower of this one carnival.
    'All the meannesses we harbour, they borrow in redoubled spades.
They're a billion times itchier for pain, sorrow, and sickness than the
average man. We salt our lives with other people's sins. Our flesh to us
tastes sweet. But the carnival doesn't care if it stinks by moonlight
instead of sun, so long as it gorges on fear and pain. That's the fuel,
the vapour that spins the carousel, the raw stuffs of terror, the
excruciating agony of guilt, the screams from real or imagined wounds.
The carnival sucks that gas, ignites it, and chugs along its way.'
    Charles Halloway took a breath, shut his eyes, and said:
    'How do I know this? I don't! I feel it. I taste it. It was like old
leaves burning on the wind two nights ago. It was a smell like mortuary
flowers. I hear that music. I hear what you tell me, and half what you
don't tell me. Maybe I've always dreamt about such carnivals, and was
just waiting for it to come sols to see it once, and nod. Now, that tent
show plays my bones like a marimba.
    'My skeleton knows.
    'It tells me.
    'I tell you.'
40
    "Can they . . ." said Jim. "I mean . . . do they . . . buy souls?"
    "Buy, when they can get them free?" said Mr. Halloway. "Why, most
men jump at the chance to give up everything for nothing. There's
nothing we're so slapstick with as our own immortal souls. Besides,
you're inferring that's the, Devil out there. I only say it's a type of
creature has learned to live off souls, not the souls themselves. That
always worried me in the old myths. I asked myself, why would
Mephistopheles want a soul? What does he do with it when he gets it, of
what use is it? Stand back while I throw my own theory over the plate.
Those creatures want the gas off souls who can't sleep nights, that
fever by day from old crimes. A dead soul is no kindling. But a live and
raving soul, crippled with self-damnation, oh that's a pretty snoutful
for such as them.
    "How do I know this? I observe. The carnival is like people, only
more so. A man, a woman, rather than walk away from, or kill, each
other, ride each other a lifetime, pulling hair, extracting fingernails,
the pain of each to the other like a narcotic that makes existence worth
the day. So the carnival feels ulcerated egos miles off and lopes to
toast its hands at that ache. It smells boys ulcerating to be men,
paining like great unwise wisdom teeth, twenty thousand miles away,
summer abed in winter's night. It feels the aggravation of middle-aged
men like myself, who gibber after long-lost August afternoons to no
avail. Need, want, desire, we burn those in our fluids, oxidize those in
our souls, which jet streams out lips, nostrils, eyes, cars, broadcasts
from antennae-fingers, long or short wave, God only knows, but the
freak-masters perceive Itches and come crab-clustering to Scratch. It's
traveled a long way on an easy map, with people handy by every crossroad
to lend it lustful pints of agony to power it on. So maybe the carnival
survives, living off the poison of the sins we do each other, and the
ferment of our most terrible regrets."
    Charles Halloway snorted.
    "Good grief, how much have I said out loud, how much to myself, the
last ten minutes?"
    "You," said Jim, "talk a lot."
    "In what language, dammit!" cried Charles Halloway, for suddenly it
seemed he had done no more than other nights walking exquisitely alone,
deliciously propounding his ideas to halls which echoed them once, then
made them vanish forever. He had written books a lifetime, on the, airs
of vast rooms in vast buildings, and had it all fly out the vents. Now
it all seemed fireworks, done for color, sound, the high architecture of
words, to dazzle the boys, powder his ego, but with no mark left on
retina or mind after the color and sound faded; a mere exercise in
self-declamation. Sheepishly he accosted himself.
    "How much of all this got through? One sentence out of five, two out
of eight?"
    "Three in a thousand,"' said Will.
    Charles Halloway could not but laugh and sigh in one.
    Then Jim cut across with:
    "Is . . . is it . . . Death?"
    "The carnival?" The old man lit his pipe, blew smoke, seriously
studied the patterns. "No. But I think it uses Death as a threat. Death
doesn't exist. It never did, it never will. Butwe've drawn so many
pictures of it, so many years, trying to pin it down, comprehend it,
we've got to thinking of it as an entity, strangely alive and greedy.
All it is, however, is a stopped watch, a loss, an end, a darkness.
Nothing. And the carnival wisely knows we're more afraid of Nothing than
we are of Something. You can fight Something. But . . . Nothing? Where
do you hit it? Has it a heart, soul, butt-behind, brain? No, no. So the
carnival just shakes a great croupier's cupful of Nothing at us, and
reaps us as we tumble back headover-heels in fright. Oh, it shows us
Something that might eventually lead to Nothing, all right. That
flourish of mirrors out there in the meadow, that's a raw Something, for
sure. Enough to knock your soul sidewise in the saddle. It's a hit below
the belt to see yourself ninety years gone, the vapors of eternity
rising from you like breath off dry ice. Then, when it's frozen you
stiff, it plays that fine sweet soul-searching music that smells of
fresh-washed frocks of women dancing on back-yard lines in May, that
sounds like haystacks trampled into wine, all that blue sky and summer
night-on-the-lake kind of tune until your head bangs with the drums that
look like full moons beating around the calliope. Simplicity. Lord, I do
admire their direct approach. Hit an old man with mirrors, watch his
pieces fall in jigsaws of ice only the carnival can put together again.
How? Waltz around back on the carousel to 'Beautiful Ohio' or 'Merry
Widow.' But they're careful not to tell one thing to people who go
riding to its music."
    "What?" asked Jim.
    "Why, that if you're a miserable sinner in one shape, you're a
miserable sinner in another. Changing size doesn't change the brain. If
I made you twenty-five tomorrow, Jim, your thoughts would still be boy
thoughts, and it'd show! Or if they turned me into a boy of ten this
instant, my brain would still be fifty and that boy would act funnier
and older and weirder than any boy ever. Then, too, time's out of joint
another way."
    "Which way?" asked Will.
    "If I became young again, all my friends would still be fifty,
sixty, wouldn't they? I'd be cut off from them, forever, for I couldn't
tell them what I'd up and done, could I? They'd resent it. They'd hate
me. Their interests would no longer be mine, would they? Especially
their worries. Sickness and death for them, new life for me. So where's
the place in this world for a man who looks twenty but who is older than
Methuselah, what man could stand the shock of a change like that?
Carnival won't warn you its equal to postoperative shock, but, by God, I
bet it is, and more!
    "So, what happens? You get your reward: madness. Change of body,
change of personal environment, for one thing. Guilt, for another, guilt
at leaving your wife, husband, friends to die the way all men die-Lord,
that alone would give a man fits. So more fear, more agony for the
carnival to breakfast on. So with the green vapors coming off your
stricken conscience you say you want to go back the way you were! The
carnival nods and listens. Yes, they promise, if you behave as they say,
in a short while they'll give you back your twoscore and ten or
whatever. On the promise alone of being returned to normal old age, that
train travels with the world, its side show populated with madmen
waiting to be released from bondage, meantime servicing the carnival,
giving it coke for its ovens."
    Will murmured something.
    "What?"
    "Mss Foley," mourned Will. "'Oh, poor Miss Foley, they got her now,
just like you say. Once she got what she wanted it scared her, she
didn't like it, oh, she was crying so hard, Dad, so hard; now I bet they
promise her someday she can be fifty again if she'll mind. I wonder what
they're doing with her, right now, oh, Dad, oh, Jim!"
    "God help her." Will's father put a heavy hand out to trace the old
carnival portraits. "They've probably thrown her in with the freaks. And
what are they? Sinners who've traveled so long, hoping for deliverance,
they've taken on the shape of their original sins? The Fat Man., what
was he once? If I can guess the carnival's sense of irony, the way they
like to weight the scales, he was once a ravener after all kinds and
varieties of lust. No matter, there he lives now, anyway, collected up
in bursting skin. The Man, Skeleton, or whatever, did he starve his
wife's, children's spiritual as well as physical hungers? The Dwarf? Was
he or was he not your friend, the lightning-rod salesman, always on the
road, never settling, ever-moving, facing no encounters, running ahead
of the lightning and selling rods, yes, but leaving others to face the
storm, so maybe, through accident, or design, when he fell in with the
free rides, he shrank not to a boy but a mean ball of grotesque tripes,
all self-involved. The fortune-telling, Gypsy Dust Witch? Maybe someone
who lived always tomorrow and let today slide, like myself, and so wound
up pen having to guess other people's wild sunrises and sad sunsets. You
tell me, you've seen her near. The Pinhead? The Sheep Boy? The Fire
Eater? The Siamese Twins, good God, what were they? twins all bound up
in tandem narcissism? We'll never know. They'll never tell. We've
guessed, and probably guessed wrong, on ten dozen things the last half
hour. Now-some plan. Where do we go from here?"
    Charles Halloway placed forth a map of the town and drew in the
location of the carnival with a blunt pencil.
    "Do we keep hiding out? No. With Miss Foley, and so many others
involved, we just can't. Well, then, how do we attack so we won't be
picked off first thing? What kind of weapons-"
    "Silver bullets." cried Will. suddenly.
    "Heck, no!" snorted Jim. "They're not vampires!"
    "If we were Catholic, we could borrow church holy water and-"
    "Nuts," said Jim. "Movie stuff. It don't happen that way in real
life. Am I wrong, Mr. Halloway?"
    "I wish you were, boy."
    Will's eyes glowed fiercely. "Okay. Only one thing to do: trot down
to the meadow with a couple gallons of kerosene and some matches-"
    "That's against the law!" Jim exclaimed.
    "Look who's talking!"
    'Hold on!"
    But everyone stopped right then.
    Whisper.
    A faint tide of wind flowed up along through the library corridors
and into this room.
    "The front door," Jim whispered. "Someone just opened it."
    Far away, a gentle click. The draft that had for a moment stirred
the boys' trouser cuffs and blown the man's hair, ceased.
    "Someone just closed it."
    Silence.
    Just the great dark library with its labyrinths and hedgerow mazes
of sleeping books.
    "Someone's inside."
    The boys half rose, bleating in the backs of their mouths.
    Charles Halloway waited, then said one word, softly:
    "Hide."
    "We can't leave you-"
    "Hide."
    The boys ran and vanished in the dark maze. Charles Halloway then
rigidly, slowly, breathing in, breathing out, forced himself to sit back
down, his eyes on the yellowed newspapers, to wait, to wait, then again
. . . to wait some more.
41
A shadow moved among shadows.
    Charles Halloway felt his soul submerge.
    It took a long time for the, shadow and the man it escorted to come
stand in the doorway of the room. The shadow seemed deliberate in its
slowness so as to shingle his flesh and cheesegrate his steadily willed
calm. And when at last the shadow reached the door it brought not one,
not a hundred, but a thousand people with it to look in.
    "My name is Dark," said the voice.
    Charles Halloway let out two fistfuls of air.
    "Better known as the Illustrated Man," said the voice. "Where are
the boys?"
    "Boys?" Will's father turned at last to appraise the tall man who
stood in the door.
    The Illustrated Man sniffed the yellow pollen that whiffed up from
the ancient books as quite suddenly Will's father saw them laid out in
full sight, leaped up, stopped, then began to close them, one by one, as
casually as possible.
    The Illustrated Man pretended not to notice.
    "The boys are not home. The two houses are empty. What a shame,
they'll miss those free rides."
    "I wish I knew where they were."" Charles Halloway started carrying
the books to the shelves. "Hell, if they knew you were here with free
tickets, they'd shout for joy."
    "Would they?" Mr. Dark let his smile melt like a white and pink
paraffin candy toy he no longer had appetite for. Softly, he said, "I
could kill you."
    Charles Halloway nodded, walking slowly.
    "Did you hear what I said?" barked the Illustrated Man.
    "Yes." Charles Halloway weighed the books, as if they were his
judgment. "But you won't kill now. You're too smart. You've kept the
show on the road a long time, being smart."
    "So you've read a few papers and think you know all about us?"
    "'No, not all. Just enough to scare me."
    "Be more scared then,"' said the crowd of night-crawling
illustrations locked under black suiting, speaking through the thin
lips. "One of my friends, outside, can fix you so it seems you died of
most natural heart failure."
    The blood banged at Charles Halloway's heart, knocked at his
temples, tapped twice at his wrists.
    The Witch, he thought.
    His lips must have formed the words.
    "The Witch." Mr. Dark nodded.
    The other shelved the books, withholding one.
    "Well, what have you there?" Mr. Dark squinted. ""A Bible? How very
charming, how childish and refreshingly old-fashioned."
    "Have you ever read it, Mr. Dark?"'
    "'Read it! I've had every page, paragraph, and word read at me,
sir!" Mr. Dark took time to light a cigarette and blow smoke toward the
NO SMOKING sign, then at Will's father. "Do you really imagine that
books can harm me? Is naiveté really your armor? Here!"
    And before Charles Halloway could move, Mr. Dark ran lightly forward
and took the Bible. He, held it in his two hands.
    "Aren't you surprised? See, I touch, hold, even read from it."
    Mr. Dark blew smoke on the pages as he riffled them.
    "Do you expect me to fall away into so many Dead Sea scrolls of
flesh before you? Myths, unfortunately, are just that. Life, and by life
I could mean so many fascinating things, goes on, makes shift for
itself, survives wildly, and I not the least wild among many. Your King
James and his literary version of some rather stuffy poetic materials is
worth just about this much of my time and sweat."
    Mr. Dark hurled the Bible into a wastepaper basket and did not look
at it again.
    "I hear your heart beating rapidly," said Mr. Dark. "'My ears are
not so finely tuned as the Gypsy's, but they hear. Your eyes jump beyond
my shoulder. The boys hide out there in the warrens? Good. I would not
wish for their escape. Not that anyone will believe their gibberings, in
fact it's good advertisement for our shows, people titillate,
night-sweat, then come prowling down to look us over, lick their lips,
and wonder about investing in our special securities. You came, you
prowled, and it wasn't just for curiosity. How old are you?"
    Charles Halloway pressed his lips shut.
    "Fifty?" purred Mr. Dark. "Fifty-one?" he murmured.
    "Fifty-two? Like to be younger?"
    "No!"
    "No need to yell. Politely, please."' Mr. Dark hummed, strolling the
room, running his hand over the books as if they were years to be
counted. "Oh, it's nice to be young really. Wouldn't forty be nice,
again? Forty's ten years nicer than fifty, and thirty's twenty years
nicer by an incredible long shot."
    "I won't listen!" Charles Halloway shut his eyes.
    Mr. Dark tilted his head, sucked on his cigarette, and observed.
"Strange, you shut your eyes, not to listen. Clapping your hands over
your ears would be better-"
    Will's father clapped his hands to his ears, but the voice came
through.
    "Tell you what," said Mr. Dark, casually, waving his cigarette. "If
you help me within fifteen seconds I'll give you your fortieth birthday.
Ten seconds and you can celebrate thirty-five. A rare young age. A
stripling, almost, by comparison. I'll start counting by my watch and by
God, if you should jump to it, lend a hand, I might just cut thirty
years off your life! Bargains galore, as the posters say of it! Starting
all over again, everything fine and new and glorious, all the things to
be done and thought and savored again. Last chancel Here goes. One, Two.
Three. Four-"
    Charles Halloway hunched away, half crouched, propped hard against
the shelves, grinding his teeth to drown the sound of counting.
    "You're losing out, old man, my dear old fellow," said Mr. Dark.
"Five. Losing. Six. Losing very much. Seven. Really losing. Eight.
Frittering away. Nine. Ten. My God, you fool! Eleven. Halloway! Twelve.
Almost gone. Thirteen! Gone! Fourteen! Lost! Fifteen! Lost forever!"
    Mr. Dark put down his arm with the watch on it.
    Charles Halloway, gasping,, had turned away to bury his face in the
smell of ancient books, the feel of old and comfortable leather, the
taste of funeral dust and pressed flowers.
    Mr. Dark stood in the door now, on his way out.
    "Stay there," he directed. "'Listen to your heart. I'll send someone
to fix it. But, first, the boys . . ."
    The crowd of unsleeping creatures, saddled upon tall flesh, strode
quietly forth into darkness, borne with and all over upon Mr. Dark.
Their cries and whines and utterances of vague but excruciating
excitements sounded in his husky summoning:
    "'Boys? Are you there? Wherever you are . . . answer."
    Charles Halloway sprang forward, then felt the room spin and whirl
him, as that soft, that easy, that most pleasant voice of Mr. Dark went
calling through the dark. Charles Halloway fell against a chair,
thought: Listen, my heart! sank down to his knees, he said, Listen to my
heart! it explodes! Oh God, it's tearing free!-and could not follow.
    The Illustrated Man trod cat-soft in the labyrinths of shelved and
darkly waiting books.
    "Boys . . . ? Hear me . . . ?"
    Silence.
    "Boys . . .?"
42
Somewhere in the recumbent solitudes, the motionless but teeming
millions of books, lost in two dozen turns right, three dozen turns
left, down aisles, through doors, toward dead ends, locked doors,
half-empty shelves, somewhere in the literary soot of Dickens's London,
or Dostoevsky's Moscow or the steppes beyond, somewhere in the vellumed
dust of atlas or Geographic, sneezes pent but set like traps, the boys
crouched, stood, lay sweating a cool and constant brine.
    Somewhere hidden, Jim thought: He's coming!
    Somewhere hidden, Will thought: He's near!
    "Boys . . . ?"
    Mr. Dark came carrying his panoply of friends, his jewel-case
assortment of calligraphical reptiles which lay sunning themselves at
midnight on his flesh. With him strode the stitch-inked Tyrannosaurus
rex, which lent to his haunches a machined and ancient wellspring
mineral-oil glide. As the thunder lizard strode, all glass-bead pomp, so
strode Mr. Dark, armored with vile lightning scribbles of carnivores and
sheep blasted by that thunder and arun before storms of juggernaut
flesh. It was the pterodactyl kite and scythe which raised his arms
almost to fly the marbled vaults. And with the inked and stencilled
flashburnt shapes of pistoned or bladed doom came his usual crowd of
hangers-on, spectators gripped to each limb, seated on shoulder blades,
peering from his jungled chest, hung upside down in microscopic millions
in his armpit vaults screaming bat-screams for encounters, ready for the
hunt and if need be the kill. Like a black tidal wave upon a bleak
shore, a dark tumult infilled with phosphorescent beauties and badly
spoiled dreams, Mr. Dark sounded and hissed his feet, his legs, his
body, his sharp face forward.
    "Boys . . .?"
    Immensely patient, that soft voice, ever the warmest friend to
chilly creatures burrowed away, nested amongst dry books; so he
scuttered, crept, scurried, stalked, tiptoed, wafted, stood immensely
still among the primates, the Egyptian monuments to bestial gods,
brushed black histories of dead Africa, stayed awhile in Asia, then
sauntered on to newer lands.
    "Boys, I know you hear me! The sign reads: SILFNCE! So, I'll
whisper: one of you still wants what we offer. Eh? Eh?"
    Jim, thought Will.
    Me, thought Jim. No! oh, no! not still! not me!
    "Come out." Mr. Dark purred the air through his teeth. "I guarantee
rewards! Whoever turns himself in wins it all!
    Bangity-bang!
    My heart! thought Jim
    Is that me? thought Will, or Jim!!?
    "I hear you." Mr. Dark's lips quivered. "Closer now. Will? Jim?
Isn't it Jim who's the, smart one? Come along, boy. . . !"
    No! thought Will.
    I don't know anything! thought Jim, wildly.
    "Jim, yes . . ." Mr. Dark wheeled in a new direction. "Jim, show me
where your friend is." Softly. "We'll shut him up, give you the ride
that would have been his if he'd used his head. Right, Jim?" A dove
voice, cooing. "Closer. I hear your heart jump!"
    Stop! thought Will to his chest.
    Stop! Jim clenched his breath. Stop!!
    "I wonder . . . are you in this alcove . . . ?"
    Mr. Dark let the peculiar gravity of a certain group of stacks tug
him forward.
    "You here, Jim . . .? Or . . . over behind . . . ?"
    He shoved a trolley of books mindlessly off on rubber rollers to
bump through the night. A long way off, it crashed and spilled its
contents to the floor like so many dead black ravens.
    "Smart hide-and-seekers, both," said Mr. Dark. "But someone's
smarter. Did you hear the carousel calliope tonight? Did you know,
someone dear to you was down to the carousel? Will? Willy? William.
William Halloway. Where's your mother tonight?"
    Silence.
    "She was out riding the night wind, Willy-William. Around. We put
her on. Around. We left her on. Around. You hear, Willy? Around, a year,
another year, another, around, around!"
    Dad! thought Will. Where are you!
    In the far room, Charles Halloway, seated, his heart pounding, heard
and thought, He won't find them, I won't move unless he does, he can't
find them, they won't listen! they won't believe! he'll go away!
    "Your mother, Will," called Mr. Dark, softly. "Around and around,
can you guess which direction, Willy?"
    Mr. Dark circled his thin ghost hand in the dark air between the
stacks.
    "Around, around, and when we let your mother off, boy, and showed
her herself in the Mirror Maze, you should have heard the one single
sound she made. She was like a cat with a hair ball in her so big and
sticky there was no way to gag it out, no way to scream around the hair
coming out her nostrils and ears and eyes, boy, and her old old old. The
last we saw of her, boy Willy, she was running off away from what she
saw in the mirrors. She'll bang Jim's house door but when his ma sees a
thing, two hundred years old slobbering at the keyhole, begging the
mercy of gunshot death, boy, Jim's ma will gag the same way, like a
hairballed cat sick but can't be sick, and beat her away, send her
beggaring the streets, where no one'll believe, Will, such a kettle of
bones and spit, no one'll believe this was a rose beauty, your kind
relations So Will, it's up to us to run find, ran save her, for we know
who she is-right, Will, right, Will, right, right, right?!"
    The dark man's voice hissed away to silence.
    Very faintly now, somewhere in the library, someone was sobbing.
    Ah . . .
    The Illustrated Man gassed the air pleasantly from his dank lungs.
    Yesssssssssss . . .
    "Here . . ." he, murmured. "What? Filed under B for Boys? A for
Adventure? H for Hidden. S for Secret. T for Terrified? Or filed under J
for Jim or N for Nightshade, W for William, H for Halloway? Where are my
two precious human books, so I may turn their pages, eh?,"
    He kicked a place for his right foot on the first shelf of a
towering stack.
    He shoved his right foot in, put his weight there, and swung his
left foot free.
    "There."
    His left foot hit the second shelf, knocked space. He climbed. His
right foot kicked a hole on the third shelf, plunged books back, and so
up and up he climbed, to fourth shelf, to fifth, to six, groping dark
library heavens, hands clutching shelfboards, then scrabbling higher to
leaf night to find boys, if boys there were, like bookmarks among books.
    His right hand, a princely tarantula, garlanded with roses, cracked
a book of Bayeaux tapestries aspin down the sightless abyss below. It
seemed an age before the tapestries struck, all askew, a ruin of beauty,
an avalanche of gold, silver, and sky-blue thread on the floor.
    His left hand, reaching the ninth shelf as he panted, grunted,
encountered empty space-no books.
    "Boys, are you here on Everest?"
    Silence. Except for the faint sobbing, nearer now.
    "Is it cold here? Colder? Coldest?"'
    The eyes of the Illustrated Man came abreast of the eleventh shelf.
    Like a corpse laid rigid out, face down just three inches away, was
Jim Nightshade.
    One shelf further up in the catacomb, eyes trembling with tears, lay
William Halloway.
    "Well," said Mr. Dark.
    He reached a hand to pat Will's head.
    "Hello," he said.
43
To Will, the palm of the hand that drifted up was like a moon rising.
    Upon it was the fiery blue-inked portrait of himself. Jim, too, saw
a hand before his face.
    His own picture looked back at him from the palm.
    The hand with Will's picture grabbed Will.
    The hand with Jim's picture grabbed Jim.
    Shrieks and yells.
    The Illustrated Man heaved.
    Twisting, he fell-jumped to the floor.
    The boys, kicking, yelling, fell with him. They landed on their
feet, toppled, collapsed, to be held, reared, set right, fistfuls of
their shirts in Mr. Dark's fists.
    "Jim!" he said. "Will! What were you doing up there, boys? Surely
not reading?"
    "Dad!"
    "Mr. Halloway!"
    Will's father stepped from the dark.
    The Illustrated Man rearranged the boys tenderly under one arm like
kindling, then gazed with genteel curiosity at Charles Halloway and
reached for him. Will's father struck one blow before his left hand was
seized, held, squeezed. As the boys watched, shouting, they saw Charles
Halloway gasp and fall to one knee.
    Mr. Dark squeezed that left hand harder and, doing this, slowly,
certainly, pressured the boys with his other arm, crushing their ribs so
air gushed from their mouths.
    Night spiraled in fiery whorls like great thumbprints inside Will's
eyes.
    Will's father, groaning, sank to both knees, flailing his right arm.
    "Damn you!"
    "But," said the carnival owner quietly, "I am already."
    "Damn you, damn you!"
    "Not words, old man," said Mr. Dark. "'Not words in books or words
you say, but real thoughts, real actions, quick thought, quick action,
win the day. So!"
    He gave one last mighty clench of his fist.
    The boys heard Charles Halloway's finger bones crack. He gave a last
cry and fell senseless.
    In one motion like a solemn pavane, the Illustrated Man rounded the
stacks, the boys, kicking books from shelves, under his arms.
    Will, feeling walls, books, floors fly by, foolishly thought,
pressed close.. Why, why, Mr. Dark smells like . . . calliope steam!
    Both boys were dropped suddenly. Before they could move or regain
their breath, each was gripped by the hair on their head and roused
marionettes-wise to face a window, a street.
    "Boys, you read Dickens?" Mr. Dark whispered.
    Critics hate his coincidences. But we know, don't we? Life's all
coincidence. Turn death and happenstance flakes off him like fleas from
a killed ox. Look!"
    Both boys writhed in the iron-maiden clutch of hungry saurians and
bristly apes.
    Will did not know whether to weep with joy or new despair.
    Below, across the avenue, passing from church going home, was his
mother and Jim's mother.
    Not on the carousel, not old, crazy, dead, in jail, but freshly out
in the good October air. She had been not a hundred yards away in church
during all the last five minutes!
    Mom! screamed Will, against the hand which, anticipating his cry,
clamped tight to his mouth. .
    "Mom," crooned Mr. Dark, mockingly. "Come save me!"
    No, thought Will, save yourself, run!
    But his mother and Jim's mother simply strolled content, from the
warm church through town.
    Mom! screamed Will again, and some small muffled bleat of it escaped
the sweaty paw.
    Will's mother, a thousand miles away over on that side-walk, paused.
    She couldn't have heard! thought Will. Yet-
    She looked over at the library.
    "Good," sighed Mr. Dark. "Excellent, fine."
    Here! thought Will. See us, Mom! Run call the police!
    "Why doesn't she look at this window?" asked Mr. Dark quietly. "And
see us three standing as for a portrait. Look over. Then, come running.
We'll let her in."
    Will strangled a sob. No, no.
    His mother's gaze trailed from the front entrance to the first-floor
windows.
    "Here," said Mr. Dark. "Second floor. A proper coincidence, let's
make it proper."
    Now Jim's mother was talking. Both women stood together at the curb.
    No, thought Will, oh, no.
    And the women turned and went away into the Sunday-night town.
    Will felt the Illustrated Man slump the tiniest bit.
    "Not much of a coincidence, no crisis, no one lost or saved. Pity.
Well!"
    Dragging the boys' feet, he glided down to open the front door.
    Someone waited in the shadows.
    A lizard hand scurried cold on Will's chin.
    "Halloway," husked the Witch's voice.
    A chameleon perched on Jim's nose.
    "Nightshade," whisked the dry-broom voice.
    Behind her stood the Dwarf and the Skeleton, silent, shifting,
apprehensive.
    Obedient to the occasion, the boys would have given their best
stored yells air, but again, on the instant recognizing their need, the
Illustrated Man trapped the sound before it could issue forth, then
nodded curtly to the old dust woman.
    The Witch toppled forward with her seamed black wax sewn-shut iguana
eyelids and her great proboscis with the nostrils caked like
tobacco-blackened pipe bowls, her fingers tracing, weaving a silent
plinth of symbols on the mind.
    The boys stared.
    Her fingernails fluttered, darted, feathered cold winter-water air.
Her pickled green froes breath crawled their flesh in pimples as she
sang softly, mewing, humming, glistering her babes, her boys, her
friends of the slick snail-tracked roof, the straight-flung arrow, the
stricken and sky-drowned balloon.
    "Darning-needle dragonfly, sew up these mouths so they not speak!"
    Touch, sew, touch, sew her thumbnail stabbed, punched, drew,
stabbed, punched, drew along their lower, upper lips until they were,
thread-pouch shut with invisible read.
    "Darning needle-dragonfly, sew up these ears, so they not hear!"
    Cold sand funneled Will's ears, burying her voice. Muffled, far
away, fading, she chanted on with a rustle, tick, tickle, tap, flourish
of caliper hands.
    Moss grew in Jim's ears, swiftly sealing him deep.
    "Darning needle-dragonfly, sew up these eyes so they not see!"
    Her white-hot fingerprints rolled back their stricken eyeballs to
throw the lids down with bangs like great tin doors slammed shut.
    Will saw a billion flashbulbs explode, then suck to darkness while
the unseen darning-needle insect out beyond somewhere pranced and fizzed
like insect drawn to sun-warmed honeypot, as closeted voice stitched off
their senses forever and a day beyond.
    "Darning-needle dragonfly, have done with eye, ear, lip and tooth,
finish hem, sew dark, mound dust, heap with slumber sleep, now tie all
knots ever so neat, pump silence, in blood like sand in river deep. So.
So."
    The Witch, somewhere outside the boys, lowered her hands.
    The boys stood silent. The Illustrated Man took his embrace from
them and stepped back.
    The woman from the Dust sniffed at her twin triumphs, ran her hand a
last loving time over her statues.
    The Dwarf toddled madly about in the boys' shadows, nibbling
daintily at their fingernails, softly calling their names.
    The Illustrated Man nodded toward the library. "The janitor's clock.
Stop it."
    The Witch, mouth wide, savoring doom, wandered off into the marble
quarry.
    Mr. Dark said: "Left, right. One, two."
    The boys walked down the steps, the Dwarf at Jim's side, the
Skeleton at Will's.
    Serene as death, the Illustrated Man followed.
44
Somewhere near, Charles Halloway's hand lay in a white-hot furnace,
melted to sheer nerve and pain. He opened his eyes. At the same moment
he heard a great breath as the front door swung shut and a woman's voice
came singing in the hall:
    "Old man, old man, old man, old man . . . ?"
    Where his left hand should be was this swelled blood pudding which
pulsed with such ecstasies of pain it fed forth his life, his will, his
whole attention. He tried to sit up, but the pain hammerblowed him down
again "Old man . . . ?"
    Not old! Fifty-four's not old, he thought wildly.
    And here she came on the worn stone floors, her moth-fingers
tapping, scanning braille book titles, as her nostrils siphoned the
shadows.
    Charles Halloway hunched and crawled, hunched and crawled, toward
the nearest stack, cramming pain back with his tongue. He must climb out
of reach, climb where books might be weapons flung down upon any
night-crawling pursuer. . . .
    "Old man, hear you breathing. .
    She on his tide, let her body be summoned by every sibilant hiss of
his pain.
    "Old man. feel your hurt. . . ."
    If he could fling the hand, the pain, out the window where it might
lie beating like a heart, summoning her away, tricked, to go seek this
awful fire. Bent in the street, he imagined her brisking her palms at
this throb, an abandoned chunk of delirium.
    But no the hand stayed, glowed, poisoned the air, hurrying the
strange nun-Gypsy's tread as she gasped her avaricious mouth most
ardently.
    "Damn you!" he cried. "Get it over with! I'm here!"
    So the Witch wheeled swift as a black clothes dummy on rubber
rollers and swayed over him.
    He did not even look at her. Such weights and pressures of despair
and exertion fought for his attention, he could only free his eyes to
watch the inside of his lids upon which multiple and ever changing looms
of terror jigged and gamboled.
    "Very simple." The whisper bent low. "Stop the heart!"
    Why not, he thought, vaguely.
    "Slow," she murmured.
    Yes, he thought.
    "'Slow, very slow."
    His heart, once bolting, now fell away to a strange, ease, disquiet,
then quiet, then ease.
    "Much more slow, slow . . ." she suggested.
    Tired, yes, you hear that, heart? he wondered.
    His heart heard. Like a tight fist it began to relax, a finger at a
time.
    "Stop all for good, forget all for good," she whispered.
    Well why not?
    "Slower . . . slowest."
    His heart stumbled.
    And then for no reason, save perhaps for a last look around, because
he did want to get rid of the pain, and sleep was the way to do that . .
. Charles Halloway opened his eyes.
    He saw the Witch.
    He saw her fingers working at the air, his face, his body, the heart
within his body, and the soul within the heart. Her swamp breath flooded
him while, with immense curiosity, he watched the poisonous drizzle from
her lips, counted the folds in her stitch-wrinkled eyes, the Gila
monster neck, the mummy-linen ears, the dry-rivulet riversand brow.
Never in his life had he focused so nearly to a person, as if she were a
puzzle, which once touched together might show life's greatest secret.
The solution was in her, it would all spring clear this moment, no, the
next, no, the next, watch her scorpion fingers! hear her chant as she
diddled the air, yes, diddled was it, tickling, tickling, "Slow!" she
whispered. "Slow!" And his obedient heart pulled rein. Diddle-tickle
went her fingers.
    Charles Halloway snorted. Faintly, he giggled.
    He caught this. Why? Why am I . . . gigling . . . at such a time!?
    The Witch pulled back the merest quarter inch as if some strange but
hidden electric light socket, touched with wet whorl, gave shock.
    Charles Halloway saw but did not see her flinch, sensed but seemed
in no way to consider her withdrawal, for almost immediately, seizing
the initiative, she flung herself forward, not touching, but mutely
gesticulating at his chest as one might try to spell an antique clock
pendulum.
    "Slow!" she cried.
    Senselessly, he permitted an idiot smile to balloon itself up from
somewhere to attach itself with careless ease under his nose.
    "Slowest!"
    Her new fever, her anxiety which changed itself to anger was even
more of a toy to him. A part of his attention, secret until now, leaned
forward to scan every pore of her Halloween face. Somehow, irresistibly,
the prime thing was: nothing mattered. Life in the end seemed a prank of
such size you could only stand off at this end of the corridor to note
its meaningless length and its quite unnecessary height, a mountain
built to such ridiculous immensities you were dwarfed in its shadow and
mocking of its pomp. So with death this near he thought numbly but
purely upon a billion vanities, arrivals, departures, idiot excursions
of boy, boy-man, man and old-man goat. He had gathered and stacked all
manner of foibles, devices, playthings of his egotism and now, between
all the silly corridors of books, the toys of his life swayed. And none
more grotesque than this thing named Witch Gypsy Reader-of-Dust,
tickling, that's what! just tickling the air! Fool! Didn't she know what
she was doing! He opened his mouth.
    Of itself, like a child born of an unsuspecting parent, one single
raw laugh broke free.
    The Witch swooned back.
    Charles Halloway did not see. He was far too busy letting the joke
rush through his fingers, letting hilarity spring forth of it's own
volition along his throat, eyes squeezed shut; there it flew, whipping
shrapnel in all directions.
    "You!" he cried, to no one, everyone, himself, her, them, it, all.
"Funny! You!"
    "No," the Witch protested.
    "Stop tickling!" he gasped.
    "Not!" she lunged back, frantically. "Not! Sleep! Slow! Very slow!"
    "No tickling is all it is, for sure," he roared. "Oh, ha! Ha, stop!"
    "Yes, stop heart!" she squealed. "Stop blood." Her own heart must
have shaken like a tambourine; her hands shook. In mid-gesticulation she
froze and became, aware of the silly fingers.
    "Oh, my God!" He wept beautiful glad tears. "Get off my ribs, oh,
ha, go on, my heart!"
    "Your heart, yesssssss!"
    "God!" He popped his eyes wide, gulped air, released more soap and
water washing everything clear, incredibly clean. "Toys! The key sticks
out your back! Who wound you up!?"
    And the largest roar of all, flung at the woman, burnt her hands,
seared her face, or so it seemed, for she seized herself as from a blast
furnace, wrapped her fried hands in Egyptian rags, gripped her dry dugs,
skipped back, gave pause, then started a slow retreat, nudged, pushed,
pummeled inch by inch, foot by foot, clattering bookracks, shelves,
fumbling for handholds on volumes that thrashed free as she scrambled
them down. Her brow knocked dim histories, vain theories, duned-up time,
promised but compromised years. Chased, bruised, beaten by his laugh
which echoed, rang, swam to fill the marble vaults, she whirled at last,
claws razoring the wild air and fled to fall downstairs.
    Moments later, she managed to cram herself through the front door,
which slammed!
    Her fall, the door slam, almost broke his frame with laughter.
    "Oh God, God, please stop, stop yourself!" he begged of his
hilarity.
    And thus begged, his humor let be.
    In mid-roar, at last, all faded to honest laughter, pleasant
chuckling, faint giggling, then softly and with great contentment
receiving and giving, breath, shaking his happy-weary head, the good
ache of action in his throat and ribs, gone from his crumpled hand. He
lay against the stacks, head leaned to some dear befriending book, the
tears of releaseful mirth salting his cheeks, and suddenly knew her
gone.
    Why? he wondered. What did I do?
    With one last bark of mirth, he rose up, slow.
    What's happened? Oh, God, let's get it clear! First, the drug store,
a half-dozen aspirin to cure this hand for an hour, then, think. In the
last five minutes you did win something, didn't you? What's victory
taste like?
    Try to remember
    And smiling a new smile at the ridiculous dead-animal left hand
nested in his right crooked elbow, he hurried down the night corridors,
and out into town. . . .
III
Departures
45
The small parade moved, soundless, past the eternally revolving,
ending-but-unending candy serpentine of Mr. Crosetti's barber pole, past
all the darkening or darkened shops, the emptying streets, for people
were home now from the church suppers, or out at the carnival for the
last side show or the last high-ladder diver floating like milkweed down
the night.
    Will's feet, far away below, clubbed the sidewalk. One, two, he
thought, someone tells me left, right. Dragonfly whispers: one-two.
    Is Jim in the parade?! Will's eyes flicked the briefest to one side.
Yes! But who's the other little one? The gone-mad,
everything's-interesting-so-touch-it, everything's red-hot, pull-back,
Dwarf! Plus the Skeleton. And then behind, who were all those hundreds,
no, thousands of people marching along, breathing down his neck?
    The Illustrated Man.
    Will nodded and whined so high and silently that only dogs, dogs who
were no help, dogs who could not speak, might hear.
    And sure enough, looking obliquely over, he saw not one, not two,
but three dogs who, smelling the occasion, their own parade, now ran
ahead, now fell behind, their tails like guidons for the platoon.
    Bark! thought Will, like in the movies! Bark, bring the police!
    But the dogs just smiled and trotted.
    Coincidence, please, thought Will. Just a small one!
    Mr. Tetley! Yes! Will saw-but-did-not-see Mr. Tetley! Rolling the
wooden Indian back into his shop, closing for the night!
    "Turn heads," murmured the Illustrated Man.
    Jim turned his head. Will turned his head.
    Mr. Tetley smiled.
    "Smile," murmured Mr. Dark.
    The two boys smiled.
    "Hello!" said Mr. Tetley.
    "Say hello," someone whispered.
    "Hello," said Jim.
    "'Hello," said Will.
    The dogs barked.
    "A free ride at the carnival," murmured Mr. Dark.
    "Free ride," said Will.
    "'At the carnival!" cracked Jim.
    Then, like good machines, they shut up their smiles.
    "'Have fun!" called Mr. Tetley.
    The dogs barked joy.
    The parade marched on.
    "Fun," said Mr. Dark. "Free rides. When the crowds go home, half an
hour from now. We'll ride Jim round. You still want that, Jim?"
    Hearing but not hearing, locked away in himself, Will thought, Jim,
don't listen!
    Jim's eyes slid: wet or oily, it was hard to tell.
    "You'll travel with us, Jim, and if Mr. Cooger doesn't survive (it's
a near thing for him, we haven't saved him yet, we'll try again now) but
if he doesn't make it, Jim, how would you like to be partners? I'll grow
you to a fine strong age, eh? Twenty-two? twenty-five?'. Dark and
Nightshade, Nightshade and Dark, sweet lovely names for such as we with
such as the side shows to run around the world! What say, Jim?"
    Jim said nothing, sewn up in the Witch's dream.
    Don't listen! wailed his best friend, who heard nothing but heard it
all.
    "And Will?" said Mr. Dark. "Let's ride him back and back, eh? Make
him a babe in arms, a babe for the Dwarf to carry like a clown-child,
roundabout in parades, every day for the next fifty years, would you
like that, Will? to be a babe forever? not able to talk and tell all the
lovely things you know? Yes, I think that's best for Will. A plaything,
a little wet friend for the Dwarf!"
    Will must have screamed.
    But not out loud.
    For only the dogs barked, in terror; yiping, off they ran, as if
pelted with rocks.
    A man came around the comer.
    A policeman.
    "Who's this?" muttered Mr. Dark.
    "Mr. Kolb," said Jim.
    "Mr. Kolb!" said Will.
    "Darning-needle," whispered Mr. Dark. "Dragonfly." Pain stabbed
Will's ears. Moss stuffed his eyes. Gum glued his teeth. He felt a
multitudinous tapping, shuttling, weaving, about his face, all numb
again.
    "Say hello to Mr. Kolb."
    "Hello, " said Jim.
    ". . . Kolb . . ." said the dreaming Will
    "Hello, boys. Gentlemen."
    "Turn here," said Mr. Dark.
    They turned.
    Away toward meadow country, away from warm lights, good town, safe
streets, the drumless march progressed.
46
Stretched out over, a mile of territory the straggling parade now moved
as follows:
    At the edge of the carnival midway, stumping the grass with their
dead feet, Jim and Will paced friends who constantly retold the wondrous
uses of darning-needle dragonflies.
    Behind, a good half mile, trying to catch up, walking mysteriously
wounded, the Gypsy, who whorl-symboled the dust.
    And yet farther back came the janitor-father, now slowing himself
with remembrances of age, now pacing swiftly young with thoughts of the
brief first encounter and victory, carrying his left hand patted to his
chest, chewing medicines as he went.
    At the midway rim, Mr. Dark looked back as if an inner voice had
named the stragglers in his widely separated maneuver. But the voice
failed, he was unsure. He nodded briskly, and Dwarf, Skeleton, Jim, Will
thrust through the crowd.
    Jim felt the river of bright people wash by all around but not
touching. Will heard waterfall laughter here, there, and him walking
through the downpour. An explosion of fireflies blossomed on the sky;
the ferris wheel, exultant as a titanic fireworks, dilated above them.
    Then they were at the Mirror Maze and sidling, coliding, bumping,
careening through the unfolded ice ponds where stricken spider-stung
boys much like themselves appeared, vanished a thousand times over.
    That's me! thought Jim.
    But I can't help me, thought Will, no matter how many of me there
are!
    And crowd of boys, plus crowd of reflected Mr. Dark's illustrations,
for he had taken off his coat and shirt now, crammed and crushed through
to the Waxworks at the end of the maze.
    "Sit," said Mr. Dark. "Stay."
    Among the wax figures of murdered, gunshot, guillotined, garroted
men and women the two boys sat like Egyptian cats, unblinked,
untwitched, unswallowing.
    Some late visitors passed through, laughing. They commented on all
the wax figures.
    They did not notice the thin line of saliva crept from the comer of
one "wax" boy's mouth.
    They did not see how bright was the second "wax" boy's stare, which
suddenly brimmed and ran clear water down his cheek.
    Outside, the Witch limped in through back alleys of rope and peg
between the tents.
    "Ladies and gentlemen!"
    The last crowd of the night, three or four hundred strong, turned as
a body.
    The Illustrated Man, stripped to the waist, all nightmare viper,
sabertooth, libidinous ape, clotted vulture, all salmon-sulphur sky rose
up with annunciations:
    "The last free event this evening! Come one! Come all!"
    The crowd surged toward the main platform outside the freak tent,
where stood Dwarf, Skeleton, and Mr. Dark.
    "The Most Amazingly Dangerous, ofttimes Fatal-World Famous BULLET
TRICK!"
    The crowd gasped with pleasure.
    "The rifles, if you please!"
    The Thin One cracked wide a racked display of bright artillery.
    The Witch, hurrying up, froze when Mr. Dark cried: "'And here, our
death-defier, the bullet-catcher who will stake her life-Mademoiselle
Tarot!"
    The Witch shook her head, bleated, but Dark's hand swept down to
swing her like a child to the platform, still protesting, which gave
Dark pause, but, in front of everyone now, he went on:
    "A volunteer, please, to fire the rifle!"
    The crowd rumbled softly, daring itself to speak up.
    Mr. Dark's mouth barely moved. Under his breath he asked, "Is the
clock stopped?"
    "Not," she whined, "stopped."
    "No?" he almost burst out.
    He burnt her with his eyes, then turned to the audience and let his
mouth finish the spiel, his fingers rapping over the rifles.
    "Volunteers, please!"
    "Stop the act," the Witch cried softly, wringing, her hands.
    "It goes on, damn you, worse than double-damn you" he whispered,
whistled fiercely.
    Secretly, Dark gathered a pinch of flesh on his wrist, the
illustration of a black-nun blind woman, which he bit with his
fingernails.
    The Witch spasmed, seized her breast, groaned, ground her teeth.
"Mercy!" she hissed, half aloud.
    Silence from the crowd.
    Mr. Dark nodded swiftly.
    "Since there are no volunteers-" He scraped his illustrated wrist.
The Witch shuddered. "'We will cancel our last act and-"
    "Here! A volunteer!"
    The crowd turned.
     Mr. Dark recoiled., then asked: "Where?"'
    "Here."
    Far out at the edge of the crowd, a hand lifted, a path opened.
    Mr. Dark could see very clearly the man standing there, alone.
    Charles Halloway, citizen, father, introspective husband,
night-wanderer, and janitor of the town library.
47
The crowd's appreciative clamor faded.
    Charles Halloway did not move.
    He let the path grow leading down to the platform.
    He could not see the expression on the faces of the freaks standing
up there. His eyes swept the crowd and found the Mirror Maze, the empty
oblivion which beckoned with ten times a thousand million light years of
reflections, counterreflections,, reversed and double-reversed, plunging
deep to nothing, face-falling to nothing, stomach-dropping away to yet
more sickening plummets of nothing.
    And yet, wasn't there an echo of two boys in the powdered silver at
the back of each glass? Did or did he not perceive, with the tremulous
tip of eyelash if not the eye, their passage through, their wait beyond,
warm wax amongst cold, waiting to be key-wound by terrors, run free in
panics?
    No. thought Charles Halloway, don't think. Get on with this!
    "Coming!" he shouted.
    "Go get 'em, Pop!" a man said.
    "Yes," said Charles Halloway. " I will."
    And he walked down through the crowd.
    The Witch spun slowly, magnetized at the night-wandering volunteer's
approach. Her eyelids jerked at their sewn black-wax threads behind dark
glasses.
    Mr. Dark, the illustration-drenched, superinfested civilization of
souls, leaned from the platform, gladly whetting his lips. Thoughts spun
fiery Catherine wheels in his eyes, quick, quick, what, what, what!
    And the aging janitor, fixing a smile to his face like a white
celluloid set of teeth from a Cracker Jack box, strode on, and the crowd
opened as the sea before Moses and closed behind, and him wondering what
to do? why was he here? but on the move, steadily, nevertheless.
    Charles Halloway's foot touched the first step of the platform.
    The Witch trembled secretly.
    Mr. Dark felt this secret, glanced sharply. Swiftly he put his hand
out to grab for the good right hand of this fifty-four-year-old man.
    But the fifty-four-year-old man shook his head, would not give his
hand to be held, touched, or helped up.
    "Thanks, no."
    On the platform, Charles Halloway waved to the crowd.
    The people set off a few firecrackers of applause.
    "But-" Mr. Dark was amazed- "your left hand, sir, you can't hold and
fire a rifle if you have only the use of one hand!"
    Charles Halloway paled.
    "I'll do it," he said. "With one hand."
    "Hoorah!" cried a boy, below.
    "Go it, Charlie!" a man called, out beyond.
    Mr. Dark flushed as the crowd laughed and applauded even louder now.
He lifted his hands to ward off the wave of refreshing sound, like rain
that washed in from the people.
    "All right, all right! Let's see if he can do it!"
    Brutally, the Illustrated Man snapped a rifle from its locks, hurled
it through the air.
    The crowd gasped.
    Charles Halloway ducked. He put up his right hand. The rifle slapped
his palm. He grabbed. It did not fall. He had it good.
    The audience hooted, said things against Mr. Dark's bad manners
which made him turn away for a moment, damning himself, silently.
    Will's father lifted the rifle, beaming.
    The crowd roared.
    And while the wave of applause came in, crashed, and went back down
the shore, he looked again to the maze, where the sensed but unseen
shadow-shapes of Will and Jim were filed among titanic razor blades of
revelation and illusion, then back to the Medusa gaze of Mr. Dark,
swiftly reckoned with, and on to the stitched and jittering sightless
nun of midnight, sidling back still more. Now she was as far as she
could sidle, at the far end of the platform, almost pressed to the
whorled red-black rifle bull's-eye target.
    "Boy!" shouted Charles Halloway.
    Mr. Dark stiffened.
    "I need a boy volunteer to help me hold the rifle!" shouted Charles
Halloway.
    "Someone! Anyone!" he shouted.
    A few boys in the crowd shifted around on their toes.
    "Boy!" shouted Charles Halloway. "Hold on. My son's out there. He'll
volunteer, won't you, Will?"
    The Witch flung one band up to feel the shape of this audacity which
came off the fifty-four-year-old man like a fever. Mr. Dark was spun
round as if hit by a fast-traveling gunshot.
    "Will!" called his father.
    In the Wax Museum, Will sat motionless.
    "Will!" called his father. "Come on, boy!"
    The crowd looked left, looked right, looked back.
    No answer.
    Will sat in the Wax Museum.
    Mr. Dark observed all of this with some respect, some degree of
admiration, some concern; he seemed to be waiting, just as was Will's
father.
    "Will, come help your old man!" Mr. Halloway cried, jovially.
    Will sat in the Wax Museum.
    Mr. Dark smiled.
    "Will! Willy! Come here!"'
    No answer.
    Mr. Dark smiled more.
    "Willy! Don't you hear your old man?"
    Mr. Dark stopped smiling.
    For this last was the voice of a gentleman in the, crowd, speaking
up.
    The crowd laughed.
    "Will!" called a woman.
    "Willy!" called another.
    "Yoohoo!" A gentleman in a beard.
    "Come on, William!" A boy.
    The crowd laughed more, jostled elbows.
    Charles Halloway called. They called. Charles Halloway cried to the
hills. They cried to the hills.
    "'Will! Willy! William!"
    A shadow shuttled and wove in the mirrors.
    The Witch broke out chandeliers of sweat.
    "There!"
    The crowd stopped calling.
    As did Charles Halloway, choked on the name of his son now, and
silent.
    For Will stood in the entrance of the Maze, like the wax figure that
he almost was.
    "Will," called his father, softly.
    The sound of this chimed the sweat off the Witch.
    Will moved, unseeing, through the crowd.
    And handing the rifle down like a cane for the boy to grasp, his
father drew him up onto the stand.
    "Here's my good left hand!" announced the father.
    Will neither saw nor heard the crowd sound forth a solid and
offensive applause.
    Mr. Dark had not moved, though Charles Halloway could see him,
during all this, lighting and setting off cannon crackers in his head;
but each, one by one, fizzled and died. Mr. Dark could not guess what
they were up to. For that matter, Charles Halloway did not know or
guess. It was as if he had written this play for himself, over the
years, in the library, nights, torn up the play after memorizing it, and
now forgotten what he had set forth to remember. He was relying on
secret discoveries of self , moment by moment, playing by ear, no! heart
and soul! And . . . now?!
    The brightness of his teeth seemed to strike the Witch blinder!
Impossible! She flung one hand to her glasses, her sewn eyelids!
    "Closer, everyone!" called Will's father.
    The crowd gathered in. The platform was an island. The sea was
people.
    "'Watch the bull's-eye targeteer!"
    The Witch melted in her rags.
    The Illustrated Man looked left, found no pleasure in the Skeleton,
who simply looked thinner; found no pleasure looking right to a Dwarf
who blandly dwelt in squashed idiot madness.
    "The bullet, please!" Will's father said, amiably.
    The thousand illustrations on his jerking horseflesh frame did not
hear, so why should Mr. Dark?
    "If you please," said Charles Halloway. "The bullet? So I may knock
that flea off the old Gypsy's wart!"
    Will stood motionless.
    Mr. Dark hesitated.
    Out in the choppy sea, smiles flashed, here, there, a hundred, two
hundred, three hundred whitenesses, as if a vast titillation of water
had been provoked by a lunar gravity. The tide ebbed.
    The Illustrated Man, in slow motion, proffered the bullet. His arm,
a long molasses undulation, lazed to offer the bullet to the boy, to see
if he would notice; he did not notice.
    His father took the missile.
    "Mark it with your initials," said Mr. Dark, by rote.
    "No, with more!" Charles Halloway raised his son's hand and made him
hold the bullet, so he could take a penknife with his one good hand and
carve a strange symbol on the lead.
    What's happening? Will thought. I know what's happenmg. I don't know
what's happening? What!?
    Mr. Dark saw a crescent moon on the bullet, saw nothing wrong with
such a moon, rammed it in the rifle, slapped the rifle back at Will's
father, who once more caught it deftly.
    "Ready, Will?"
    The boy's peach face drowsed in the slightest nod.
    Charles Halloway flicked a last glance at the maze, thought, Jim,
you there still? Get ready!
    Mr. Dark turned to go pat, conjure, calm his dust-crone friend, but
cracked to a halt at the crack of the rifle being reopened, the bullet
ejected by Will's father, to assure the audience it was there. It seemed
real enough, yet he had read long ago that this was a substitute bullet,
shaped of a very hard steel-colored crayon wax. Shot through the rifle
it would dissolve out the barrel as smoke and vapor. At this very
moment, having somehow switched bullets, the Illustrated Man was
slipping the real marked bullet into the Witch's jerking fingers. She
would hide it in her cheek. At the shot, she would pretend to jolt under
the imagined impact, then reveal the bullet caught by her yellow rat
teeth. Fanfare! Applause!
    The Illustrated Man, glancing up, saw Charles Halloway with the
opened rifle, the wax bullet. But instead of revealing what he knew, Mr.
Halloway simply said, ""Let's cut our mark more clearly, eh, boy?"' And
with his penknife, the boy holding the bullet in his senseless hand, he
marked this fresh new wax unmarked bullet with the same mysterious
crescent moon, then snapped it back into the rifle.
    "Ready?!"
    Mr. Dark looked to the Witch.
    Who hesitated, then nodded, once, faintly.
    "Ready!" announced Charles Halloway.
    And all about lay the tents, the breathing crowds, the anxious
freaks, a Witch iced with hysteria, Jim hidden to be found, an ancient
mummy still seated glowing with blue fire in his electric chair, and a
merry-go-round waiting for the show to cease, the crowd to go, and the
carnival to have its way with boys and janitor trapped if possible, and
alone.
    "Will," said Charles Halloway conversationally, as he lifted the now
suddenly heavy rifle. "Your shoulder here is my brace. Take the middle
of the rifle, gently, with one hand. Take it, Will." The boy raised a
hand. "That's it, son. When I say 'hold,' hold your breath. Hear me?"
    The boy's head tremored with the slightest affirmation.
    He slept. He dreamed. The dream was nightmare. The nightmare was
this.
    And the next part of this was his father shouting:
    "Ladies! Gentlemen!"
    The illustrated Man clenched his fist. Will's picture, lost in it.,
like a flower, was crushed.
    Will twisted.
    The rifle fell.
    Charles Halloway pretended not to notice.
    "Me and Will here will now, together, him being the good left arm I
can't use, do the one and only most dangerous, sometimes fatal, Bullet
Trick!"
    Applause. Laughter.
    Quickly the fifty-four-year-old janitor, denying each year, laid the
rifle back on the boy's jerking shoulder.
    "Hear that, Will? Listen! That's for us!"
    The boy listened. The boy grew calm.
    Mr. Dark tightened his fist.
    Will was taken with slight palsy.
    "We'll hit 'em bull's-eye on, won't we, boy!" said his father.
    More laughter.
    And the boy grew very calm indeed, with the rifle on his shoulder,
and Mr. Dark squeezed tight on the peach-fuzz face nestled in the flesh
of his hand, but the boy was serene in the laughter which still flowed
and his father kept the hoop rolling thus:
    "Show the lady your teeth, Will!"
    Will showed the woman against the target his teeth. The blood fell
away from the Witch's f ace.
    Now Charles Halloway showed her his teeth, too, such as they were.
    And winter lived in the Witch.
    "'Boy," said someone in the audience, "she's great. Acts scared!
Look!"
    "I'm looking, thought Will's father, his left hand useless at his
side his right hand up to the rifle trigger, his face to the sight as
his son held the rifle unswervingly pointed at the bull's-eye and the
Witch's face superimposed there, and the last moment come, and a wax
bullet in the chamber, and what could a wax bullet do? A bullet that
dissolved in transit, what use? why were they here, what could they do?
silly, silly!
    No! thought Will's father. Stop!
    He stopped the doubts.
    He felt his mouth shape words with no sound.
    But, the Witch heard what he said.
    Above the dying laughter, before the warm sound was completely goes,
he made these words, silently with his lips:
    The crescent moon I have marked on the bullet is not a crescent
moon.
    It is my own smile.
    I have put my smile on the bullet in the rifle.
    He said it once.
    He waited for her to understand.
    He said it, silently, again.
    And in the moment before the Illustrated Man himself translated the
mouthings, quickly, Charles Halloway cried, faintly, "Hold!" Will held
his breath. Far back among wax statues, Jim, hid away, dripped saliva
from his chin. Strapped in electric chair a dead-alive mummy hummed
power in its teeth. Mr. Dark's illustrations writhed with sick sweat as
he clenched his fist a final time, but-too late! Serene, Will held
breath, held weapon. Serene, his father said, "Now."
    And fired the rifle.
48
One shot!
    The Witch sucked breath.
    Jim, in the Wax Museum, sucked breath.
    As did Will, asleep.
    As did his father.
    As did Mr. Dark.
    As did all the freaks.
    As did the crowd.
    The Witch screamed.
    Jim among the wax dummies, blew all the air from his lungs.
    Will shrieked himself awake, on the platform.
    The Illustrated Man let the air from his mouth in a great angry
bray, whipping up his hands to stop all events. But the Witch fell. She
fell off the platform. She fell in the dust.
    The smoking rifle in his one good hand, Charles Halloway let his
breath go slow, feeling every bit of it move from him. He still stared
along the rifle sights at the target where the woman had been.
    At the platform rim, Mr. Dark looked down at the screaming crowd and
what they were screaming about.
    "She's fainted-"
    "No. She slipped!"
    "Shes . . . shot!"
    At last Charles Halloway came to stand by the Illustrated Man,
looking down. There were many things in his face: surprise, dismay, and
some small strange relief and satisfaction.
    The woman was lifted and put on the platform. Her mouth was frozen
open, almost with a look of recognition.
    He knew she was dead. In a moment, the crowd would know. He watched
the Illustrated Man's hand move down to touch, trace, feel for life.
Then Mr. Dark lifted both her hands, like a doll, in some marionette
strategy, to give her motion. But the body refused.
    So he gave one of the Witch's arms to the Dwarf, the other to the
Skeleton, and they shook and moved them in a ghastly semblance of
reawakening as the crowd backed.
    ". . . dead
    "But . . . there's no wound."
    "Shock, you think?"
    Shock, thought Charles Halloway, my God, did that kill her? Or the
other bullet? When I fired the shot, did she suck the other bullet down
her throat? Did she . . . choke on my smile! Oh, Christ!
    "It's all right! Show's over! Just fainted!" said Mr. Dark. "All an
act! All part of the, show," he said, not looking at the woman, not
looking at the crowd, but looking at Will, who stood blinking around,
out of one nightmare and fresh into the next as his father stood with
him and Mr. Dark cried: "Everyone home! Show's over! Lights! Lights!"
    The carnival lights flickered.
    The crowd, herded before the failing illumination, turned like a
great carousel and as the lamps dimmed, hustled toward the few remaining
pools of light as if to warm themselves there before braving the wind.
One by one, one by one, the lights indeed were going off.
    "Lights!" said Mr. Dark.
    "Jump!" said Will's father.
    Will jumped. Will ran with his father who still carried the, weapon
that had fired the, smile that had killed the Gypsy and put her to dust.
    "Is Jim in there?"
    They were at the maze. Behind them, on the platform, Mr. Dark
bellowed: "Lights! Go home! All over. Done!"
    "Is Jim in there?" wondered Will. "Yes. Yes, he is!"
    Inside the Wax Museum, Jim still had not moved, had not blinked.
    "Jim!" The voice came through the maze.
    Jim moved. Jim blinked. A rear exit door stood wide. Jim blundered
toward it.
    "I'm coming for you, Jim!"
    "No, Dad!"
    Will caught at his father, who stood at the first turn of the
mirrors with the pain come back to his hands racing up along the nerves
to strike a fireball near his heart. "Dad, don't go in!" Will gabbed his
good arm.
    Behind them, the platform was empty, Mr. Dark was running . . .
where? Somewhere as the night shut in, the lights went off, went off,
went off, the night sucked around, gathering, whistling, simpering, and
the crowd, like a shake of leaves from one huge tree, blew off the
midway, and Will's father stood facing the glass tides, the waves, the
gauntlet of horror he knew waited for him to swim through, stride
through to fight the desiccation, the annihilation of one's self that
waited there. He had seen enough to know. Eyes shut, you'd be lost. Eyes
open, you'd know such utter despair, such gravities of anguish would
weight you, you might never drag past the twelfth turn. But Charles
Halloway took Will's hands away. "Jim's there. Jim, wait! I'm coming
in!"
    And Charles Halloway took the next step into the maze.
    Ahead flowed sluices of silver light, deep slabs of shadow,
polished, wiped, rinsed with images of themselves and others whose
souls, passing, scoured the glass with their agony, curried the cold ice
with their narcissism, or sweated the angles and flats with their fear.
    "Jim!"
    He ran. Will ran. They stopped.
    For the lights in here were going blind, one by one, going dim,
changing color, now blue, now a color like lilac summer lightning which
flared in haloes, then a flickerlight like a thousand ancient windblown
candles.
    And between himself and Jim in need of rescue, stood an army of one
million sick-mouthed, frost-haired, white-tine-bearded men.
    Them! all of them! he thought. That's me!
    Dad! thought Will, at his back, don't be afraid. It's only you. All
only my father!
    But he did not like their look. They were so old, so very old, and
got much older the farther away they marched, wildly gesticulating, as
Dad threw up his hands to fend off the revelation, this wild image
repeated to insanity.
    Dad! he thought, it's you!
    But, it was more.
    And all the lights went out.
    And both, squeezed still, in muffle-gasping silence, stood afraid.
49
A hand dug like a mole in the dark.
    Will's hand.
    It emptied his pockets, it delved, it rejected, it dug again. For
while it was dark he knew those million old men might march, hustle,
rush, leap, smash Dad with what they were! In this shut-up night, with
just four seconds to think of them, they might do anything to Dad! If
Will didn't hurry, these legions from Time Future, all the ,alarms of
coming life, so mean, raw, and true you couldn't deny that's how Dad'd
look tomorrow, next day, the day after the day after that, that cattle
run of possible years might sweep Dad under!
    So, quick!
    Who has more pockets than a magician?
    A boy.
    Whose pockets contain more than a magician's?
    A boy's.
    Will seized forth kitchen matches!
    "Oh God, Dad, here!"
    He struck the match.
    The stampede was close!
    They had come running. Now, fixed by light, they widened their eyes,
as did Dad, amazed their mouths at their own ancient quakes and
masquerades. Halt! the match had cried. And platoons left, squads right,
had stilt-muscled themselves to fitful rest, to baleful glare, itching
for the match to whiff out. Then, given lease to run next time, they'd
hit this old, very old, much older, terribly old man, suffocate him with
Fates in one instant.
    "No!" said Charles Halloway.
    No. A million dead lips moved.
    Will thrust the match forward. In the mirrors, a wizened
multiplication of boy-apes did likewise, posing a single rosebud of
blue-yellow flame.
    "No!"
    Every glass threw javelins of light which invisibly pierced, sank
deep, found heart, soul, lungs, to frost the veins, cut nerves, send
Will to ruin, paralyze and then kick-football heart. Hamstrung, the old
old man foundered to his knees, as did his suppliant images, his
congregation of terrified selves one week, one month, two years, twenty,
fifty, seventy, ninety years from now! every second, minute, and
long-after-midnight hour of his possible survival into insanity, there
all sank grayer, more yellow as the mirrors ricocheted him through, bled
him lifeless, mouthed him dry, then threatened to whiff him to skeletal
dusts and litter his moth ashes to the floor.
    "No!"
    Charles Halloway struck the match from his son's hand. "Dad, don't."
    For in the new dark, the restive herd of old men shambled forward,
hearts hammering.
    "Dad, we gotta see!"
    He struck his second and final match.
    And in the flare saw Dad sunk down, eyes clenched, fists tight, and
all those other men who would have to shunt, crawl, scramble on knees
once this last light was gone. Will grabbed his father's shoulder and
shook him.
    "Oh, Dad, Dad, I don't care how old you are, ever! I don't care
what, I don't care anything! Oh, Dad," he cried, weeping. "I love you!"
    At which Charles Halloway opened his eyes and saw himself and the
others like himself and his son behind holding him, the flame trembling,
the tears trembling on his face, and suddenly, as before, the image of
the Witch, the memory of the library, defeat for one, victory for
another, swam before him, mixed with sound of rifle, shot, flight of
marked bullet, surge of fleeing crowd.
    For only a moment longer he looked at all of himselves, at Will. A
small sound escaped his mouth. A little larger sound escaped his mouth.
    And then, at last, he gave the maze, the mirrors, and all Time
ahead, Beyond, Around, Above, Behind, Beneath or squandered inside
himself, the only answer possible.
    He opened his mouth very wide, and let the loudest sound of all
free.
    The Witch, if she were alive, would have known that sound, and died
again.
50
Jim Nightshade, out the back door of the maze lost on the carnival
grounds, running, stopped.
    The Illustrated Man, somewhere among the black tents, running,
stopped.
    The Dwarf froze.
    The Skeleton turned.
    All had heard.
    Not the sound that Charles Halloway made, no.
    But the terrific sounds that followed.
    One mirror alone, and then a second mirror, followed by a pause, and
then a third mirror, and a fourth and another after that and another
after that and still another and another after that, in domino fashion,
they formed swift spiderwebs over their fierce stares and then with
faint tinkles and sharp cracks, fell.
    One minute there was this incredible Jacob's ladder of glass,
folding, refolding and folding away yet again images pressed in a book
of light. The next, all shattered to meteor precipitation.
    The Illustrated Man, halted, listening, felt his own eyes, crystal,
almost spiderweb and splinter with the sounds.
    It was as if Charles Halloway, once more a choirboy in a strange
sub-sub-demon church had sung the most beautiful high note of amiable
humor ever in his life which first shook moth-silver from the mirror
backs, then shook images from glass faces, then shook glass itself to
ruin. A dozen, a hundred, a thousand mirrors, and with them the ancient
images of Charles Halloway, sank earthward in delicious moonfalls of
snow and sleety water.
    All because of the sound he had let come from his lungs through his
throat out his mouth.
    All because he accepted everything at last, accepted the carnival,
the hills beyond, the people in the hills, Jim, Will, and above all
himself and all of life, and, accepting, threw back his head for the
second time tonight and showed his acceptance with sound.
    And lo! like Jericho and the trump, with musical thunders the glass
gave up its ghosts, Charles Halloway cried out, released. He took his
hands from his face. Fresh starlight and dying carnival glow rushed in
to set him free. The reflected dead men were gone, buried under the
cymbaled slide, the splash and surfing of glass at his feet.
    "'Lights . . . lights!"
    A far voice cried away more warmth.
    The Illustrated Man, unfrozen, vanished among the tents.
    The crowd was now gone.
    "Dad, what'd you do?"
    But the match burned Will's fingers, he dropped it, but now there
was dim light enough to see Dad shuffle the trash, stir the mess of
mirrored glass, heading back through the empty places where the maze had
been and was no more.
    "Jim?"
    A door stood open. Pale carnival illumination, fading, poured
through to show them wax figures of murderers and murderess.
    Jim did not sit among them.
    "Jim!"
    They stared at the open door through which Jim had run to be lost in
the swarms of night between black canvases.
    The last electric light bulb went out.
    "We'll never find him now,"' said Will.
    "Yes," said his father, standing in the dark. "We'll find him."
    Where? Will thought, and stopped.
    Far down the midway, the carousel steamed, the calliope tortured
itself with musics.
    There, thought Will. If Jim's anywhere, its there, to the music, old
funny Jim, the free-ride ticket hid in his pocket still, I bet! Oh, damn
Jim, damn him, damn him! he cried, and then thought, no! don't you, he's
damned already, or near it! So how do we find him in the dark, no
matches, no lights, just the two of us, all of them, and us alone in
their territory?
    "How-" said Will, aloud.
    But his father said "There," very softly. With gratitude.
    And Will stepped to the door, which was lighter now.
    The moon! Thank God.
    It was rising from the hills.
   "The police . . . ?"
    "No time. It's the next few minutes or nothing. Three people we got
to worry about-"
    "The freaks!"
    "Three people, Will. Number one, Jim, number two, Mr. Cooger frying
in his Electric Chair. Niunber three, Mr. Dark and his skinful of souls.
Save one, kick the other two to hell and gone. Then I think the freaks
go, too. You ready, Will?"
    Will eyed the door, the tents, the dark, the sky with new light
paling it.
    "God bless the moon."
    Hands tight together, they stepped out the door.
    As if to greet them, the wind flung up and down all the tent
canvases in a great prehistoric thunder-kite display of leprous wings.
51
They ran in urine smell of shadow, they ran in clean ice smell of moon.
    The calliope steam-throb whispered, tatted, trilled.
    The music! thought Will, is it running backward or forward?
    "Which way?" Dad whispered.
    "Through here!" Will pointed.
    A hundred yards off, beyond a foothill of tents, there was a flare
of blue light, sparks jumped up and fell away, then dark again.
    Mr. Electrico! Thought Will. They're trying to move him, sure! Get
him to the merry-go-round, kill or cure! And if they cure him, then, oh
gosh, then, it's angry him and angry Illustrated Man against just Dad
and me! And Jim? Well, where was Jim? This way one day, that way the
next, and . . . tonight? Whose side would he wind up on? Ours! Old
friend Jim! Ours, of course! But Will trembled. Did friends last
forever, then? For eternity, could they be counted to a warm, round, and
handsome sum?
    Will glanced left.
    The Dwarf stood half enfolded by tent flaps, waiting motionless.
    "Dad, look," cried Will, softly. "And there-the Skeleton."
    Further over, the tall man, the man all marble bone and Egyptian
papyrus stood like a dead tree.
    "The freaks-why don't they stop us?"
    "Scared."
    "Of us?!"
    Will's father crouched and squinted out from around an empty cage.
    "They're walking wounded, anyway. They saw what happened to the
Witch. That's the only answer. Look at them."
    And there they stood, like uprights, like tent poles spotted all
through the meadow grounds, hiding in shadow, waiting. For what? Will
swallowed, hard. Maybe not hiding at all, but spread out for the running
fight to come. At the right time, Mr. Dark would yell and they'd just
circle in. But the time wasn't right. Mr. Dark was busy. When he'd done
what must be done, then he'd give  that yell. So? So, thought Will, we
got to see he never yells at all.
    Will's feet slithered in the grass.
    Will's father moved ahead.
    The freaks watched with moon-glass eyes as they passed.
    The calliope changed. It whistled sadly, sweetly, around a curve of
tents, around a riverflow of darkness.
    It's going ahead! thought Will. Yes! It was going backward. But now
it stopped and started again, and this time forward! What's Mr. Dark up
to?
    "Jim!" Will burst out.
    "Sh!" Dad shook him.
    But the name had tumbled from his mouth only because he heard the
calliope summing the golden years ahead, felt Jim isolate somewhere,
pulled by warm gravities, swung by sunrise notes, wondering what it
could be like to stand sixteen, seventeen, eighteen years tall, and
then, oh then, nineteen and, most incredible! -twenty! The great wind of
time blew in the brass pipes, a fine, a jolly, a summer tune, promising
everything and even Will, hearing, began to run toward the music that
grew up like a peach tree full of sun-ripe fruit-
    No! he thought.
    And instead made his feet step to his own fear, jump to his own
tune, a hum cramped back by throat, held fast by lungs, which shook the
bones of his head and drowned the calliope away.
    "There," said Dad softly.
    And between the tents, ahead, in transit, they saw a grotesque
parade. Like a dark sultan in a palanquin, a half-familiar figure rode a
chair borne on the shoulders of assorted sizes and shapes of darkness.
    At Dad's cry, the parade jolted, then broke into a run!
    "Mr. Electrico!" said Will.
    They're taking him to the carousel!
    The parade vanished.
    A tent lay between them.
    "Around here!" Will jumped, pulling his father. The calliope played
sweet. To pull Jim, to draw Jim. And when the parade arrived with
Electrico? Back the music would spin, back the carousel run, to shard
away his skin, to freshen forth his years! Will stumbled, fell. Dad
picked him up.
    And then . . .
    There arose a human barking, yapping, baying, whining, as if all had
fallen. In a long-drawn moan, a gasp, a shuddering sigh, an entire crowd
of people with crippled throats made chorus together.
    "Jim! They've got Jim!"
    "No . . ." murmured Charles Halloway, strangely. "Maybe Jim . . . or
us . . . got them."
    They stepped around the last tent.
    Wind blew dust in their faces.
    Will clapped his hand up, squinched his nose. The dust was antique
spice, burnt maple leaves, a prickling blue that teemed and sifted to
earth. Swarming its own shadows, the dust filtered over the tents.
    Charles Halloway sneezed. Figures jumped and scurried away from an
upended, half-tilted object abandoned half-way between one tent and the
carousel.
    The object was the electric chair, capsized, with straps dangling
from wooden arms and legs, and a metal headcap hanging from its top.
    "But," said Will. "Where's Mr. Electrico!? I mean Mr. Cooger!?"
    "That must have been him."
    "What must have been him?"
    But the answer was there, sifting down the midway in the whorling
wind devils . . . the burnt spice, the autumn incense that had floured
them when they turned this comer.
    Kill or cure, Charles Halloway thought. He imagined them rushed in
the last few seconds, toting the ancient dustsack boneheap over starched
grasses in his disconnected chair, perhaps only one in a running series
of attempts to foster, encourage, preserve life in what was really
nothing but a mortuary junkpile, rust-flakes and dying coals that no
wind could blow alight again. Yet they must try. How many times in the
last twenty-four hours had they run out on such excursions, only, in
panic, to cease activity because the merest jolt, the slightest breath,
threatened to shake old ancient Cooger down to mealmush and chaff?
Better to leave him propped in electric-warm chair, a continual exhibit,
an ever-going-on performance for gaping audiences, and try again, but
especially try now, when, lights out, and crowds herded off in the dark,
all threatened by one smile on a bullet, there was need of Cooger as he
once was, tall, flame-headed, and riven with earthquake violence. But
somewhere, twenty seconds, ten seconds ago, the last glue crumbled, the
last bolt of life fell free, and the mummy-doll, the Erector-set
grotesque disencumbered itself in smoke puffs and November leaflets, a
broadcast of mortality along the wind. Mr. Cooger, threshed in a final
harvest, was now a billion parchment flecks, tumbled sea-scrolls capered
in meadows. A mere dust explosion in a silo of ancient grain: gone.
    "Oh, no. no, no,, no,, no," someone murmured.
    Charles Halloway touched Will's arm.
    Will stopped saying "Oh, no, no, no." He, too, in the last few
moments, had thought the same as his father, of the toted corpse, the
strewn bone-meal, the mineral-enriched hills of grass. . . .
    Now there was only the empty chair and the last particles of mica,
the radiant motes of peculiar dirt crusting the straps. And the freaks,
who had been toting the baroque dump, now fled to shadows.
    We made them run, thought Will, but something made them drop it!
    No, not something. Someone.
    Will flexed his eyes.
    The carousel, deserted, empty, traveled on its way through its own
special time, forward.
    But between the fallen chair and the carousel, standing alone, was
that a freak? No . . .
    "Jim!"
    Dad knocked his elbow and Will shut up.
    Jim, he thought.
    And where, now, was Mr. Dark?
    Somewhere. For he had started the carousel, hadn't he? Yes! To draw
them, to draw Jim, and-what else? Right now there was no time, for-
    Jim turned from the spilled chair, turned and walk slowly toward the
free, free ride.
    He was going where he had always known he must go.
    Like a weather vane in wild seasons he had tremored this way,
wandered that, hesitated upon bright horizons and warm directions, only
at last now to tilt and, half sleep-walking, tremble about in the bright
brass pull and summer march of music. He could not look away.
    Another step, and then another, toward the merry-go-round, there
went Jim.
    "Go get him, Will," said his father.
    Will went.
    Jim raised his right hand.
    The brass poles flashed by into the future, pulling the flesh like
syrup, stretching the bones like taffy, the sunmetal color burning Jim's
cheeks, flinting his eyes.
    Jim reached. The brass poles flick-knocked his fingernails, tinkling
their own small tune.
    "Jim!"
    The brass poles chopped by in a yellow sunrise at night.
    The music leaped in a clear fountain, high.
    Eeeeeeeeeeeeeee.
    Jim opened his mouth with the same cry:
    "Eeeeeeeeeeeeee!"
    "Jim!" cried Will, running.
    Jim's palm slapped one brass pole. The pole whipped on.
    He slapped another brass pole. This time, his palm glued itself
tight.
    Wrist followed fingers, arm followed wrist, shoulder and body
followed arm. Jim, sleepwalked, was torn from his roots in the earth.
    "Jim!"
    Will reached, felt Jim's foot flick from his grasp.
    Jim swung round the waiting night in a great dark summer circle,
Will racing after.
    "Jim, get off! Jim, don't leave me here!"
    Flung by centrifuge, Jim grasped the pole with one hand, spun, and,
as if by some lone lost and final instinct, gestured his other hand free
to trail on the wind, the one part of him, the small white separate part
that still remembered their friendship.
    "Jim, jump!!"
    Will snatched for that hand, missed, stumbled, almost fell. The
first race was lost. Jim must circle once, alone. Will stood waiting the
next charge of horses, the fling-about of boy not-so-much boy-
    "Jim! Jim!"
    Jim awoke! Circled half round, his face showed now July, now
December. He seized the pole, bleating out his despair. He wanted, he
did not want. He wished, he rejected, he ardently wished again, in
flight, in heat-spell river of wind and blaze of metal, in jog of July
and August horses whose hoofs thudded the air like thrown fruit, his
eyes blazed. Tongue clamped in teeth, he hissed his frustration.
    ""Jim! Jump! Dad, stop the machine!"
    Charles Halloway turned to see where the control box stood, fifty
feet off.
    "Jim!" Will's side was stabbed with pain. "'I need you! Come back!"
    And, far over away on the far side of the carousel, traveling,
fast-traveling, Jim fought with his own hands, the pole, the empty
wind-whipped journey, the growing night, the wheeling stars. He let go
the pole. He grabbed it. And still his right hand trailed down and out,
begging Will's last full ounce of strength.
    "Jim!"
    Jim came around. There, below, in the black-night station from which
this train pulled away forever in a flurry of ticket-punch confetti, he
saw Will-Willy-William Halloway, young pal, young friend who would seem
younger still at the end of this journey, and not just young but
unknown! vaguely remembered from some other time in some other year . .
. but now that boy, that friend, that younger friend, ran along by the
train, reached up, asking passage? or demanding he get off? which?!
    "Jim! Remember me?"
    Will lunged his final lunge. Fingers touched fingers, palm touched
palm.
    Jim's face, white cold, stared down.
    Will trot-paced the circling machine.
    Where was Dad? Why didn't he shut it off?
    Jim's hand was a warm hand, a familiar, a good hand. It closed on
his. He gripped it yelling.
    "Jim, please!"
    But still they spun on the journey, Jim borne, Will dragged in a
jog-crazy-trot.
    "Please!"
    Will jerked. Jim jerked. Trapped by Jim, Will's hand was shot with
July heat. It went, like a kept animal, held and fondled by Jim, along,
around, into older times. So his hand, far-traveling, would be alien to
himself, knowing things by night that he himself, abed, might only
guess. Fourteen-year boy, fifteen-year hand! Jim had it, yes! cramped it
tight, would not let go! And Jim's face, was it older, from the journey
round? Was he fifteen now, going on sixteen!?
    Will pulled. Jim pulled opposite.
    Will fell on the machine.
    Both rode the night.
    All of Will rode with friend Jim now.
    "Jim! Dad!"
    How easy it might be to just stand, ride, go round with Jim, if he
couldn't pull Jim off, just leave him on and, dear pals, travel! The
juices of his body swam, binding his sight, they drummed his ears, shot
electric jolts through his loins. . . .
    Jim shouted. Will shouted.
    They traveled half a year in slithering orchard-warm dark before
Will seized Jim's arm tight and dared to leap from so much promise, so
many fine tall-growing years, flail out, off, down, pull Jim with. But
Jim could not let go the pole, could not give up the ride.
    "Will!"
    Jim, half between machine and friend, one hand on each, screamed.
    It was like a great tearing of cloth or flesh.
    Jim's eyes went blind as a statue's.
    The carousel whirled.
    Jim screamed, fell, spun crazily, on the air.
    Will tried to break his fall, but Jim struck earth rolling. He lay,
silent.
    Charles Halloway hit the carousel control switch. Empty, the machine
slowed. Its horses paced themselves down from their trot toward some far
midsummer night.
    Together, Charles Halloway and his son knelt by Jim to touch his
wrist, to put ear to his chest. Jim's eyes, skinned white, were fixed on
the stars.
    "Oh. God," cried Will. "Is he dead?"
52
"Dead . . . ?"
    Will's father moved his hand over that cold face, the cold chest.
    "'I don't feel . . .
    A long way off, someone cried for help.
    They looked up.
    A boy came running down the midway bumping into the ticket booths,
falling over tent ropes, looking back over his shoulder.
    "Help! He's after me!" the boy cried. "The terrible man! The
terrible man! I want to go home!"
    The boy flung himself forward, and grabbed at Will's father.
    "Oh, help, I'm lost, I don't like it. Take me home. That man with
the tattoos!"
    "'Mr. Dark!" gasped Will.
    "Yes!" gibbered the boy. "He's down that way! Oh, stop him!"
    "Will-" his father rose-"take care of Jim. Artificial respiration.
All right, boy."
    The boy trotted off. "This way!"
    Following, Charles Halloway watched the distraught boy who led him;
observed his head, his frame, the way his pelvis hung from his spine.
    "Boy," he said, by the shadowed merry-go-round, twenty feet around
from where Will bent to Jim. "What's your name?"
    "No time!" cried the boy. "Jed. Quick, quick!"
    Charles Halloway stopped.
    "Jed," he said. The boy no longer moved, but turned, chafing his
elbows. "How old are you, Jed?"
    "Nine!" said the boy. "My gosh, this is no time! We-"
    "This is a fine time, Jed," said Charles Halloway. "Only nine? So
young. I was never that young."
    "Holy cow!" shouted the boy, angrily.
    "Or unholy something," said the man, and reached out. The boy backed
away. "You're only afraid of one man, Jed. Me."
    "You?" The boy still backed off. "Cut it out! Why, why?"
    "Because, sometimes good has weapons and evil none. Sometimes tricks
fail. Sometimes people can't be picked off, led to deadfalls. No
divide-and-conquer tonight, Jed. Where were you taking me, Jed? To some
lion's cage you got fixed and ready? To some side show, like the
mirrors? To someone like the Witch? What, what, Jed, what? Let's just
roll up your right shirt sleeve, shall we, Jed?"
    The great moonstone eyes flashed at Charles Halloway.
    The boy leaped back, but not before the man had leaped with him,
seized his arm, grabbed the back of his shirt and instead of simply
rolling up the sleeve as first suggested, tore the entire shirt off the
boy's body.
    "Why, yes, Jed," said Charles Halloway, almost quietly. "Just as I
thought."
    "You, you, you, you!"
    "Yes, Jed, me. But especially you, look at you."
    And look he did.
    For there, on the back of the small boy's hand, on the fingers, and
up along the wrist scrambled blue serpents, blue-venomed snake eyes,
blue scorpions scuttling about blue shark maws which gaped eternally
hungry to feed upon all the freaks crammed and stung-sewn cheek by jowl,
skin to skin, flesh to flesh all up and down the chest, the tiny torso,
and tucked in the secret gathering places on this small small very small
body, this cold and now shocked and trembling body.
    "Why, Jed, that's fine artwork, that is."
    "You!" The boy struck.
    "Yes, still me." Charles Halloway took the blow in the face and
clamped a vise, on the boy.
    "No!"
    "Oh, yes," said Charles Halloway, using just his good right hand,
his ruined left hand hanging limp. "Yes, Jed, jump, squirm, go ahead. It
was a fine idea. Get me off alone, fix me, then go back and get Will.
And when the police come, why, you're just a boy nine or ten and the
carnival, oh, no, it's not yours, doesn't belong to you. Stay here, Jed.
Why you trying to get out from under my arm? The police look and the
owners of the show have vanished, isn't that it., Jed? A fine escape."
    "You can't hurt me!" the boy shrieked.
    "Funny," said Charles Halloway. "I think I can"
    He pressed the boy, almost lovingly, close, very close.
    "Murder!" wailed the boy. "Murder."
    "I'm not going to murder you, Jed, Mr. Dark, whoever, whatever you
are. You're going to murder yourself because you can't stand being near
people like me, not this close, close, not this long."
    "Evil!" groaned the boy, writhing. "You're evil!"
    "Evil?" Will's father laughed, which made the boy, wasp-stung and
brambled by the sound, jerk all the more violently. "Evil?" The man's
hands were flypaper fastened to the small bones. "Strange hearing that
from you, Jed. So it must seem. Good to evil seems evil. So I will do
only good to you, Jed. I will simply hold you and watch you poison
yourself. I will do good to you, Jed, Mr. Dark, Mr. Proprietor, boy,
until you tell what's wrong with Jim. Wake him up. Let him free. Give
him life!"
    "Can't . . . can't. . . . " The boy's voice fell down a well inside
his body, fading away, away "can't. . . ."
    "You mean you won't?"
    " . . . can't . . ."
    "All right, boy, all right, then here and here and this and this . .
."
    They looked like father and son long apart, passionately met,
embraced, yet more embraced, as the man lifted his wounded hand to
gently touch the stricken face as the crowd, the teem, of illustrations
shivered and flew now this way and that in microscopic forays quickly
abandoned. The boy's eyes swiveled wildly, fixed upon the manes mouth.
He saw there the strange and somehow lovely smile once flung as
beatification to the Witch.
    He gathered the boy somewhat closer and thought, Evil has only the
power that we give it. I give you nothing. I take back. Starve. Starve.
Starve.
    The two matchstick lights in the boy's affrighted eyes blew out.
    The boy, and his stricken and bruised conclave of monsters, his felt
but half-seen crowd, fell to earth.
    There should have been a roar like a mountain slid to ruin.
    But there was only a rustle, like a Japanese paper lantern dropped
in the dust.
53
Charles Halloway stood for a long while, breathing deep, lungs aching,
looking down at the body. The shadows swooned and fluttered in all the
canvas alleys where odd assorted sizes of freaks and people, fleshed in
their own terrors and sins, held to poles, moaning in disbelief.
Somewhere, the Skeleton moved out in the light. Somewhere else, the
Dwarf almost knew who he was, and scuttled forth like a crab from a cave
to blink and blink again at Will bent working over Jim, at Will's father
bent to exhaustion over the still form of the silent boy, while the
merry-go-round, at last, slow, slow, came to a stop, rocking like a
ferryboat in the watery-blowing grass.
    The carnival was a great dark hearth lit with gathered coals, as
shadows came to stare and fire their gaze with the tableau by the
carousel.
    There in the moonlight lay the, illustrated boy named Dark.
    There lay dragons slaughtered, towers ruined, monsters from dim ages
toppled into rusted coinages pterodactyls smashed like biplanes from old
and always meaningless wars, crustacea the color of emeralds abandoned
on a white sand shore where the tide of life was going out, all, all the
illustrations changing now, shifting, shriveling as the small flesh
cooled. There the obscene wink of the navel eye gasped in on itself,
there the nipple-iris of a trumpeting mastodon went blind and raved at
its blindness; each and every picture remembered from the tall Mr. Dark
now rendered down to miniature canvas pronged and forked over a boy's
tennis-racket bones.
    More freaks, with faces the color of beds where so many had lost the
battle of souls, emerged from the shadows to glide in a great and ever
more curious carousel motion about Charles Halloway and his dropped
burden.
    Will paused in his desperate push and relaxation, push and
relaxation, trying to shape Jim back to life, unafraid of the watchers
in the dark, no time for that! Even if there were time, these freaks, he
sensed, were breathing the night as if they had not been fed on such
rare fine air in years!
    And as Charles Halloway watched, and the fox-fire, lobster-moist,
phlegm-trapped eyes watched from distances, the
boy-who-had-been-Mr.-Dark grew yet colder, as death cut the timbers of
nightmares, and the calligraphies, the smoky lightnings of sketch that
coiled and crouched and soared like terrible banners of a lost war,
began to vanish one by one from the strewn small body.
    A score of freaks glanced fearfully round as if the moon had
suddenly filled itself full and they could see; they chafed their wrists
as if chains had fallen from them, chafed their necks as if weights had
crumbled from their bowed shoulders. Stumbled forth after long
entombments, they blinked swiftly, disbelieving the packet of their
misery sprawled near the spent carousel. If they dared they might have
bent to tremble their hands over that suddenly death-sweet mouth, the
marbling brow. As it was they watched, benumbed, as their portrait
pictures, the vital stuffs of their mortal greed, rancor, and poisonous
guilt, the emerald abstracts of their self-blinded eyes, self-wounded
mouths, self-trapped bodies melted one by one from this insignificant
mound of snow. There melted the Skeleton! there the sidewise-scuttling
crayfish Dwarf! Now the Lava Sipper took leave of autumn flesh, followed
by the black Executioner from London Dock, there soared off and gone
went the Human Montgolfier, the Balloon Man, Avoirdupois the
Magnificent! deflated to purest air, there! there fled mobs and bands,
as death washed the drawing board clean!
    Now there lay just a plain dead boy, unbruised by pictures, staring
up at the stars with Mr. Dark's empty eyes.
    "Ahhhh . . ."
    In a chorus of release, the strange people in the shadows sighed.
    Perhaps the calliope gave a last ringmaster's bark. Perhaps thunder
turned, sleeping, in the clouds. Suddenly all wheeled about. The freaks
stampeded. North, south, east, west, free of tent, master, dark law,
free above all of each other, they ran like albino pigs, tuskless boars,
and stricken sloths before storms.
    It must have been, it seemed, each yanked a rope, loosed a tent-peg,
running.
    For now the sky was shaken with a fatal respiration, the breathing
down, the insunk rattle and pule of collapsing darkness as the tents
gave way.
    With hiss of viper, swirl of cobra, the ropes insanely raveled,
slithered, snapped, cut grass with frictioned whips.
    The networks of the vast Main Freak Tent convulsed, parted bones,
small from medium, and medium from brontosaur magnificent. All swayed
with impending fall.
    The menagerie tent shut up like a dark Spanish fan.
    Other small tents, caped figures in the meadow, fell down at the
wind's command.
    Then at last, the Freak Tent, the great melancholy mothering reptile
bird, after a moment of indecision, sucked in a Niagara of blizzard air,
broke loose three hundred hempen snakes, crack-rattled its black
sidepoles so they fell like teeth from a cyclopean jaw, slammed the air
with acres of moldered wing as if trying to kite away but,
earth-tethered, must succumb to plain and most simple gravity, must be
crushed by its own locked bulk.
    Now this greatest tent stated out hot raw breaths of earth, confetti
that was ancient when the canals of Venice were not yet staked, and
wafts of pink cotton candy like tired feather boas. In rushing
downfalls, the tent shed skin; grieved, soughed as flesh fell away until
at last the tall museum timbers at the spine of the discarded monster
dropped with three cannon roars.
    The calliope simmered, moronic with wind.
    The train stood, an abandoned toy, in a field.
    The freak oil paintings clapped hands high on the last standing
pennant poles, then plummeted to earth.
    The Skeleton, the only strange one left, bent to pick up the body of
the porcelain boy-who-was-Mr. Dark. He moved away into the fields.
    Will, in a swift moment, saw the thin man and his burden go over a
hill among all the footprints of the vanished carnival race.
    Will's face shadowed this way, then that, pulled by the swift
concussions, the tumults, the deaths, the fleeing away of souls. Cooger,
Dark, Skeleton, Dwarf-who-was-Lightning-Rod-Salesman, don't run, come
back! Miss Foley, where are you? Mr. Crosetti! it's over! Be still!
Quiet! It's all right. Come back, come back!
    But the wind was blowing their footprints out of the grass and they
might run forever now trying to outflee themselves.
    So Will turned back astride Jim and pushed the chest and let go,
pushed and let go, then, trembling, touched his dear friend's cheek.
    "Jim . . . ?"
    But Jim was cold as spaded earth.
54
Beneath the cold was a fugitive warmness, in the white skin lay some
small color, but when Will felt Jim's wrist there was nothing and when
he put his ear to the chest there was nothing.
    "He's dead!"
    Charles Halloway came to his son and his son's friend and knelt down
to touch the quiet throat, the unstirred rib cage.
    "No." Puzzled. "Not quite . . ."
    "Dead!"
    The tears burst from Wills eyes. But then, as swiftly, be felt
himself knocked, struck, shaken.
    "Stop that!" cried his father. "You want to save him?!"
    "It's too late, oh, Dad!"
    "Shut up! Listen!"
    But Will wept.
    And again his father hauled off and hit him. Once on the left cheek.
Once on the right cheek, hard.
    All the tears in him were knocked flying; there were no more.
    "Will!" His father savagely jabbed a finger at him and at Jim. "Damn
it, Willy, all this, all these, Mr. Dark and his sort, they like crying,
my God, they love tears! Jesus God, the more you bawl, the more they
drink the salt off your chin. Wail and they suck your breath like cats.
Get up! Get off your knees, damn it! Jump around! Whoop and holler! You
hear! Shout, Will, sing, but most of all laugh, you got that, laugh!"
    "I can't!"
    "You must! It's all we got. I know! In the library! The Witch ran,
my God, how she ran! I shot her dead with it. A single smile, Willy, the
night people can't stand it. The sun's there. They hate the sun. We
can't take them seriously, Will!"
    "But-"
    "But hell! You saw the mirrors! And the mirrors shoved me half in,
half out the grave. Showed me all wrinkles and rot! Blackmailed me!
Blackmailed Miss Foley so she joined the grand march Nowhere, joined the
fools who wanted everything! Idiot thing to want: everything! Poor
damned fools. So wound up with nothing like, the dumb dog who dropped
his bone to go after the reflection of the bone in the pond. Will, you
saw: every mirror fell. Like ice in a thaw. With no rock or rifle, no
knife, just my teeth, tongue and lungs, I gunshot those mirrors with
pure contempt! Knocked down ten million scared fools and let the real
man get to his feet! Now, on your feet, Will!"
    "But Jim-" Will faltered.
    "Half in, half out. Jim's been that, always. Sore-tempted. Now he
went too far and maybe he's lost. But he fought to save himself, right?
Put his hand out to you, to fall free of the machine? So we finish that
fight for him. Move!"
    Will sailed up, giddily, yanked.
    "Run!"
    Will sniffed again. Dad slapped his face. Tears flew like meteors.
    "Hop! Jump! Yell!"
    He banged Will ahead, shuffled with him, shoved his hand in his
pockets, tearing them inside out until he pulled forth a bright object.
    The harmonica.
    Dad blew a chord.
    Will stopped, staring down at Jim.
    Dad clouted him on the car.
    "Run! Don't look!"
    Will ran a step.
    Dad blew another chord, yanked Will's elbow, flung each of his arms.
    "Sing!"
    "What?"
    "God, boy, anything!"
    The harmonica tried a bad "Swanee River."
    "Dad." Will shuffled, shaking his head, immensely tired. "Silly . .
. !"
    "Sure! We want that! Silly damn fool man! Silly harmonica! Bad
off-key tune!"
    Dad whooped. He circled like a dancing crane. He was not in the
silliness yet. He wanted to crack through. He had to break the moment!
    "Will: louder, funnier, as the man said! Oh, hell, don't let them
drink your tears and want more! Will! Don't let them take your crying,
turn it upside down and use it for their own smile! I'll be damned if
death wears my sadness for glad rags. Don't feed them one damn thing,
Willy, loosen your bones! Breathe! Blow!"
    He seized Will's hair, shook him.
    "Nothing . . . funny. . ."
    "Sure there is! Me! You! Jim! All of us! The whole shooting works!
Look!"
    And Charles Halloway pulled faces, popped his eyes, mashed his nose,
winked, cavorted like chimpanzee-ape, waltzed with the wind, tap-danced
the dust, threw back his head to bay at the moon, dragging Will with
him.
    "Death's funny, God damn it! Bend, two, three, Will. Soft-shoe. Way
down upon the Swanee River-what's next, Will? . . . Far far away! Will,
your God-awful voice! Damn girl soprano. Sparrow in a tin can. Jump,
boy!"
    WM went up, came down, cheeks hotter, a wincing like lemons in his
throat. He felt balloons grow in his chest.
    Dad sucked the silver harmonica.
    "That's where the old folks-" Will spoke.
    "Stay!" bellowed his father.
    Shuffle, tap, bounce, jog.
    Where was Jim! Jim was forgotten.
    Dad jabbed his ribs, tickling.
    "De Camptown ladies sing this song!"
    "Doo-dah!" yelled Will. "Doo-dah!" he sang it now, with a tune. The
balloon grew. His throat tickled.
    "Camptown race track, five miles long!"
    "Oh, doo-dah day!"
    Man and boy did a minuet.
    And in midstep it happened.
    Will felt the balloon grow huge within him.
    He smiled.
    "'What?" Dad was surprised by those teeth.
    Will snorted. Will giggled.
    "What say?" asked Dad.
    The force of the exploding warm balloon alone shoved Will's teeth
apart, kicked his head back.
    "Dad! Dad!"
    He bounded. He grabbed his Dad's hand. He raced crazily, hollering,
quacking like a duck, clucking like a chicken. His palms hit his
throbbing knees. Dust flow off his soles.
    "Oh, Susanna!"
    "Oh, don't you cry-"
    "-for me!"
    "For I'm come from-"
    "Alabama with my-"
    "Banjo on my-"
    Together. "Knee!"
    The harmonica knocked teeth, wheezing, Dad hocked forth great chords
of squeeze-eyed hilarity, turning in a circle, jumping up to kick his
heels.
    "Ha!" They collided, half-collapsed, knocked elbows, cracked heads,
which blew the air out faster. "Ha! Oh God, ha! Oh God. Will, Ha! Weak!
Ha!"
    In the middle of wild laughter-
    A sneeze!
    They spun. They stared.
    Who lay there on the moonlit earth?
    Jim? Jim Nightshade?
    Had he stirred? Was his mouth wider, his eyelids quivering? Were his
cheeks pinker?
    Don't took! Dad swung Will handily round in a further reel. They
do-si-doed, hands extended, the harmonica seeping and guzzling raw tunes
from a father who storked his legs and turkeyed his arms. They hopped
Jim one way, hopped back, as if he were but a lump-stone on the grass.
    "Someone's in the kitchen with Dinah! Someone's in the kitchen-"
    "-I know-oh-oh-oh!"
    Jim's tongue slid out on his lips.
    No one saw this. Or if they saw, ignored it, fearing it might pass.
    Jim did the final things himself. His eyes opened. He watched the
dancing fools. He could not believe. He had been off on a journey of
years. Now, returned, no one said "Hi!" All jigged Sambo-style. Tears
might have jumped to his eyes. But before they could start, Jim's mouth
curved. He gave up a ghost of laughter. For, after all there indeed was
silly Will and his silly old janitor dad racing like gorillas
knuckle-dusting the meadows, their faces a puzzlement. They toppled
above him, clapped bands, wiggled cars, bent to wash him all over with
their now bright full-river flowing laughter that could not be stopped
if the sky fell or the earth rent open, to blend their good mirth with
his, to fuse-light and set him off in a detonation which could not stop
exploding from ladyfingers to four-inchers to doomsday cannon crackers
of delight!
    And looking down, jolt-dancing his bones loose and delicious. Will
thought: Jim don't remember he was dead, so we won't tell, not now-some
day, sure, but not . . . Doo-dah! Doo-dah!
    They didn't even say "Hello, Jim" or "Join in the dance," they just
put out hands as if he had fallen from their swung pandemonium commotion
and needed a boost back into the swarm. They yanked Jim. Jim flew. Jim
came down dancing.
    And Will knew, hand in hand, hot palm to palm, they had truly
yelled, sung, gladly shouted the live blood back. They had slung Jim
like the newborn, knocked his lungs, slapped his back, shocked joyous
breath to where it made room.
    Then Dad bent and Will leaped over him and Will bent and Dad jumped
him and they both waited crouched in a line, wheezing songs, deliciously
tired, while Jim swallowed spit, and ran full tilt. He got half over Dad
when they all fell, rolled in the grass, all hoot-owl and donkey, all
brass and cymbal as it must have been the first year of Creation, and
Joy not yet thrown from the Garden.
    Until at last they drew up their feet, socked each other's
shoulders, embraced knees tight, rocking, and looking with swift bright
happiness at each other, growing wine-drunkenly quiet.
    And when they were done smiling at each other's faces as at burning
torches, they looked away across the field.
    And the black tent poles lay in elephant boneyards with the dead
tents blowing away like the petals of a great black rose.
    The only three people in a sleeping world, a rare trio of tomcats,
they basked in the moon.
    "What happened?" asked Jim, at last.
    "What didn't!" cried Dad.
    And they laughed again, when suddenly Will grabbed Jim, held him
tight and wept.
    "Hey," Jim said, over and over, quietly. "'Hey hey . . ."
    "Jim, Jim," Will said. "We'll be pals forever."
    "Sure, hey sure." Jim was very quiet now.
    "It's all right," said Dad. "Have a small cry. We're out of the
woods. Then we'll laugh some more, going home."
    Will let Jim go.
    They got to their feet and stood looking at each other Will examined
his father, with fierce pride.
    "Oh, Dad, Dad, you did it, you did it!"
    "No, we did it together."
    "But without you it'd all be over. Oh, Dad, I never knew you. I sure
know you now."
    "Do you, Will?"
    "Darn right!"
    Each, to the other, shimmered in bright halos of wet light.
    "Why then, hello. Reply, son, and curtsey."
    Dad held out his hand. Will shook it. Both laughed and wiped their
eyes, then looked quickly at the foot prints scattered in the dew over
the hills.
    "Dad, will they ever come back?"
    "No. And yes." Dad tucked away his harmonica. "No not them. But yes,
other people like them. Not in a carnival. God knows what shape they'll
come in next. But sunrise, noon, or at the latest, sunset tomorrow
they'll show. They're on the road."
    "Oh, no," said Will.
    "Oh, yes, said Dad. "We got to watch out the rest of our lives. The
fight's just begun."
    They moved around the carousel slowly.
    "'What will they look like? How will we know them?"
    "Why," said Dad, quietly, "maybe they're already here."
    Both boys looked around swiftly.
    But there was only the meadow, the machine, and themselves.
    Will looked at Jim, at his father, and then down at his own body and
hands. He glanced up at Dad.
    Dad nodded, once, gravely, and then nodded at the carousel, and
stepped up on it, and touched a brass pole.
    Will stepped up beside him. Jim stepped up beside Will.
    Jim stroked a horse's mane. Will patted a horse's shoulders.
    The great machine softly tilted in the tides of night.
    Just three times around, ahead, thought Will. Hey.
    Just four times around, ahead, thought Jim. Boy.
    Just ten times around, back, thought Charles Halloway.
    Lord.
    Each read the thoughts in the other's eyes.
    How easy, thought Will.
    Just this once, thought Jim.
    But then, thought Charles Halloway, once you start, you'd always
come back. One more ride and one more ride. And, after awhile, you'd
offer rides to friends, and more friends until finally . . .
    The thought hit them all in the same quiet moment.
    . . . finally you wind up owner of the carousel, keeper of the
freaks . . . proprietor for some small part of eternity of the traveling
dark carnival shows. . . .
    Maybe, said their eyes, they're already here.
    Charles Halloway stepped back into the machinery of the
merry-go-round, found a wrench, and knocked the flywheels and cogs to
pieces. Then he took the boys out and he hit the control box one or two
times until it broke and scattered fitful lightnings.
    "Maybe this isn't necessary," said Charles Halloway. "Maybe it
wouldn't run anyway, without the freaks to give it power. But-" He hit
the box a last time and threw down the wrench.
    "It's late. Must be midnight straight up."
    Obediently, the City Hall clock, the Baptist church clock, the
Methodist, the Episcopalian, the Catholic church, all the clocks, struck
twelve. The wind was seeded with Time.
    "Last one to the railroad semaphore at Green Crossing is an old
lady!"
    The boys fired themselves off like pistols.
    The father hesitated only a moment. He felt the vague pain in his
chest. If I run, he thought, what will happen? Is Death important? No.
Everything that happens before Death is what counts. And we've done fine
tonight. Even Death can't spoil it. So, there went the boys and why not
. . . follow?
    He did just that.
    And Lord! it was fine printing their life in the dew on the cool
fields that new dark suddenly-like-Christmas morning. The boys ran as
tandem ponies, knowing that someday one would touch base first, and the
other second or not at all, but now this first minute of the new morning
was not the minute or the day or morning of ultimate loss. Now was not
the time to study faces to see if one was older and the other too much
younger. Today was just another day in October in a year suddenly better
than anyone supposed it could ever be just a short hour ago, with the
moon and the stars moving in a grand rotation toward inevitable dawn,
and them loping, and the last of this night's weeping done, and Will
laughing and singing and Jim giving answer line by line, as they
breasted the waves of dry stubble toward a town where they might live
another few years across from each other.
    And behind them jogged a middle-aged man with his own now solemn,
now amiable, thoughts.
    Perhaps the boys slowed. They never knew. Perhaps Charles Halloway
quickened his pace. He could not say.
    But, running even with the boys, the middle-aged man reached out.
    Will slapped, Jim slapped, Dad slapped the semaphore signal base at
the same instant.
    Exultant, they banged a trio of shouts down the wind.
    Then, as the moon watched, the three of them together left the
wilderness behind and walked into the town.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