                                 
                        The Best of All Possible Worlds
                                      1963

     The two men sat swaying side by side, unspeaking for the long while it took
for  the  train  to  move through cold December twilight, pausing at one country
station  after  another.  As the twelfth depot was left behind, the older of the
two men muttered, "Idiot, Idiot!" under his breath.
     "What?" The younger man glanced up from his Times.
     The  old man nodded bleakly. "Did you see that damn fool rush off just now,
stumbling after that woman who smelled of Chanel?"
     "Oh,  her?" The young man looked as if he could not decide whether to laugh
or be depressed. "I followed her off the train once myself."
     The old man snorted and closed his eyes. "I too, five years ago."
     The young man stared at his companion as if he had found a friend in a most
unlikely spot.
     "Did - did the same thing happen once you reached the end of the platform?"
     "Perhaps. Go on."
     "Well,  I  was  twenty feet behind her and closing up fast when her husband
drove into the station with a carload of kids! Bang! The car door slammed. I saw
her  Cheshire-cat smile as she drove away. I waited half an hour, chilled to the
bone, for another train. It taught me something, by God!"
     "It  taught  you  nothing  whatsoever," replied the older man drily. "Idiot
bulls, that's all of us, you, me, them, silly boys jerking like laboratory frogs
if someone scratches our itch."
     "My  grandpa  once  said,  'Big  in the hunkus, small in the brain, that is
man's fate.'"
     "A wise man. But, now, what do you make of her?'
     "That  woman?  Oh,  she  likes to keep in trim. It must pep up her liver to
know  that  with  a  little mild eye-rolling she can make the lemmings swarm any
night  on  this train. She has the best of all possible worlds, don't you think?
Husband, children, plus the knowledge she's neat packaging and can prove it five
trips  a week, hurting no one, least of all herself. And, everything considered,
she's not much to look at. It's just she smells so good."
     "Tripe,"  said  the  old  man.  "It  won't wash. Purely and simply, she's a
woman.  All women are women, all men are dirty goats. Until you accept that, you
will be rationalizing your glands all your life. As it is, you will know no rest
until  you  are  seventy  or (hereabouts. Meanwhile, self-knowledge may give you
whatever  solace can be had in a sticky situation. Given all these essential and
inescapable  truths, few men ever strike a balance. Ask a man if he is happy and
he  will  immediately  think  you are asking if he is satisfied. Satiety is most
men's  Edenic dream. I have known only one man who came heir to the very best of
all possible worlds, as you used the phrase."
     "Good Lord," said the young man, his eyes shining, "I wouldn't mind hearing
about him."
     "I  hope  there's  time.  This  chap is the happiest ram, the most carefree
bull, in history. Wives and girl friends galore, as the sales pitch says. Yet he
has no qualms, guilts, no feverish nights of lament and self-chastisement."
     "Impossible," the young man put in. "You can't eat your cake and digest it,
too!"
     "He  did, he does, he will! Not a tremour, not a trace of moral seasickness
after  an  all-night  journey  over  a  choppy  sea  of innersprings! Successful
businessman.  Apartment  in New York on the best street, the proper height above
traffic,  plus  a  long-weekend Bucks County place on a more than correct little
country stream where he herds his nannies, the happy farmer. But I met him first
at  his  New  York apartment last year, when he had just married. At dinner, his
wife  was  truly gorgeous, snow-cream arms, fruity lips, an amplitude of harvest
land below the line, a plenitude above. Honey in the horn, the full apple barrel
through  winter,  she seemed thus to me and her husband, who nipped her bicep in
passing.  Leaving, at midnight, I found myself raising a hand to slap her on the
flat  of  her  flank  like  a  thoroughbred.  Falling down in the elevator, life
floated out from under me. I nickered."
     "Your  powers  of description," said the young commuter, breathing heavily,
"are incredible."
     "I  write advertising copy," said the older. "But to continue. I met let us
call  him  Smith  again  not  two  weeks  later. Through sheer coincidence I was
invited  to  crash  a  party  by a friend. When I arrived in Bucks County, whose
place  should  it turn out to be but Smith's! And near him, in the center of the
living room, stood this dark Italian beauty, all tawny panther, all midnight and
moonstones,  dressed  in  earth  colours, browns, siennas, tans, umbers, all the
tones of a riotously fruitful autumn. In the babble I lost her name. Later I saw
Smith  crush her like a great sunwarmed vine of lush October grapes in his arms.
Idiot  fool, I thought. Lucky dog, I thought. Wife in town, mistress in country.
He  is trampling out the vintage, et cetera, and all that. Glorious. But I shall
not stay for the wine festival, I thought, and slipped away, unnoticed."
     "I  can't  stand too much of this talk," said the young commuter, trying to
raise the window.
     "Don't interrupt," said the older man. "Where was I?"
     "Trampled. Vintage."
     "Oh,  yes!  Well,  as  the  party  broke  up,  I  finally caught the lovely
Italian's name. Mrs.Smith!"
     "He'd married again, eh?"
     "Hardly. Not enough time. Stunned, I thought quickly, He must have two sets
of  friends. One set knows his city wife. The other set knows this mistress whom
he calls wife. Smith's too smart for bigamy. No other answer. Mystery."
     "Go on, go on," said the young commuter feverishly.
     "Smith,  in  high spirits, drove me to the train station that night. On the
way he said, 'What do you think of my wives?'
     "'Wives, plural?' I said.
     "  'Plural,  hell,' he said. 'I've had twenty in the last three years, each
better  than  the  last! Twenty, count them, twenty! Here!' As we stopped at the
station  he  pulled out a thick photo wallet. He glanced at my face as he handed
it  over,  'No,  no,' he laughed, 'I'm not Bluebeard with a score of old theater
trunks in the attic crammed full of former mates. Look!'
     "I  flipped  the  pictures.  They  flew  by like an animated film. Blondes,
brunettes,  redheads,  the  plain, the exotic, the fabulously impertinent or the
sublimely  docile  gazed  out  at  me,  smiling,  frowning.  The flutter-flicker
hypnotized,  then  haunted  me. There was something terribly familiar about each
photo.
     " 'Smith,' I said, 'you must be very rich to afford all these wives.'
     " 'Not rich, no. Look again!'
     "I flipped the montage in my hands. I gasped. I knew.
     "  'The  Mrs.Smith  I  met tonight, the Italian beauty, is the one and only
Mrs.Smith,'  I  said.  'But,  at  the same time, the woman I met in New York two
weeks  ago  is  also  the  one and only Mrs. Smith. It can only follow that both
women are one and the same!'
     " 'Correct!' cried Smith, proud of my sleuthing.
     " 'Impossible!' I blurted out.
     "  'No,'  said  Smith,  elated.  'My  wife  is  amazing.  One of the finest
off-Broadway  actresses  when I met her. Selfishly I asked her to quit the stage
on  pain  of  severance  of  our mutual insanity, our rampaging up one side of a
chaise-longue and down the other. A giantess made dwarf by love, she slammed the
door  on the theater, to run down the alley with me. The first six months of our
marriage,  the earth did not move, it shook. But, inevitably, fiend that 1 am, I
began  to  watch various other women ticking by like wondrous pendulums. My wife
caught  me noting the time. Meanwhile, she had begun to cast her eyes on passing
theatrical  billboards. I found her nesting with the New York Times next-morning
reviews,  desperately  tearful. Crisis! How to combine two violent careers, that
of passion-disheveled actress and that of anxiously rambling ram?'
     "  'One  night,'  said  Smith,  'I  eyed  a  peach  Melba  that drifted by.
Simultaneously,  an  old playbill blew in the wind and clung to my wife's ankle.
It  was  as  if these two events, occurring within the moment, had shot a window
shade  with  a  rattling  snap clear to the top of its roll. Ligit poured in! My
wife  seized  my  arm.  Was  she or was she not an actress? She was! Well, then,
well!  She  sent  me  packing  for  twenty-four  hours,  wouldn't  let me in the
apartment,  as  she  hurried  about  some vast and exciting preparations. When I
returned  home  the  next afternoon at the blue hour, as the French say in their
always twilight language, my wife had vanished! A dark Latin put out her hand to
me.  "I  am  a  friend  of  your wife's," she said and threw herself upon me, to
nibble  my  ears, crack my ribs, until I held her, off and, suddenly suspicious,
cried,  "This is no woman I'm with - this is my wife!" And we both fell laughing
to  the floor. This was my wife, with a different cosmetic, different couturier,
different  posture  and  intonation.  "My  actress!" I said. "Your actress!" she
laughed.  "Tell  me  what  I  should  be  and I'll be it. Carmen? All right, I'm
Carmen.  Brunhild?  Why  not?  I'll  study,  create  and,  when  you grow bored,
re-create.  I'm  enrolled  at the Dance Academy. I'll learn to sit, stand, walk,
ten thousand ways. I'm chin deep in speech lessons, I'm signed at the Berlitz! I
am  also a member of the Yamayuki Judo Club -" "Good Lord," I cried, "what for?"
"This!" she replied, and tossed me head over heels into bed!'
     "  'Well,'  said  Smith, 'from that day on I've lived Reilly and nine other
Irishmen's  lives!  Unnumbered fancies have passed me in delightful shadow plays
of  women all colours, shapes, sizes, fevers! My wife, finding her proper stage,
our parlour, and audience, me, has fulfilled her need to be the greatest actress
in the land. Too small an audience? No! For I, with my ever-wandering tastes, am
there to meet her, whichever part she plays. My jungle talent coincides with her
wide-ranging  genius.  So,  caged at last, yet free, loving her I love everyone.
It's  the best of all possible worlds, friend, the best of all possible worlds.'
"
     There was a moment of silence.
     The train rumbled down the track in the new December darkness.
     The  two commuters, the young and the old, were thoughtful now, considering
the story just finished.
     At  last  the  younger ma n swallowed and nodded in awe. "Your friend Smith
solved his problem, all right."
     "He did."
     The young man debated a moment, then smiled quietly. "I have a friend, too.
His situation was similar, but - different. Shall I call him Quillan?"
     "Yes," said the old man, "but hurry. I get off soon."
     "Quillan,"  said  the  young  man  quickly,  "was in a bar one night with a
fabulous  redhead.  The  crowd  parted  before  her  like  the sea before Moses.
Miraculous,  I  thought,  revivifying,  beyond  the  senses!  A  week  later, in
Greenwich,  I  saw Quillan ambling along with a dumpy little woman, his own age,
of  course,  only  thirty-two,  but she'd gone to seed young. Tatty, the English
would   say;  pudgy,  snouty-nosed,  not  enough  make-up,  wrinkled  stockings,
spider's-nest  hair,  and  immensely  quiet;  she  was content to walk along, it
seemed,  just  holding  Quillan's  hand.  Ha,  I thought, here's his poor little
parsnip  wife who loves the earth he treads, while other nights he's out winding
up that incredible robot redhead! How sad, what a shame. And I went on my way.
     "A  month  later  I  met  Quillan  again.  He was about to dart into a dark
entranceway  in MacDougal Street, when he saw me. 'Oh, God!' he cried, sweating.
'Don't tell on me! My wife must never know!'
     "I was about to swear myself to secrecy when a woman called to Quillan from
a window above.
     "I glanced up. My jaw dropped.
     "There in the window stood the dumpy, seedy little woman!!
     "So  suddenly it was clear. The beautiful redhead was his wife! She danced,
she  sang, she talked loud and long, a brilliant intellectual, the goddess Siva,
thousand-limbed,  the  finest throw pillow ever sewn by mortal hand. Yet she was
strangely - tiring.
     "So my friend Quillan had taken this obscure Village room where, two nights
a  week,  he  could  sit  quietly  in the mouse-brown silence or walk on the dim
streets  with this good homely dumpy comfortably mute woman who was not his wife
at all, as I had quickly supposed, but his mistress!
     "I looked from Quillan to his plump companion in the window above and wrung
his hand with new warmth and understanding. 'Mum's the word!' I said. The last I
saw of them, they were seated in a delicatessen, Quillan and his mistress, their
eyes  gently touching each other, saying nothing, eating pastrami sandwiches. He
too had, if you think about it, the best of all possible worlds."
     The train roared, shouted its whistle and slowed. Both men, rising, stopped
and looked at each other in surprise. Both spoke at once:
     "You get off at this stop?"
     Both nodded, smiling.
     Silently  they  made  their way back and, as the train stopped in the chill
December night, alighted and shook hands.
     "Well, give my best to Mr. Smith."
     "And mine to Mr. Quillan!"
     Two  horns honked from opposite ends of the station. Both men looked at one
car.  A  beautiful  woman  was  in it. Both looked at the other car. A beautiful
woman was in it.
     They  separated,  looking  back  at  each  other  like two schoolboys, each
stealing a glance at the car toward which the other was moving.
     "I wonder," thought the old man, "if that woman down there is..."
     "I wonder," thought the young man, "if that lady in his car could be..."
     But both were running now. Two car doors slammed like pistol shots ending a
matinee.
     The cars drove off. The station platform stood empty. It being December and
cold, snow soon fell like a curtain.