prose_contemporaryRayBradburyThe Cold Wind and the WarmcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
The Cold Wind and the Warm
‘Good God in heaven, what’s that?’
‘What’s what?’
‘Are you blind, man, look!’
And Garrity, elevator operator, looked out to see what the hall porter
was staring at.
And in out of the Dublin morn, sweeping through the front doors of the
Royal Hibernian Hotel, along the entryway and to the registry was a tall
willowy man of some forty years followed by five short willowy youths of
some twenty years, a burst of bird song, their hands flapping all about
on the air as they passed, their eyes squinching, batting, and
flickering, their mouths pursed, their brows enlightened and then dark,
their color flushed and then pale, or was it both?, their voices now
flawless piccolo, now flute, now melodious oboe but always tuneful.
Carrying six monologues, all sprayed forth upon each other at once, in a
veritable cloud of self-commiseration, peeping and twitting the
discouragements of travel and the ardors of weather, thecorps de
balletas it were flew, cascaded, flowed eloquently in a greater bloom of
cologne by astonished hall porter and transfixed elevator man. They
collided deliciously to a halt at the desk where the manager glanced up
to be swarmed over by their music. His eyes made nice round o’s with no
centers in them.
‘What,’ whispered Garrity, ‘was that?’
‘You may well ask,’ said the porter.
At which point the elevator lights flashed and the buzzer buzzed.
Garrity had to tear his eyes off the summery crowd and heft himself
skyward.
‘We,’ said the tall slender man with a touch of gray at the temples,
‘should like a room, please.’
The manager remembered where he was and heard himself say, ‘Do you have
reservations, sir?’
‘Dear me, no,’ said the older man as the others giggled. ‘We flew in
unexpectedly from Taormina,’ the tall man with the chiseled features and
the moist flower mouth continued. ‘We were getting so awfully bored,
after a long summer, and someone said, Let’s have a complete change,
let’s do something wild. What? I said. Well, where’s the most improbable
place in the world? Let’s name it and go there. Somebody said the North
Pole, but that was silly. Then I cried, Ireland! Everyone fell down.
When the pandemonium ceased we just scrambled for the airport. Now
sunshine and Sicilian shorelines are like yesterday’s lime sherbet to
us, all melted to nothing. And here we are to do … somethingmysterious!’
‘Mysterious?’ asked the manager.
‘We don’t know what it is,’ said the tall man. ‘But we shall know it
when we see it, or it happens, or perhaps we shall have to make it
happen, right, cohorts?’
The cohorts responded with something vaguely like tee-hee.
‘Perhaps,’ said the manager, with good grace, ‘if you gave me some idea
what you’re looking for in Ireland, I could point out—’
‘Goodness, no,’ said the tall man. ‘We shall just plummet forth with our
intuitions scarved about our necks, taking the wind as ’twere and see
what we shall tune in on. When we solve the mystery and find what we
came to find, you will know of our discovery by the ululations and cries
of awe and wonder emanating from our small tourist group.’
‘You can saythatagain,’ said the hall porter, under his breath.
‘Well, comrades, let us sign in.’
The leader of the encampment reached for a scratchy hotel pen, found it
filthy, and flourished forth his own absolutely pure 14-carat solid gold
pen with which in an obscure but rather pretty cerise calligraphy he
inscribed the name DAVID followed by SNELL followed by dash and ending
with ORKNEY. Beneath, he added ‘and friends.’
The manager watched the pen, fascinated, and once more recalled his
position in all this. ‘But, sir, I haven’t said if we have space—’
‘Oh, surely you must, for six miserable wanderers in sore need of
respite from overfriendly airline stewardesses – one room would do it!’
‘One?’ said the manager, aghast.
‘We wouldn’t mind the crowd, would we, chums?’ asked the older man, not
looking at his friends.
No, they wouldn’t mind.
‘Well,’ said the manager, uneasily fumbling at the registry. ‘We just
happen to have two adjoining—’
‘Perfecto!’cried David Snell-Orkney.
And the registration finished, the manager behind the desk and the
visitors from a far place stood regarding each other in a prolonged
silence. At last the manager blurted, ‘Porter! Front! Take these
gentlemen’s luggage—’
But just then the hall porter ran over to look at the floor.
Where there was no luggage.
‘No, no, none.’ David Snell-Orkney airily waved his hand. ‘We travel
light. We’re here only for twenty-four hours, or perhaps only twelve,
with a change of underwear stuffed in our overcoats. Then back to Sicily
and warm twilights. If you want me to pay in advance—’
‘That won’t be necessary,’ said the manager, handing the keys to the
hall porter. ‘Forty-six and forty-seven, please.’
‘It’s done,’ said the porter.
And like a collie dog silently nipping the hooves of some woolly
long-haired, bleating, dumbly smiling sheep, he herded the lovely bunch
toward the elevator which wafted down just at that precise moment.
At the desk, the manager’s wife came up, steel-eyed behind him. ‘Are you
mad?’ she whispered, wildly. ‘Why? Why?’
‘All my life,’ said the manager, half to himself, ‘I have wished to see
not one Communist but ten close by, not two Nigerians but twenty in
their skins, not three cowboy Americans but a gross fresh from the
saddle. So when six hothouse roses come in a bouquet, I could not resist
potting them. The Dublin winter is long, Meg; this may be the only lit
fuse in the whole year. Stand by for the lovely concussion.’
‘Fool,’ she said.
As they watched, the elevator, freighted with hardly more than the fluff
from a blown dandelion, whisked up the shaft, away.
It was exactly at high noon that a series of coincidences occurred that
tottered and swerved toward the miraculous.
Now the Royal Hibernian Hotel lies half between Trinity College, if
you’ll excuse the mention, and St. Stephen’s Green, which is more like
it, and around behind is Grafton Street, where you can buy silver,
glass, and linen, or pink hacking coats, boots, and caps to ride off to
the goddamned hounds, or better still duck in to Heeber Finn’s pub for a
proper proportion of drink and talk – an hour of drink to two hours of
talk is about the best prescription.
Now the boys most often seen in Finn’s are these: Nolan, you know Nolan;
Timulty, who could forget Timulty; Mike MaGuire, surelyeveryone’sfriend;
then there’s Hannahan, Flaherty, Kilpatrick, and, on occasion, when God
seems a bit untidy and Job comes to mind, Father Liam Leary himself, who
strides in like Justice and glides forth like Mercy.
Well, that’s the lot, and it’s high noon, and out of the Hibernian Hotel
front who should come now but Snell-Orkney and his canary five.
Which resulted in the first of a dumbfounding series of confrontations.
For passing below, sore torn between the sweet shops and Heeber Finn’s,
wasTimultyhimself.
Timulty, as you recall, when Blight, Famine, Starvation, and other mean
Horsemen drive him, works a day here or there at the post office. Now,
idling along between dread employments, he smelled a smell as if the
gates of Eden had swung wide again and him invited back in after a
hundred million years. So Timulty looked up to see what made the wind
blow out of the Garden.
And the wind, of course, was in tumult about Snell-Orkney and his
uncaged pets.
‘I tell you,’ said Timulty, years later, ‘I felt my eyes start as if I’d
been given a good bash on the skull. A new part ran down the center of
my hair.’
Timulty, frozen to the spot, watched the Snell-Orkney delegation flow
down the steps and around the corner. At which point he decided on
sweeter things than candy and rushed the long way to Finn’s.
At that instant, rounding the corner, Mr David Snell-Orkney-plus-five
passed a beggar-lady playing a harp in the street. And there, with
nothing else to do but dance the time away, was Mike MaGuire himself,
flinging his feet about in a self-involved rigadoon to ‘Lightly o’er the
Lea.’ Dancing, Mike MaGuire heard a sound that was like the passing by
of warm weather from the Hebrides. It was not quite a twittering nor a
whirr, and it was not unlike a pet shop when the bell tinkles as you
step in and a chorus of parakeets and doves start up in coos and light
shrieks. But hear he did, above the sound of his own shoes and the
pringle of harp. He froze in mid-jig.
As David Snell-Orkney-plus-five swept by all tropic smiled and gave him
a wave.
Before he knew what he was doing, Mike waved back, then stopped and
seized his wounded hand to his breast. ‘What the hell am I waving for?’
he cried to no one. ‘I don’t know them,doI?’
‘Ask God for strength!’ said the harpist to her harp and flung her
fingers down the strings.
Drawn as by some strange new vacuum cleaner that swept all before it,
Mike followed the Team down the street.
Which takes care of two senses now, the sense of smell and the use of
the ears.
It was at thenextcorner that Nolan, leaving Finn’s pub because of an
argument with Finn himself, came around the bend fast and ran bang into
David Snell-Orkney. Both swayed and grabbed each other for support.
‘Top of the afternoon!’ said David Snell-Orkney.
‘The Back Side of Something!’ replied Nolan, and fell away, gaping to
let the circus by. He had a terrible urge to rush back to Finn’s. His
fight with the owner of the pub was obliterated. He wished now to report
upon this fell encounter with a feather duster, a Siamese cat, a spoiled
Pekingese, and three others gone ghastly frail from undereating and
over-washing.
The six stopped outside the pub looking up at the sign.
Ah, God, thought Nolan. They’re going in. What willcomeof it? Who do I
warn first? Them? Or Finn?
Then, the door opened. Finn himself looked out. Damn, thought Nolan,
that spoils it! Now we won’t be allowed to describe this adventure. It
will be Finn this, Finn that, and shut up to us all! There was a long
moment when Snell-Orkney and his cohorts looked at Finn. Finn’s eyes did
not fasten on them. He looked above. He looked over. He looked beyond.
But hehadseen them, this Nolan knew. For now a lovely thing happened.
All the color went out of Finn’s face.
Then an even lovelier thing happened.
All the color rushed back into Finn’s face.
Why, cried Nolan to himself, he’s …blushing!
But still Finn refused to look anywhere save the sky, the lamps, the
street, until Snell-Orkney trilled, ‘Sir, which way to St. Stephen’s
Green?’
‘Jesus,’ said Finn and turned away. ‘Who knowswherethey put
it,thisweek!’ and slammed the door.
The six went on up the street, all smiles and delight, and Nolan was all
for heaving himself through the door when a worse thing happened.
Garrity, the elevator operator from the Royal Hibernian Hotel, whipped
across the sidewalk from nowhere. His face ablaze with excitement, he
ran first into Finn’s to spread the word.
By the time Nolan was inside, and Timulty rushing in next, Garrity was
all up and down the length of the bar while Finn stood behind it
suffering concussions from which he had not as yet recovered.
‘It’s a shame you missed it!’ cried Garrity to all. ‘I mean it was the
next thing to one of them fiction-and-science fillums they show at the
Gayety Cinema!’
‘How do you mean?’ asked Finn, shaken out of his trance.
‘Nothingthey weigh!’ Garrity told them. ‘Lifting them in the elevator
was throwing a handful of chaff up a chimney! And you should haveheard.
They’re here in Ireland for …’ He lowered his voice and squinched his
eyes. ‘… formysterious reasons!’
‘Mysterious!’ Everyone leaned in at him.
‘They’ll put no name to it, but, mark my declaration, they’re up to no
good! Have you ever seen the like?’
‘Not since the great fire at the convent,’ said Finn. ‘I—’
But the word ‘convent’ seemed one more magic touch. The doors sprang
wide at this. Father Leary entered in reverse. That is to say he backed
into the pub one hand to his cheek as if the Fates had dealt him a
proper blow unbewares.
Reading the look of his spine, the men shoved their noses in their
drinks until such time as the father had put a bit of the brew into
himself, still staring as if the door were the gates of Hell ajar.
‘Beyond,’ said the father, at last, ‘not two minutes gone, I saw a sight
as would be hard to credit. In all the days of her collecting up the
grievances of the world, has Ireland indeed gone mad?’
Finn refilled the priest’s glass. ‘Was you standing in the blast ofThe
Invaders from the Planet Venus, Father?’
‘Have you seen them, then, Finn?’ the father said.
‘Yes, and do you guess them bad, your Holiness?’
‘It’s not so much bad or good as strange andoutré, Finn, and words like
rococo, I should guess, and baroque if you go with my drift?’
‘I lie easy in the tide, sir.’
‘When last seen, where heading?’ asked Timulty.
‘On the edge of the Green,’ said the priest. ‘You don’t imagine there’ll
be a bacchanal in the park now?’
‘The weather won’t allow, beg your pardon, Father,’ said Nolan, ‘but it
strikes me, instead of standing with the gab in our mouth we should be
out on the spy—’
‘You move against my ethics,’ said the priest.
‘A drowning man clutches at anything,’ said Nolan, ‘and ethics may drown
with him ifthat’swhat he grabs instead of a lifebelt.’
‘Off the Mount, Nolan,’ said the priest, ‘and enough of the Sermon.
What’s your point?’
‘The point is, Father, we have had no such influx of honorary Sicilians
since the mind boggles to remember. For all we know, at this moment,
they may be reading aloud to Mrs Murphy, Miss Clancy, or Mrs O’Hanlan in
the midst of the park. And reading aloud fromwhat, I ask you?’
‘The Ballad of Reading Gaol?’asked Finn.
‘You have rammed the target and sunk the ship,’ said Nolan, mildly
irritated the point had been plucked from him. ‘How do we know these
imps out of bottles are not selling real-estate tracts in a place called
Fire Island? Have youheardof it, Father?’
‘The American gazettes come often to my table, man.’
‘Well, do you remember the great hurricane of nineteen-and-fifty-six
when the waves washed over Fire Island there in New York? An uncle of
mine, God save his sanity and sight, was with the Coast Guard there
which evacuated the entirety of the population of Fire Island. It was
worse than the twice-a-year showing at Fennelly’s dressworks, he said.
It was more terrible than a Baptist Convention. Ten thousand men came
rushing down to the stormy shore carrying bolts of drape material, cages
full of parakeets, tomato-and-tangerine-colored sport coats, and
lime-colored shoes. It was the most tumultuous scene since Hieronymus
Bosch laid down his palette after he painted Hell for all generations to
come. You do not easily evacuate ten thousand Venetian-glass boyos with
their great blinky cow-eyes and their phonograph symphonic records in
their hands and their rings in their ears, without tearing down the
middle. My uncle, soon after, took to the heavy drink.’
‘Tell usmoreabout that night,’ said Kilpatrick, entranced.
‘More, hell,’ said the priest. ‘Out, I say. Surround the park. Keep your
eyes peeled. And meet me back here in an hour.’
‘That’s more like it,’ cried Kelly. ‘Let’sreallysee what dread thing
they’re up to!’
The doors banged wide.
On the sidewalk, the priest gave directions. ‘Kelly, Murphy, you around
the north side of the park. Timulty, you to the south. Nolan and
Garrity, the east; Moran, MaGuire, and Kilpatrick, the west. Git!’ But
somehow or other in all the ruction, Kelly and Murphy wound up at the
Four Shamrocks pub halfway to the Green and fortified themselves for the
chase, and Nolan and Moran each met their wives on the street and had to
run the other way, and MaGuire and Kilpatrick, passing the Elite Cinema
and hearing Lawrence Tibbett singing inside, cadged their way in for a
few half-used cigarettes.
So it wound up with just two, Garrity on the east and Timulty on the
south side of the park, looking in at the visitors from another world.
After half an hour of freezing weather, Garrity stomped up to Timulty
and said, ‘What’swrongwith the fiends? They’re juststandingthere in the
midst of the park. They haven’t moved half the afternoon. And it’s cut
to the bone is my toes. I’ll nip around to the hotel, warm up, and rush
back to stand guard with you, Tim.’
‘Take your time,’ called Timulty in a strange sad wandering,
philosophical voice as the other charged away.
Left alone, Timulty walked in and sat for a full hour watching the six
men who, as before, did not move. You might almost have thought to see
Timulty there, with his eyes brooding, and, his mouth gone into a tragic
crease, that he was some Irish neighbor of Kant or Schopenhauer, or had
just read something by a poet or thought of a song that declined his
spirits. And when at last the hour was up and he had gathered his
thoughts like a handful of cold pebbles, he turned and made his way out
of the park. Garrity was there, pounding his feet and swinging his hands
but before he could explode with questions, Timulty pointed in and said,
‘Go sit. Look. Think. Thenyoutellme.’
Everyone at Finn’s looked up sheepishly when Timulty made his entrance.
The priest was still off on errands around the city, and after a few
walks about the Green to assuage their consciences, all had returned,
nonplussed, to intelligence headquarters.
‘Timulty!’ they cried. ‘Tell us! What? What?’
Timulty took his time walking to the bar and sipping his drink.
Silently, he observed his own image remotely buried beneath the lunar
ice of the barroom mirror. He turned the subject this way. He twisted it
inside out. He put it back wrong-side-to. Then he shut his eyes and
said:
‘It strikes me as how—’
Yes, said all silently, about him.
‘From a lifetime of travel and thought, it comes to the top of my mind,’
Timulty went on, ‘there is a strange resemblance between the likes of
them and the likes of us.’
There was such a gasp as changed the scintillation, the goings and
comings of light in the prisms of the little chandeliers over the bar.
When the schools of fish-light had stopped swarming at this exhalation,
Nolan cried, ‘Do you mind putting your hat on so I can knock it off!?’
‘Consider,’ Timulty calmly said. ‘Are we or are we not great ones for
the poem and the song?’
Another kind of gasp went through the crowd. There was a warm burst of
approval. ‘Oh, sure, we’rethat!’ ‘My God, isthatall you’re up to?’ ‘We
were afraid—’
‘Hold it!’ Timulty raised a hand, eyes still closed.
And all shut up.
‘If we’re not singing the songs, we’re writing them, and if not writing,
dancing them, and aren’ttheyfond admirers of the song and the writing of
same and the dancing out the whole? Well, just now, I heard them at a
distance reciting poems and singing, to themselves, in the Green.’
Timulty had something there. Everyone had to paw everybody and admit it.
‘Do you find anyotherresemblances?’ asked Finn, heavily, glowering.
‘I do,’ said Timulty, with a judge’s manner.
There was a still more fascinated indraw of breath and the crowd drew
nearer.
‘They do not mind a drink now and then,’ said Timulty.
‘By God, he’s right!’ cried Murphy.
‘Also,’ intoned Timulty, ‘they do not marry until very late, if ever at
all! And—’
But here the tumult was such he had to wait for it to subside before he
could finish:
‘And they – ah – have very little to do with women.’
After that there was a great clamor, a yelling and shoving about and
ordering of drinks and someone invited Timulty outside. But Timulty
wouldn’t even lift one eyelid, and the brawler was held off and when
everyone had a new drink in them and the near-fistfights had drained
away, one loud clear voice, Finn’s, declared:
‘Now would you mind explaining the criminal comparison you have just
made in the clean air of my honorable pub?’
Timulty sipped his drink slowly and then at last opened his eyes and
looked at Finn steadily, and said, with a clear bell-trumpet tone and
wondrous enunciation:
‘Where in all of Ireland can a man lie down with a woman?’
He let that sink in.
‘Three hundred twenty-nine days a damn year it rains. The rest it’s so
wet there’s no dry piece, no bit of land you would dare trip a woman out
flat on for fear of her taking root and coming up in leaves, do you deny
that?’
The silence did not deny.
‘So when it comes to places to do sinful evils and perform outrageous
acts of the flesh, it’s to Arabia the poor damn fool Irishman must take
himself. It’s Arabian dreams we have, of warm nights, dry land, and a
decent place not just to sit down but to lie down on, and not just lie
down on but to roister joyfully about on in clinches and clenches of
outrageous delight.’
‘Ah, Jaisus,’ said Flynn, ‘you can saythatagain.’
‘Ah, Jaisus,’ said everyone, nodding.
‘That’s number one.’ Timulty ticked it off on his fingers. ‘Place is
lacking. Then, second, time and circumstances. For say you should sweet
talk a fair girl into the field, eh? in her rainboots and slicker and
her shawl over her head and her umbrella over that and you making noises
like a stuck pig half over the sty gate, which means you’ve got one hand
in her bosom and the other wrestling with her boots, which is as far as
you’ll damn well get, for who’s standing there behind you, and you feel
his sweet spearmint breath on your neck?’
‘The father from the local parish?’ offered Garrity.
‘The father from the local parish,’ said everyone, in despair.
‘There’s nails number two and three in the cross on which all Ireland’s
males hang crucified,’ said Timulty.
‘Go on, Timulty, go on.’
‘Those fellows visiting here from Sicily run in teams.Werun in teams.
Here we are, the gang, in Finn’s, are wenot?’
‘Be damned and we are!’
‘Theylook sad and are melancholy half the time and then spitting like
happy demons the rest, either up or down, never in between, and who
doesthatremind you of?’
Everyone looked in the mirror and nodded.
‘If we had the choice,’ said Timulty, ‘to go home to the dire wife and
the dread mother-in-law and the old-maid sister all sour sweats and
terrors, or stay here in Finn’s for one more song or one more drink or
one more story,whichwould all of us men choose?’
Silence.
‘Think on that,’ said Timulty. ‘Answer the truth. Resemblances.
Similarities. The long list of them runs off one hand and up the other
arm. And well worth the mulling over before we leap about crying Jaisus
and Mary and summoning the Guard.’
Silence.
‘I,’ said someone, after a long while, strangely, curiously, ‘would like
… to see them closer.’
‘I think you’ll get your wish. Hist!’
All froze in a tableau.
And far off they heard a faint and fragile sound. It was like the
wondrous morning you wake and lie in bed and know by a special feel that
the first fall of snow is in the air, on its way down, tickling the sky,
making the silence to stir aside and fall back in on nothing.
‘Ah, God,’ said Finn, at last, ‘it’s the first day of spring …’
And it was that, too. First the dainty snowfall of feet drifting on the
cobbles, and then a choir of bird song.
And along the sidewalk and down the street and outside the pub came the
sounds that were winterandspring. The doors sprang wide. The men reeled
back from the impact of the meeting to come. They steeled their nerves.
They balled their fists. They geared their teeth in their anxious
mouths, and into the pub like children come into a Christmas place and
everything a bauble or a toy, a special gift or color, there stood the
tall thin older man who looked young and the small thin younger men who
had old things in their eyes. The sound of snowfall stopped. The sound
of spring birds ceased.
The strange children herded by the strange shepherd found themselves
suddenly stranded as if they sensed a pulling away of a tide of people,
even though the men at the bar had flinched but the merest hair.
The children of a warm isle regarded the short child-size and runty
fullgrown men of this cold land and the full-grown men looked back in
mutual assize.
Timulty and the men at the bar breathed long and slow. You could smell
the terrible clean smell of the children way over here. There was too
much spring in it.
Snell-Orkney and his young-old boy-men breathed swiftly as the
heartbeats of birds trapped in a cruel pair of fists. You could smell
the dusty, impacted, prolonged, and dark-clothed smell of the little men
way over here. There was too much winter in it.
Each might have commented upon the other’s choice of scent, but—
At this moment the double doors at the side banged wide and Garrity
charged in full-blown, crying the alarm:
‘Jesus, I’ve seen everything! Do you know where they arenow, and
whatdoing?’
Every hand at the bar flew up to shush him.
By the startled look in their eyes, the intruders knew they were being
shouted about.
‘They’re still at St. Stephen’s Green!’ Garrity, on the move, saw naught
that was before him. ‘I stopped by the hotel to spread the news. Now
it’s your turn. Those fellows—’
‘Those fellows,’ said David Snell-Orkney, ‘are here in—’ He hesitated.
‘Heeber Finn’s pub,’ said Heeber Finn, looking at his shoes.
‘Heeber Finn’s,’ said the tall man, nodding his thanks.
‘Where,’ said Garrity, gone miserable, ‘we will all be having a drink
instantly.’
He flung himself at the bar.
But the six intruders were moving, also. They made a small parade to
either side of Garrity and just by being amiably there made him hunch
three inches smaller.
‘Good afternoon,’ said Snell-Orkney.
‘It is and it isn’t,’ said Finn, carefully, waiting.
‘It seems,’ said the tall man surrounded by the little boy-men, ‘there
is much talk about what we are doing in Ireland.’
‘That would be putting the mildest interpretation on it,’ said Finn.
‘Allow me to explain,’ said the stranger.
‘Have you ever,’ continued Mr David Snell-Orkney, ‘heard of the Snow
Queen and the Summer King?’
Several jaws trapped wide down.
Someone gasped as if booted in the stomach.
Finn, after a moment in which he considered just where a blow might have
landed upon him, poured himself a long slow drink with scowling
precision. He took a stiff snort of the stuff and with the fire in his
mouth, replied, carefully, letting the warm breath out over his tongue:
‘Ah …whatQueen is that again,andthe King?’
‘Well,’ said the tall pale man, ‘there was this Queen who lived in
Iceland who had never seen summer, and this King who lived in the Isles
of Sun who had never seen winter. The people under the King almost died
of heat in the summers, and the people under the Snow Queen almost died
of ice in the winters. But the people of both countries were saved from
their terrible weathers. The Snow Queen and the Sun King met and fell in
love and every summer when the sun killed people in the islands they
moved North to the lands of ice and lived temperately. And every winter
when the snow killed people in the North, all of the Snow Queen’s people
moved South and lived in the mild island sun. So there were no longer
two nations, two peoples, butonerace which commuted from land to land
with the strange weathers and wild seasons.The end.’
There was a round of applause, not from the canary boys, but from the
men lined up at the bar who had been spelled. Finn saw his own hands out
clapping on the air, and put them down. The others saw their own hands
and dropped them.
But Timulty summed it up, ‘God, if you only had a brogue! What a teller
of tales you would make.’
‘Many thanks, many thanks,’ said David Snell-Orkney.
‘All of which brings us around to the point of the story,’ Finn said. ‘I
mean, well, about that Queen and the King and all.’
‘The point is,’ said Snell-Orkney, ‘that we have not seen a leaf fall in
five years. We hardly know a cloud when we see it. We have not felt snow
in ten years, or hardly a drop of rain. Our story is the reverse. We
must have rain or we’ll perish, right, chums?’
‘Oh, yes, right,’ said all five, in a sweet chirruping.
‘We have followed summer around the world for six or seven years. We
have lived in Jamaica and Nassau and Port-au-Prince and Calcutta, and
Madagascar and Bali and Taormina but finally just today we said we must
go north, we must have cold again. We didn’t quite know what we were
looking for, but we found it in St. Stephen’s Green.’
‘Themysteriousthing?’ Nolan burst out. ‘I mean—’
‘Your friend here will tell you,’ said the tall man.
‘Ourfriend? You mean – Garrity?’
Everyone looked at Garrity.
‘As I was going to say,’ said Garrity, ‘when I came in the door. They
was in the park standing there …watching the leaves turn colors.’
‘Is thatall?’ said Nolan, dismayed.
‘It seemed sufficient unto the moment,’ said Snell-Orkney.
‘Arethe leaves changing color up at St. Stephen’s?’ asked Kilpatrick.
‘Do you know,’ said Timulty numbly, ‘it’s been twenty years since
Ilooked.’
‘The most beautiful sight in all the world,’ said David Snell-Orkney,
‘lies up in the midst of St. Stephen’s this very hour.’
‘He speaks deep,’ murmured Nolan.
‘The drinks are on me,’ said David Snell-Orkney.
‘He’s touchedbottom,’ said MaGuire.
‘Champagne all around!’
‘Don’t mind if I do!’ said everyone.
And not ten minutes later they were all up at the park, together.
And well now, as Timulty said years after, did you ever see as many
damned leaves on a tree as there was on the first tree just inside the
gate at St. Stephen’s Green? No! cried all. And what, though, about
thesecondtree? Well, that had abillionleaves on it. And the more they
looked the more they saw it was a wonder. And Nolan went around craning
his neck so hard he fell over on his back and had to be helped up by two
or three others, and there were general exhalations of awe and
proclamations of devout inspiration as to the fact that as far as they
could remember there had neverbeenany goddamn leaves on the trees to
begin with, but now they were there! Or if they had been there they
hadneverhad any color, or if theyhadhad color, well, it was so long ago
… Ah, what the hell, shut up, said everyone, and look!
Which is exactly what Nolan and Timulty and Kelly and Kilpatrick and
Garrity and Snell-Orkney and his friends did for the rest of the
declining afternoon. For a fact, autumn had taken the country, and the
bright flags were out by the millions through the park.
Which is exactly where Father Leary found them.
But before he could say anything, three out of the six summer invaders
asked him if he would hear their confessions.
And next thing you know with a look of great pain and alarm the father
was taking Snell-Orkney & Co. back to see the stained glass at the
church and the way the apse was put together by a master architect, and
they liked his church so much and said so out loud again and again that
he cut way down on their Hail Marys and the rigmaroles that went with.
But the top of the entire day was when one of the young-old boy-men back
at the pub asked what would it be? Should he sing ‘Mother Machree’ or
‘My Buddy’?
Arguments followed, and with polls taken and results announced, he
sangboth.
He had a dear voice, all said, eyes melting bright. A sweet high clear
voice.
And as Nolan put it, ‘He wouldn’t make much of a son. But there’s a
great daughter there somewhere!’
And all said ‘aye’ to that.
And suddenly it was time to leave.
‘But great God!’ said Finn, ‘you just arrived!’
‘We found what we came for, there’s no need to stay,’ announced the tall
sad happy old young man. ‘It’s back to the hothouse with the flowers …
or they wilt overnight. We never stay. We are always flying and jumping
and running. We are always on the move.’
The airport being fogged-in, there was nothing for it but the birds cage
themselves on the Dun Laoghaire boat bound for England, and there was
nothing for it but the inhabitants of Finn’s should be down at the dock
to watch them pull away in the middle of the evening. There they stood,
all six, on the top deck, waving their thin hands down, and there stood
Timulty and Nolan and Garrity and the rest waving their thick hands up.
And as the boat hooted and pulled away the keeper-of-the-birds nodded
once, and winged his right hand on the air and all sang forth:‘As I was
walking through Dublin City, about the hour of twelve at night, I saw a
maid, so fair was she … combing her hair by candlelight.’
‘Jesus,’ said Timulty, ‘do youhear?’
‘Sopranos, everyoneof them!’ cried Nolan.
‘Not Irish sopranos, but realrealsopranos,’ said Kelly.
‘Damn, why didn’t theysay? If we’d known, we’d have had a good hour
ofthatout of them before the boat.’
Timulty nodded and added, listening to the music float over the waters.
‘Strange. Strange. I hate to see themgo. Think. Think. For a hundred
years or more people have said we had none. But now they have returned,
if but for a little time.’
‘We had none ofwhat?’ asked Garrity. ‘Andwhatreturned?’
‘Why,’ said Timulty, ‘the fairies, of course, the fairies that once
lived in Ireland, and live here no more, but who came this day and
changed our weather, and there they go again, who once stayed all the
while.’
‘Ah, shut up!’ cried Kilpatrick. ‘And listen!’
And listen they did, nine men on the end of a dock as the boat sailed
out and the voices sang and the fog came in and they did not move for a
long time until the boat was far gone and the voices faded like a scent
of papaya on the mist.
By the time they walked back to Finn’s it had begun to rain.

