prose_contemporaryRayBradburyYES, WE'LL GATHER AT THE RIVERcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
YES, WE'LL GATHER AT THE RIVER
At one minute to nine he should have rolled the wooden Indian back into
warm tobacco darkness and turned the key in the lock. But somehow he
waited because there were so many lost men walking by in no special
direction for no special reason. A few of them wandered in to drift
their gaze over the tribal cigars laid out in their neat brown boxes,
then glanced up suddenly surprised to find where they were and said,
evasively, "Evening, Charlie."
"So it is," said Charlie Moore.
Some of the men wandered off empty-handed, others moved on with a nickel
cigar unlit in their mouths.
So it was nine thirty of a Thursday night before Charlie Moore finally
touched the wooden Indian's elbow as if disturbing a friend and hating
to bother. Gently he maneuvered the savage to where he became watchman
of the night. In the shadows, the carved face stared raw and blind
through the door.
"Well, Chief, what do you see?"
Charlie followed that silent gaze beyond to the highway that cut through
the very center of their lives.
In locust hordes, cars roared up from Los Angeles. With irritation they
slowed to thirty miles per hour here. They crept between some three
dozen shops, stores, and old livery stables become gas stations, to the
north rim of town. There the cars exploded back to eighty, racing like
Furies on San Francisco, to teach it violence.
Charlie snorted softly.
A man passed, saw him standing with his silent wooden friend, said,
"Last night, eh?" and was gone.
Last night.
There. Someone had dared use the words.
Charlie wheeled to switch off the lights, lock the door and, on the
sidewalk, eyes down, freeze.
As if hypnotized, he felt his gaze rise again to the old highway which
swept by with winds that smelled a billion years ago. Great bursts of
headlight arrived, then cut away in departures of red taillight, like
schools of small bright fish darting in the wake of sharks and
blind-traveling whales. The lights sank away and were lost in the black
hills.
Charlie broke his stare. He walked slowly on through his town as the
clock over the Oddfellows Lodge struck the quarter hour and moved on
toward ten and still he walked and was amazed and then not amazed any
more to see how every shop was still open long after hours and in every
door stood a man or woman transfixed even as he and his Indian brave had
been transfixed by a talked-about and dreadful future suddenly become
Here Now Tonight.
Fred Ferguson, the taxidermist, kin to the family of wild owls and
panicked deer which stayed on forever in his window, spoke to the night
air as Charlie passed:
"Hard to believe, ain't it?"
He wished no answer, for he went on, immediately:
"Keep thinking: just can't be. Tomorrow, the highway dead and us dead
with it."
"Oh, it won't be that bad," said Charlie.
Ferguson gave him a shocked look. "Wait. Ain't you the one hollered two
years ago, wanted to bomb the legislature, shoot the road contractors,
steal the concrete mixers and earth-movers when they started the new
highway three hundred yards west of here?Whatyou mean, it won't be bad?
It will, and you know it!"
"I know," said Charlie Moore, at last.
Ferguson brooded on the near distance.
"Three hundred little bitty yards. Not much, eh? But seeing as how our
town is only a hundred yards wide, that puts us, give or take, about two
hundred yards from the new super-road. Two hundred yards from people who
need nuts, bolts, or house-paint. Two hundred from jokers who barrel
down from the mountains with deer or fresh shot alley-cats of all sorts
and need the services of the only A-l taxidermist on the Coast. Two
hundred yards from ladies who need aspirin—" He eyed the drugstore.
"Haircuts." He watched the red-striped pole spin in its glass case down
the street. "Strawberry sodas." He nodded at the malt shop. "You name
it."
They named it all in silence, sliding their gaze along the stores, the
shops, the arcades.
"Maybe it's not too late."
"Late, Charlie? Hell. Cement's mixed and poured and set. Come dawn they
yank the roadblocks both ends of the new road. Governor might cut a
ribbon from the first car. Then … people might remember Oak Lane the
first week, sure. The second week not so much. A month from now? We'll
be a smear of old paint on their right running north, on their left
running south, burning rubber. There's Oak Lane! Remember? Ghost town.
Oops! It's gone."
Charlie let his heart beat two or three times.
"Fred … what you going to do?"
"Stay on awhile. Stuff a few birds the local boys bring in. Then crank
the old Tin Lizzie and drive that new superfreeway myself going nowhere,
anywhere, and so long to you, Charlie Moore."
"Night, Fred. Hope you sleep."
"What, and miss welcoming in the New Year, middle of July … ?"
Charlie walked and that voice faded behind and he came to the barbershop
where three men, laid out, were being strenuously barbered behind plate
glass. The highway traffic slid over them in bright reflections. They
looked like they were drowning under a stream of huge fireflies.
Charlie stepped in. Everyone glanced up.
"Anyone got any ideas?"
"Progress, Charlie," said Frank Mariano, combing and cutting, "is an
idea can't be stopped with no other idea. Let's yank up the whole damn
town, lock, stock, and tar barrel, carry it over, nail it down by that
new road."
"We figured the cost last year. Four dozen stores at three thousand
dollars average to haul them just three hundred yards west."
"So ends that master plan," muttered someone under a hot-steam towel,
buried in inescapable fact.
"One good hurricane would do the job, carriage-free."
They all laughed quietly.
"We should all celebrate tonight," said the man under the hot towel. He
sat up, revealing himself as Hank Summers, the groceryman. "Snort a few
stiff drinks and wonder where the hell we'll all be this time next
year."
"We didn't fight hard enough," said Charlie. "When it started, we didn't
pitch in."
"Hell." Frank snipped a hair out of the inside of a fairly large ear,
"when times move, not a day passes someone's not hurt. This month, this
year, it's our turn. Next timewewant something, someone else gets
stepped on, all in the name of Get Up and Go. Look, Charlie, go form a
vigilantes. Mine that new road. But watch out. Just crossing the lanes
to place the bomb, you're sure to be run down by a manure truck bound
for Salinas."
More laughter, which faded quickly.
"Look," said Hank Summers, and everybody looked. He spoke to his own
fly-specked image in the ancient mirror as if trying to sell his twin on
a shared logic. "We lived here thirty years now, you, me, all of us.
Won't kill us to move on. Good God, we're all root and a yard wide.
Graduation. School of hard knocks is throwing us out the door with no
never-mind's and no thank-you's. I'm ready. Charlie, areyou?"
"Me, now," said Frank Mariano. "Monday morning six a.m. I load my
barbership in a trailer and shoot off after those customers, ninety
miles an hour!"
There was a laugh sounded like the very last one of the day, so Charlie
turned with one superb and mindless drift and was back on the street.
And still the shops stayed open, the lights stayed on, the doors stood
wide, as if each owner was reluctant to go home, so long as that river
out there was flowing and there was the great motion and glint and sound
of people and metal and light in a tide they had grown so accustomed to
it was hard to believe the river bottom would ever know a dry season.
Charlie lingered on, straying from shop to shop, sipping a chocolate
Coke at the malted-milk counter, buying some stationery he couldn't use
from the drugstore under the soft fluttering wood fan that whispered to
itself in the ceiling. He loitered like a common criminal, thieving
sights. He paused in alleys where, Saturday afternoons, gypsy tie
salesmen or kitchenware spielers laid out their suitcase worlds to con
the pedestrians. Then, at last he reached the gas station where Pete
Britz, deep in the oil pit, was mending the dumb brute underside of a
dead and uncomplaining 1947 Ford.
At ten o'clock, as if by some secret but mutual consent, all the shops
went dark, all the people walked home, Charlie Moore among them.
He caught up with Hank Summers, whose face was still shining pink from
the shave he hadn't needed. They ambled in silence for a time past
houses where it seemed the whole population was sitting out smoking or
knitting, rocking in chairs or fanning themselves against a nonexistent
hot spell.
Hank laughed suddenly at some private thought. A few paces on, he
decided to make it public:
"Yes, we'll gather at the River, River, River.
Yes, we'll gather at the River
That flows by the Throne of God."
He half-sang it and Charlie nodded.
"First Baptist Church, when I was twelve."
"The Lord giveth and the Highway Commissioner taketh away," said Hank,
drily. "Funny. Never thought how much a town is people. Doing things,
that is. Under the hot towel back there, thought: what's this place to
me? Shaved, I had the answer. Russ Newell banging a carburetor at the
Night Owl Garage? Yep. Allie Mae Simpson … "
He swallowed his voice in embarrassment.
Allie Mae Simpson … Charlie took up the count in his own mind … Allie
Mae fixing wet curlicues: in old ladies' hair in the bay window of her
Vogue Salon … Doc Knight stacking pill bottles in the drug emporium
cases … hardware store laid out in the hot noon sun, Clint Simpson
middle of it all, running his hands over, sorting out the million blinks
and shines of brass and silver and gold, all the nails, hinges, knobs,
all the saws, hammers, and snaked up copper wire and stacks of aluminum
foil like the junk shaken free of a thousand boys' pockets in a thousand
summers past—and then …
… then there was his own place, warm dark, brown, comfortable, musky as
the den of a tobacco smoking bear … thick with the humidor smells of
whole families of odd-sized cigars, imported cigarettes, snuffs just
waiting to be exploded on the air …
Take all that: away, thought Charlie, you got nothing. Buildings, sure.
Anyone can raise a frame, paint a sign to say what might go on inside.
But it was people that made the damn thingget.
Hank surfaced in his own long thoughts.
"Guess right now I'm sad. Want to send everyone back to open their shops
so I can see what they were up to. Why wasn't I looking closer, all
these years? Hell, hell. What's got into you, Hank Summers. There's
another Oak Lane on up the line or down the line and people there busy
as they are here. Wherever I land, next time I'll look close, swear to
God. Good-bye, Charlie."
"To hell with good-bye."
"All right, then, good night."
And Hank was gone and Charlie was home and Clara was waiting at the
screen door with a glass of ice water.
"Sit out awhile?"
"Like everyone else? Why not?"
They sat in the dark on the porch in the chain-hung wooden swing and
watched the highway flush and drain, flush and drain with arrivals of
headlight and departures of angry red fire like the coals from an
immense brazier scattered to the fields.
Charlie drank the water slowly and, drinking, thought: In the old days
you couldn't see the roads die. You felt them gradually fade, yes, lying
in bed nights, maybe your mind got hold of some hint, some nudge or
commotion that warned you it was sinking away. But it took years and
years for any one road to give up its dusty ghost and another to stir
alive. That's how things were, slow arriving and slow passing away.
That's how things had always been.
But no more. Now, in a matter of hours.
He paused.
He touched in upon himself to find a new thing.
"I'm not mad any more."
"Good," said his wife.
They rocked awhile, two halves of a similar content.
"My God, I was stirred up there for awhile."
"I remember," she said.
"But now I figure, well … " he drifted his voice, mostly to himself.
"Millions of cars come through every year. Like it or not, the road's
just not big enough, we're holding up the world, that old road there and
this old town. The world says it's got to move. So now, on that new
road, not one but two million will pass just a shotgun blast away, going
where they got to go to get things done they say are important, doesn't
matter if they're important or not, folksthinkthey are, and thinking
makes the game. If we'd really seen it coming, thought in on it from
every side, we'd have taken a steam-driven sledge and just mashed the
town flat and said, 'Drive through!' instead of making them lay the damn
road over in that next clover patch. This way, the town dies hard,
strangled on a piece of butcher string instead of being dropped off a
cliff. Well, well." He lit his pipe and blew great clouds of smoke in
which to poke for past mistakes and present revelations. "Us being
human, I guess we couldn't have done but as we did … "
They heard the drugstore clock strike eleven and the Oddfellows Hall
clock chime eleven thirty, and at twelve they lay in bed in the dark,
each with a ceilingful of thoughts above them.
"Graduation."
"What?"
"Frank the barber said it and had it right. This whole week feels like
the last days of school, years ago. I remember how I felt, how I was
afraid, ready to cry, and how I promised myself to live every last
moment right up to the time the diploma was in my hand, for God only
knew what tomorrow might bring. Unemployment. Depression. War. And
then...
.

