prose_contemporaryRayBradburyTHE HAUNTING OF THE NEWcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
THE HAUNTING OF THE NEW
I hadn't been in Dublin for years. I'd been round the world—everywhere
but Ireland—but now within the hour of my arrival the Royal Hibernian
Hotel phone rang and on the phone: Nora herself, God Bless!
"Charles? Charlie? Chuck? Are you rich at last? And do rich writers buy
fabulous estates?"
"Nora!" I laughed. "Don't you ever say hello?"
"Life's too short for hellos, and now there's no time for decent
good-byes.Couldyou buy Grynwood?"
"Nora, Nora, your family house, two hundred rich years old? What would
happen to wild Irish social life, the parties, drinks, gossip? You can't
throw it all away!"
"Can and shall. Oh, I've trunks of money waiting out in the rain this
moment. But, Charlie, Charles, I'malonein the house. The servants have
fled to help the Aga. Now on this final night, Chuck, I need a
writer-man to see the Ghost. Does your skin prickle? Come. I've
mysteries and a home to give away. Charlie, oh, Chuck, oh, Charles."
Click. Silence.
Ten minutes later I roared round the snake-road through the green hills
toward the blue lake and the lush grass meadows of the hidden and
fabulous house called Grynwood.
I laughed again. Dear Nora! For all her gab, a party was probably on the
tracks this moment, lurched toward wondrous destruction. Bertie might
fly from London, Nick from Paris, Alicia would surely motor up from
Galway. Some film director, cabled within the hour, would parachute or
helicopter down, a rather seedy manna in dark glasses. Marion would show
with his Pekingese dog troupe, which always got drunker, and sicker,
than he.
I gunned my hilarity as I gunned the motor.
You'll be beautifully mellow by eight o'clock, I thought, stunned to
sleep by concussions of bodies before midnight, drowse till noon, then
even more nicely potted by Sunday high tea. And somewhere in between,
the rare game of musical beds with Irish and French contesses, ladies,
and plain field-beast art majors crated in from the Sorbonne, some with
chewable mustaches, some not, and Monday ten million years off. Tuesday,
I would motor oh so carefully back to Dublin, nursing my body like a
great impacted wisdom tooth, gone much too wise with women,
pain-flashing with memory.
Trembling, I remembered the first time I had drummed out to Nora's, when
I was twenty-one.
A mad old Duchess with flour-talcummed cheeks, and the teeth of a
barracuda had wrestled me and a sports car down this road fifteen years
ago, braying into the fast weather:
"You shall love Nora's menagerie zoo and horticultural garden! Her
friends are beasts and keepers, tigers and pussies, rhododendrons and
flytraps. Her streams run cold fish, hot trout. Hers is a great
greenhouse where brutes grow outsize, force-fed by unnatural airs, enter
Nora's on Friday with clean linen, sog out with the wet-wash-soiled
bedclothes Monday, feeling as if you had meantime inspired, painted, and
lived through all Bosch's Temptations, Hells, Judgments, and Dooms! Live
at Nora's and you reside in a great warm giant's cheek, deliriously
gummed and morseled hourly. You will pass, like victuals, through her
mansion. When it has crushed forth your last sweet-sour sauce and
dismarrowed your youth-candied bones, you will be discarded in a cold
iron-country train station lonely with rain."
"I'm coated with enzymes?" I cried above the engine roar. "No house can
break down my elements, or take nourishment from my Original Sin."
"Fool!" laughed the Duchess. "We shall see most of your skeleton by
sunrise Sunday!"
I came out of memory as I came out of the woods at a fine popping glide
and slowed because the very friction of beauty stayed the heart, the
mind, the blood, and therefore the foot upon the throttle.
There under a blue-lake sky by a blue-sky lake lay Nora's own dear
place, the grand house called Grynwood. It nestled in the roundest hills
by the tallest trees in the deepest forest in all Eire. It had towers
built a thousand years ago by unremembered peoples and unsung architects
for reasons never to be guessed. Its gardens had first flowered five
hundred years back and there were outbuildings scattered from a creative
explosion two hundred years gone amongst old tomb yards and crypts. Here
was a convent hall become a horse barn of the landed gentry, there were
new wings built on ninety years ago. Out around the lake was a
hunting-lodge ruin where wild horses might plunge through minted shadow
to sink away in greenwater grasses by yet further cold ponds and single
graves of daughters whose sins were so rank they were driven forth even
in death to the wilderness, sunk traceless in the gloom.
As if in bright welcome, the sun flashed vast tintinnabulations from
scores of house windows. Blinded, I clenched the car to a halt. Eyes
shut, I licked my lips.
I remembered my first night at Grynwood.
Nora herself opening the front door. Standing stark naked, she
announced:
"You're too late. It's all over!"
"Nonsense. Hold this, boy, and this."
Whereupon the Duchess, in three nimble moves, peeled herself raw as a
blanched oyster in the wintry doorway.
I stood aghast, gripping her clothes.
"Come in, boy, you'll catch your death." And the bare Duchess walked
serenely away among the well-dressed people.
"Beaten at my own game," cried Nora. "Now, to compete, I must put my
clothes back on. And I wassohoping to shock you."
"Never fear." I said. "You have."
"Come help me dress."
In the alcove, we waded among her clothes, which lay in misshapen pools
of musky scent upon a parqueted floor.
"Hold the panties while I slip into them. You're Charles, aren't you?"
"How do you do." I flushed, then burst into an uncontrollable fit of
laughter. "Forgive me," I said at last, snapping her bra in back, "it's
just here it is early evening, and I'm putting youintoyour clothes. I—"
A door slammed somewhere. I glanced around for the Duchess.
"Gone," I murmured. "The house has devoured her, already."
True. I didn't see the Duchess again until the rainy Tuesday morn she
had predicted. By then she had forgotten my name,myface, and the soul
behind my face.
"My God," I said, "What's that, andthat?"
Still dressing Nora, we had arrived at the library door. Inside, like a
bright mirror-maze, the weekend guests turned.
"That," Nora pointed, "is the Manhattan Civic Ballet flown over on ice
by jet stream. To the left, the Hamburg Dancers, flown the opposite way.
Divine casting. Enemy ballet mobs unable, because of language, to
express their scorn and vitriol. They must pantomime their cat-fight.
Stand aside, Charlie. What was Valkyrie must become Rhine Maiden. And
those boysareRhine Maidens. Guard your flank!"
Nora was right.
The battle was joined.
The tiger lilies leapt at each other, jabbering in tongues. Then,
frustrated, they fell away, flushed. With a bombardment of slammed
doors, the enemies plunged off to scores of rooms. What was horror
became horrible friendship and what was friendship became steamroom
oven-bastings of unabashed and, thank God, hidden affection.
After that it was one grand crystal-chandelier avalanche of
writer-artist-choreographer-poets down the swift-sloped weekend.
Somewhere I was caught and swept in the heaped pummel of flesh headed
straight for a collision with the maiden-aunt reality of Monday noon.
Now, many lost parties, many lost years later, here I stood.
And there stood Grynwood manse, very still.
No music played. No cars arrived.
Hello, I thought. A new statue seated by the shore. Hello again. Not a
statue …
But Nora herself seated alone, legs drawn under her dress, face pale,
staring at Grynwood as if I had not arrived, was nowhere in sight.
"Nora … ?" But her gaze was so steadily fixed to the house wings, its
mossy roofs and windows full of empty sky, I turned to stare at it
myself.
Somethingwaswrong. Had the house sunk two feet into the earth? Or had
the earth sunk all about, leaving it stranded forlorn in the high chill
air?
Had earthquakes shaken the windows atilt so they mirrored intruders with
distorted gleams and glares?
The front door of Grynwood stood wide open. From this door, the house
breathed out upon me.
Subtle. Like waking by night to feel the push of warm air from your
wife's nostrils, but suddenly terrified, for the scent of her breath has
changed, she smells of someone else! You want to seize her awake, cry
her name. Whoisshe, how, what? But heart thudding, you lie sleepless by
some stranger in bed.
I walked. I sensed my image caught in a thousand windows moving across
the grass to stand over a silent Nora.
A thousand of me sat quietly down.
Nora, I thought. Oh dear God, here we are again.
That first visit to Grynwood …
And then here and there through the years we had met like people
brushing in a crowd, like lovers across the aisle and strangers on a
train, and with the whistle crying the quick next stop touched hands or
allowed our bodies to be bruised together by the crowd cramming out as
the doors flung wide, then, impelled, no more touch, no word, nothing
for years.
Or, it was as if at high noon midsummer every year ior so we ran off up
the vital strand away, never dreaming we might come back and collide in
mutual need. And then somehow another summer ended, a sun went down, and
there came Nora dragging her empty sandpail and here came I with scabs
on my knees, and the beach empty and a strange season gone, and just us
left to say hello Nora, hello Charles as the wind rose and the sea
darkened as if a great herd of octopi suddenly swam by with their inks.
I often wondered if a day might come when we circled the long way round
and stayed. Somewhere back perhaps twelve years ago there had been one
moment, balanced like a feather upon fingertip when our breaths from
either side had held our love warmly and perfectly in poise.
But that was because I had bumped into Nora in Venice, with her roots
packed, far from home, away from Grynwood, where she might truly belong
to someone else, perhaps even to me.
But somehow our mouths had been too busy with each other to ask
permanence. Next day, healing our lips, puffed from mutual assaults, we
had not the strength to say forever-as-of-now, more tomorrows this way,
an apartment, a house anywhere, not Grynwood, not Grynwood ever again,
stay! Perhaps the light of noon was cruel, perhaps it showed too many
pores in people. Or perhaps, more accurately, the nasty children were
bored again. Or terrified of a prison of two! Whatever the reason, the
feather, once briefly lofted on champagne breath, toppled. Neither knew
which ceased breathing upon it first. Nora pretended an urgent telegram
and fled off to Grynwood.
Contact was broken. The spoiled children never wrote. I did not know
what sand castles she had smashed. She did not know what Indian Madras
had bled color from passion's sweat on my back. I married. I divorced. I
traveled.
And now here we were again come from opposite directions late on a
strange day by a familiar lake, calling to each other without calling,
running to each other without moving, as if we had not been years apart.
"Nora." I took her hand. It was cold. "What's happened?"
"Happened!?" She laughed, grew silent, staring away. Suddenly she
laughed again, that difficult laughter that might instantly flush with
tears. "Oh, my dear Charlie, think wild, think all, jump hoops and come
round to maniac dreams. Happened, Charlie, happened?!"
She grew frightfully still.
"Where are the servants, the guests—?"
"The party," she said, "was last night."
"Impossible! You've never had just a Friday-night bash. Sundays have
always seen your lawn littered with demon wretches strewn and bandaged
with bedclothes. Why—?"
"Why did I invite you out today, you want to ask, Charles?" Nora still
looked only at the house. "To give you Grynwood. A gift, Charlie, if you
can force it to let you stay, if it will put up with you—"
"I don't want the house!" I burst in.
"Oh, it's not if you wantit,but if it wantsyou.It threw us all out,
Charlie."
"Last night … ?"
"Last night the last great party at Grynwood didn't come off. Mag flew
from Paris. The Aga sent a fabulous girl from Nice. Roger, Percy,
Evelyn, Vivian, Jon were here. That bullfighter who almost killed the
playwright over the ballerina was here. The Irish dramatist who falls
off stages drunk was here. Ninety-seven guests teemed in that door
between five and seven last night. By midnight they were gone."
I walked across the lawn.
Yes, still fresh in the grass: the tire marks of three dozen cars.
"It wouldn't let us have the party, Charles," Nora called, faintly.
I turned blankly. "It? The house?"
"Oh, the music was splendid but went hollow upstairs. We heard our
laughter ghost back from the topmost halls. The party clogged. Thepetits
fourswere clods in our throats. The wine ran over our chins. No one got
to bed for even three minutes. Doesn't it sound a lie? But, Limp
Meringue Awards were given to all and they went away and I slept bereft
on the lawn all night. Guess why? Go look, Charlie."
We walked up to the open front door of Grynwood.
"What shall I look for?"
"Everything. All the rooms. The house itself. The mystery. Guess. And
when you've guessed a thousand times I'll tell you why I can never live
here again, must leave, why Grynwood is yours if you wish. Go in,
alone."
And in I went, slowly, one step at a time.
I moved quietly on the lovely lion-yellow hardwood parquetry of the
great hall. I gazed at the Aubusson wall tapestry. I examined the
ancient white marble Greek medallions displayed on green velvet in a
crystal case.
"Nothing," I called back to Nora out there in the late cooling day.
"No. Everything," she called. "Go on."
The library was a deep warm sea of leather smell where five thousand
books gleamed their colors of hand-rubbed cherry, lime, and lemon
bindings. Their gold eyes, bright titles, glittered. Above the fireplace
which could have kenneled two firedogs and ten great hounds hung the
exquisite GainsboroughMaidens and Flowersthat had warmed the family for
generations. It was a portal overlooking summer weather. One wanted to
lean through and sniff wild seas of flowers, touch harvest of peach
maiden girls, hear the machinery of bees bright-stitching up the
glamorous airs.
"Well?" called a far voice.
"Nora!" I cried. "Come here. There's nothing to fear! It's still
daylight!"
"No," said the far voice sadly. "The sun is going down. What do you see,
Charlie?"
"Out in the hall again, the spiral stairs. The parlor. Not a dust speck
on the air. I'm opening the cellar door. A million barrels and bottles.
Now the kitchen. Nora, this is lunatic!"
"Yes, isn't it?" wailed the far voice. "Go back to the library. Stand in
the middle of the room. See the GainsboroughMaidens and Flowersyou
always loved?"
"It's there."
"It's not. See the silver Florentine humidor?"
"I see it."
"You don't. See the great maroon leather chair where you drank sherry
with Father?"
"Yes."
"No," sighed the voice.
"Yes, no? Do, don't? Nora, enough!"
"More than enough, Charlie. Can't you guess? Don't youfeelwhat happened
to Grynwood?"
I ached, turning. I sniffed the strange air.
"Charlie," said Nora, far out by the open front door, " … four years
ago," she said faintly. "Four years ago … Grynwood burned completely to
the ground."
I ran.
I found Nora pale at the door.
"Itwhat!?" I shouted.
"Burned to the ground," she said. "Utterly. Four years ago."
I took three long steps outside and looked up at the walls and windows.
"Nora, it's standing, it's all here!"
"No, it isn't, Charlie. That's not Grynwood."
I touched the gray stone, the red brick, the green ivy. I ran my hand
over the carved Spanish front door. I exhaled in awe. "It can't be."
"It is," said Nora. "All new. Everything from the cellar stones up. New,
Charles. New, Charlie. New."
"Thisdoor?"
"Sent up from Madrid, last year."
"This pavement?"
"Quarried near Dublin two years ago. The windows from Waterford this
spring."
I stepped through the front door.
"The parqueting?"
"Finished in France and shipped over autumn last."
"But, but, thattapestry!?"
"Woven near Paris, hung in April."
"But it's all thesame,Nora!"
"Yes, isn't it? I traveled to Greece to duplicate the marble relics. The
crystal case I had made, too, in Rheims."
"The library!"
"Every book, all bound the same way, stamped in similar gold, put back
on similar shelves. The library alone cost one hundred thousand pounds
to reproduce."
"The same, the same, Nora," I cried, in wonder, "oh God, the same," and
we were in the library and I pointed at the silver Florentine humidor.
"That, of course, was saved out of the fire?"
"No, no, I'm an artist. I remembered. I sketched, I took the drawings to
Florence. They finished the fraudulent fake in July."
"The GainsboroughMaidens and Flowers!?"
"Look close! That's Fritzi's work. Fritzi, that horrible drip-dry
beatnik painter in Montmartre? Who threw paint on canvas and flew them
as kites over Paris so the wind and rain patterned beauty for him, which
he sold for exorbitant prices? Well, Fritzi, it turns out, is a secret
Gainsborough fanatic. He'd kill me if he knew I told. He painted
thisMaidensfrom memory, isn't itfine?"
"Fine, fine, oh God, Nora, are you telling the truth?"
"I wish I weren't. Do you think I've been mentally ill, Charles?
Naturally you might think. Do you believe in good and evil, Charlie? I
didn't used. But now, quite suddenly, I have turned old and rain-dowdy.
I have hit forty, forty has hit me, like a locomotive. Do you know what
I think? … the house destroyeditself."
"Itwhat?"
She went to peer into the halls where shadows gathered now, coming in
from the late day.
"When I first came into my money, at eighteen, when people said Guilt I
said Bosh. They cried Conscience. I cried Crappulous Nonsense! But in
those days the rain barrel was empty. A lot of strange rain has fallen
since and gathered in me, and to my cold surprise I find me to the brim
with old sin and know thereisconscience and guilt.
"There are a thousand young men in me, Charles.
"They thrust and buried themselves there. When they withdrew, Charles, I
thought they withdrew. But no, no, now I'm sure there is not a single
one whose barb, whose lovely poisoned thorn is not caught in my flesh,
one place or another. God, God, how I loved their barbs, their thorns.
God how I loved to be pinned and bruised. I thought the medicines of
time and travel might heal the grip marks. But now I know I am all
fingerprints. There lives no inch of my flesh, Chuck, is not FBI file
systems of palm print and Egyptian whorl of finger stigmata. I have been
stabbed by a thousand lovely boys and thought I did not bleed but God I
do bleed now. I have bled all over this house. And my friends who denied
guilt and conscience, in a great subway heave of flesh have trammeled
through here and jounced and mouthed each other and sweat upon floors
and buckshot the walls with their agonies and descents, each from the
other's crosses. The house has been stormed by assassins, Charlie, each
seeking to kill the other's loneliness with their short swords, no one
finding surcease, only a momentary groaning out of relaxation.
"I don't think there has ever been a happy person in this house,
Charles, I see that now.
"Oh, it alllookedhappy. When you hear so much laughter and see so much
drink and find human sandwiches in every bed, pink and white morsels to
munch upon, you think: what joy! how happy-fine!
"But it is a lie, Charlie, you and I know that, and the house drank the
lie in my generation and Father's before me and Grandfather beyond. It
was always a happy house, which means a dreadful estate. The assassins
have wounded each other here for long over two hundred years. The walls
dripped. The doorknobs were gummy. Summer turned old in the Gainsborough
frame. So the assassins came and went, Charlie, and left sins and
memories of sins which the house kept.
"And when you have caught up just so much darkness, Charles, you must
vomit, mustn't you?
"My life is my emetic. I choke on my own past.
"So did this house.
"And finally, guilt ridden, terribly sad, one night I heard the friction
of old sins rubbing together in attic beds. And with this spontaneous
combustion the house smouldered ablaze. I heard the fire first as it sat
in the library, devouring books. Then I heard it in the cellar drinking
wine. By that time I was out the window and down the ivy and on the lawn
with die servants. We picnicked on the lake shore at four in the morning
with champagne and biscuits from the gatekeeper's lodge. The fire
brigade arrived from town at five to see the roofs collapse and vast
fire founts of spark fly over the clouds and the sinking moon. We gave
them champagne also and watched Grynwood die finally, at last, so at
dawn there was nothing.
"It had to destroy itself, didn't it, Charlie, it was so evil from all
my people and from me?"
We stood in the cold hall. At last I stirred myself and said, "I guess
so, Nora."
We walked into the library where Nora drew forth blueprints and a score
of notebooks.
"It was then, Charlie, I got my inspiration. Build Grynwood again. A
gray jigsaw puzzle put back together! Phoenix reborn from the sootbin.
So no one would know of its death through sickness. Not you, Charlie, or
any friends off in the world; let all remain ignorant. My guilt over its
destruction was immense. How fortunate to be rich. You can buy a fire
brigade with champagne and the village newspapers with four cases of
gin. The news never got a mile out that Grynwood was strewn sackcloth
and ashes. Time later to tell the world. Now! to work! And off I raced
to my Dublin solicitor's where my father had filed architectural plans
and interior details. I sat for months with a secretary,
word-associating to summon up Grecian lamps, Roman tiles. I shut my eyes
to recall every hairy inch of carpeting, every fringe, every rococo
ceiling oddment, all, all brasswork decor, firedog, switchplates,
log-bucket, and doorknob. And when the list of thirty thousand items was
compounded, I flew in carpenters from Edinburgh, tile setters from
Sienna, stone-cutters from Perugia, and they hammered, nailed, thrived,
carved, and set for four years, Charlie, and I loitered at the factory
outside Paris to watch spiders weave my tapestry and floor the rugs. I
rode to hounds at Waterford while watching them blow my glass.
"Oh, Charles, I don't think it has ever happened, has it in history,
that anyone ever put a destroyed thing back the way it was? Forget the
past, let the bones cease! Well, not for me, I thought, no: Grynwood
shall rise and be as ever it was. But, while looking like the old
Grynwood, it would have the advantage of being really new. A fresh
start, I thought, and while building it I led such aquietlife, Charles.
The work was adventure enough.
"As I did the house over, I thought I did myself over. While I favored
it with rebirth, I favored myself with joy. At long last, I thought, a
happy person comes and goes at Grynwood.
"And it was finished and done, the last stone cut, the last tile placed,
two weeks ago.
"And I sent invitations across the world, Charlie, and last night they
all arrived, a pride of lion-men from New York, smelling of St. John's
breadfruit, the staff of life. A team of lightfoot Athens boys. A
Negrocorps de balletfrom Johannesburg. Three Sicilian bandits, or were
they actors? Seventeen lady violinists who might be ravished as they
laid down their violins and picked up their skirts. Four champion polo
players. One tennis pro to restring my guts. A darling French poet. Oh
God, Charles, it was to be a swell grand fine re-opening of the Phoenix
Estates, Nora Gryndon, proprietress. How did I know, or guess, the house
would not want us here?"
"Can a house want or not want?"
"Yes, when it is very new and everyone else, no matter what age, is very
old. It was freshly born. We were stale and dying. It was good. We were
evil. It wished to stay innocent. So it turned us out."
"How?"
"Why, just by being itself. It made the air so quiet, Charlie, you
wouldn't believe. We all felt someone had died.
"After awhile, with no one saying but everyone feeling it, people just
got in their cars and drove away. The orchestra shut up its music and
sped off in ten limousines. There went the entire party, around the lake
drive, as if heading for a midnight outdoor picnic, but no, just going
to the airport or the boats, or Galway, everyone cold, no one speaking,
and the house empty, and the servants themselves pumping away on their
bikes, and me alone in the house, the last party over, the party that
never happened, that never could begin. As I said, I slept on the lawn
all night, alone with my old thoughts and I knew this was the end of all
the years, for I was ashes, and ashes cannot build. It was the new grand
lovely fine bird lying in the dark, to itself. It hated my breath in the
dooryard. I was over. It had begun. There."
Nora was finished with her story.
We sat silently for a long while in the very late afternoon as dusk
gathered to fill the rooms, and put out the eyes of the windows. A wind
rippled the lake.
I said, "It can't all be true. Surely youcanstay here."
"A final test, so you'll not argue me again. We shall try to spend the
night here."
"Try?"
"We won't make it through till dawn. Let's fry a few eggs, drink some
wine, go to bed early. But lie on top your covers with your clothes on.
You shall want your clothes, swiftly, I imagine."
We ate almost in silence. We drank wine. We listened to the new hours
striking from the new brass clocks everywhere in the new house.
At ten, Nora sent me up to my room.
"Don't be afraid," she called to me on the landing. "The house means us
no harm. It simply fearswemay hurtit.I shall read in the library. When
you are ready to leave, no matter what hour, come for me."
"I shall sleep snug as a bug," I said.
"Shallyou? "said Nora.
And I went up to my new bed and lay in the dark smoking, feeling neither
afraid nor smug, calmly waiting for any sort of happening at all.
I did not sleep at midnight.
I was awake at one.
At three, my eyes were still wide.
The house did not creak, sigh, or murmur. It waited, as I waited, timing
its breath to mine.
At three thirty in the morning the door to my room slowly opened.
There was simply a motion of dark upon dark. I felt the wind draught
over my hands and face.
I sat up slowly in the dark.
Five minutes passed. My heart slowed its beating.
And then far away below, I heard the front door open.
Again, not a creak or whisper. Just the click and the shadowing change
of wind motioning the corridors.
I got up and went out into the hall.
From the top of the stairwell I saw what I expected: the front door
open. Moonlight flooded the new parqueting and shone upon the new
grandfather's clock which ticked with a fresh oiled bright sound.
I went down and out the front door.
"Thereyou are," said Nora, standing down by my car in the drive.
I went to her.
"You didn't hear a thing," she said, "and yet you heard something,
right?"
"Right."
"Are you ready to leave now, Charles?"
I looked up at the house. "Almost."
"You know now, don't you, it is all over? You feel it, surely, that it
is the dawn come up on a new morning? And, feel my heart, my soul
beating pale and mossy within my heart, my blood so black, Charlie, you
have felt it often beating under your own body, you know how old I am.
You know how full of dungeons and racks and late afternoons and blue
hours of French twilight I am. Well … "
Nora looked at the house.
"Last night, as I lay in bed at two in the morning, I heard the front
door drift open. I knew that the whole house had simply leant itself
ajar to let the latch free and glide the door wide. I went to the top of
the stairs. And, looking down, I saw the creek of moonlight laid out
fresh in the hall. And the house so much as said, here is the way you
go, tread the cream, walk the milky new path out of this and away, go,
old one, go with your darkness. You are with child. The sour-gum ghost
is in your stomach. It will never be born. And because you cannot drop
it, one day it will be your death. What are you waiting for?
"Well, Charles, I was afraid to go down and shut that door. And I knew
it was true, I would never sleep again. So, I went down and out.
"I have a dark old sinful place in Geneva. I'll go there to live. But
you are younger and fresher, Charlie, so I want this place to be yours."
"Not so young."
"Younger than I."
"Not so fresh. It wants me to go, too, Nora. The door tomyroom just now.
It opened, too."
"Oh, Charlie," breathed Nora, and touched my cheek. "Oh, Charles," and
then, softly, "I'm sorry."
"Don't be. We'll go together."
Nora opened the car door.
"Let me drive. I must drive now, very fast, all the way to Dublin. Do
you mind?"
"No. But what about your luggage?"
"What's in there, the house can have. Where are you going?"
I stopped walking. "I must shut the front door,"
"No," said Nora. "Leave it open."
"But … people will come in."
Nora laughed quietly. "Yes. But only good people. So that's all right,
isn't it?"
I finally nodded. "Yes. That's all right."
I came back to stand by my car, reluctant to leave. Clouds were
gathering. It was beginning to snow. Great gentle white leaflets fell
down out of the moonlit sky as harmlessly soft as the gossip of angels.
We got in and slammed the car doors. Nora gunned the motor.
"Ready? "she said.
"Ready."
"Charlie?" said Nora. "When we get to Dublin, will you sleep with me, I
meansleep,the next few days. I shall need someone the next days. Will
you?"
"Of course."
"I wish," she said. And tears filled her eyes. "Oh God, how I wish I
could burn myself down and start over. Burn myself down so I could go up
to the house now and go in and live forever like a dairy maid full of
berries and cream. Oh but hell. What's the use of talk like that?"
"Drive, Nora," I said, gently.
And she drummed the motor and we ran out of the valley, along the lake,
with gravel buckshotting out behind, and up the hills and through the
deep snow forest, and by the time we reached the last rise, Nora's tears
were shaken away, she did not look back, and we drove at seventy through
the dense falling and thicker night toward a darker horizon and a cold
stone city, and all the way, never once letting go, in silence I held
one of her hands.

