A MIRACLE OF RARE DEVICE (1962)

On a day neither too mellow nor too tart, too hot nor too cold, the
ancient tin lizzie came over the desert hill traveling at commotion
speed. The vibration of the various armored parts of the car caused
road-runners to spurt up in floury bursts of dust. Gila monsters, lazy
displays of Indian jewelry, took themselves out of the way. Like an
infestation, the Ford clamored and dinned away into the deeps of the
wilderness.

In the front seat, squinting back, Old Will Bantlin shouted, "Turn off!"

Bob Greenhill spun-swung the lizzie off behind a billboard. Instantly
both men turned. Both peered over the crumpled top of their car, praying
to the dust they had wheeled up on the air. "Lay down! Lay low! Please!"
And the dust blew slowly down. Just in time.

"Duck!"

A motorcycle, looking as if it had burned through all nine rings of
hell, thundered by. Hunched over its oily handlebars, a hurricane
figure, a man with a creased and most unpleasant face, goggled and
sun-deviled, leaned on the wind. Roaring bike and man flung away down
the road.

The two old men sat up in their lizzie, exhaling.

"So long, Ned Hopper," said Bob Greenhill.

"Why?" said Will Bantlin. "Why's he always tailing us?"

"Willy-William, talk sense," said Greenhill. "We're his luck, his Judas
goats. Why should he let us go, when trailing us around the land makes
him rich and happy and us poor and wise?"

The two men looked at each other, half in, half out their smiles. What
the world hadn't done to them, thinking about it had. They had enjoyed
thirty years of nonviolence together, in their case meaning non-work. "I
feel a harve’s coming on," Will would say, and they'd clear out of town
before the wheat ripened. Or, "Those apples are ready to fall!" So
they'd stand back about three hundred miles so as not to get hit on the
head.

Now Bob Greenhill slowly let the car, in a magnificent controlled
detonation, drift back out on the road.

"Willy, friend, don't be discouraged."

"I've been through 'discouraged,' " said Will. "I'm knee deep in
'accepting."

"Accepting what?"

"Finding a treasure chest of canned fish one day and no can opener.
Finding a thousand can openers next day and no fish."

Bob Greenhill listened to the motor talking to itself like an old man
under the hood, sounding like sleepless nights and rusty bones and
well-worn dreams. "Our bad luck can't last forever, Willy."

"No, but it sure tries. You and me sell ties and who's across the street
ten cents cheaper?"

"Ned Hopper."

"We strike gold in Tonopah and who registers the claim first?"

"Old Ned."

"Haven't we done him a lifetime of favors? Aren't we overdue for
something just ours, that never winds up his?"

"Prune's ripe, Willy," said Robert, driving calmly. "Trouble is, you,
me, Ned never really decided what we wanted. We've run through all the
ghost towns, see something, grab. Ned sees and grabs, too. He don't want
it, he just wants it because we want it. He keeps it 'till we're out of
sight, then tears it up and hang-dogs after us for more litter. The day
we really know what we want is the day Ned gets scared of us and runs
off forever. Ah, hell." Bob Greenhill breathed the clear fresh-water air
running in morning stream over the windshield. "It's good anyway. That
sky. Those hills. The desert and ...

His voice faded. Will Bantlin glanced over. "What's wrong?"

"For some reason ..." Bob Greenhill's eyes rolled, his tanned hands
turned the wheel slow, "we got to ... pull off ... the road."

The lizzie bumped on the dirt shoulder. They drove down in a dusty wash
and up out and suddenly along a dry pen of land overlooking the desert.
Bob Greenhill, looking hypnotized, put out his hand to turn the ignition
key. The old man under the hood stopped complaining about the insomnia,
and slept.

"Now, why did you do that?" asked Will Bantlin.

Bob Greenhill gazed at the wheel in his suddenly intuitive hands.

"Seemed as if I had to. Why?" He blinked up. He let his bones settle and
his eyes grow lazy. "Maybe only to look at the land out there. Good. All
of it been here a billion of years.

"Except for that city," said Will Bantlin.

"City?" said Bob. He turned to look and the desert was there and the
distant hills the color of lions, and far out beyond, suspended in a sea
of warm morning sand and light, was a kind of floating image, a hasty
sketch of a city. "That can't be Phoenix," said Bob Greenhill "Phoenix
is ninety miles off. No other big place around."

Will Bantlin rumpled the map on his knees, searching. "No. No other
town."

"It's coming clearer!" cried Bob Greenhill, suddenly.

They both stood absolutely straight up in the car and stared over the
dusty windshield, the wind whining softly over their craggy faces.

"Why, you know what that is, Bob? A mirage! Sure, that's t it! Light
rays just right, atmosphere, sky, temperature. City's the other side of
the horizon somewhere. Look how it jumps, fades in and out. It's
reflected against that sky up there like a mirror and comes down here
where we can see it! A mirage, by Gosh!"

"That big,-" Bob Greenhill measured the city as it grew taller, clearer
in a shift of

wind, a soft far whirlabout of sand. "The granddaddy of them all! That's
not Phoenix. Not Santa Fe or Alamogordo, no. Let's see. It's not Kansas
City."

"That's too far off, anyway."

"Yeah, but look at those buildings. Big! Tallest in the country. Only
one place like that in the world."

"You don't mean-New York?"

Will Bantlin nodded slowly and they both stood in the silence looking
out at the mirage. And the city was tall and shining now and almost
perfect in the early-morning light.

"Oh, my," said Bob, after a long while. "That's fine."

"It is," said Will.

"But," said Will, a moment later, whispering, as if afraid the city
might hear, "what's it doing three thousand miles from home, here in the
middle of Nowhere, Arizona?"

Bob Greenhill gazed and spoke. "Willy, friend, never question nature. It
just sits there and minds its knitting. Radio waves, rainbows, northern
lights, all that, heck, let's just say a great big picture got took of
New York City and is being developed here, three thousand miles away on
a mom when we need cheering, just for us."

"Not just us." Will peered over the side of the car. "Look!" There in
the floury dust lay innumerable crosshatchings, diagonals, fascinating
symbols printed out in a quiet tapestry. "Tire marks," said Bob
Greenhill. "Hundreds of them. Thousands. Lots of cars pulled off here."

"For what, Bob?" Will Bantlin leaped from the car, landed on the earth,
tromped it, turned on it, knelt to touch it with a swift and suddenly
trembling hand. "For what, for what? To see the mirage?"

"Yes, sir! To see the mirage!"

"Boy, howdy!" Will stood up, thrummed his voice like a motor.
"Brrrummm!" He turned an imaginary wheel. He ran along a tire
track."Brrrumm! Eeeee! Brakes on! Robert, Bob, you know what we got
here? Look east! Look west. This is the only point in miles you can pull
off the highway and sit and stare your eyes out!"

"Sure, it's nice people have an eye for beauty-"

"Beauty, my socks! Who owns this land?"

"The state, I reckon."

"You reckon wrong! You and me! We set up camp, register a claim, improve
the property, and the law reads it’s ours. Right?"

"Hold on!" Bob Greenhill was staring out at the desert and the strange
city there. "You mean you want to homestead a mirage?"

"Right, by zingo! Homestead a mirage!"

Robert Greenhill stood down and wandered around the car looking at the
tire-treaded earth. "Can we do that?" "Do it? Excuse my dust!" In an
instant Will Bantlin was pounding tent pegs into the soil, stringing
twine. "From here to here, and here to here, it's a gold mine, we pan
it, it's a cow we milk, it's a lakeful of money, we swim in it!"

Rummaging in the car, he heaved out cases and brought forth a large
cardboard which had once advertised cheap cravats. This, reversed, he
painted over with a brush and began lettering.

"Willy," said his friend, "nobody's going to pay to see any darned old-"

"Mirage? Put up a fence, tell folks they can't see a thing, and that's
just their itch. There!" He held up the sign.

SECRET VIEW MIRAGE-THE MYSTERIOUS CITY

25 cents per car.

Motorbikes a dime.

"Here comes a car. Watch!"

"William!"

But Will, running, lifted the sign.

"Hey! Look! Hey!" The car roared past, a buff ignoring the matador.

Bob shut his eyes so as not to see Will's smile wiped away.

But then-a marvelous sound. The squeal of brakes. The car was backing
up. Will was leaping forward, waving, pointing. "Yes, sir! Yes, ma'am!
Secret View Mirage! The Mysterious City! Drive right here!"

The treadmarks in the simple dust became numerous, and then, quite
suddenly, innumerable.

A great ball of heat-wafted dust hung over the dry peninsula where in a
vast sound of arrivals, with braked tires, slammed doors, stilled
engines, the cars of many kinds from many places came and took their
places in a line. And the people in the cars were as different as people
can be who come from four directions but are drawn in a single moment by
a single thing, all talking at first, but growing still at last at what
they saw out in the desert. The wind blew softly about their faces,
fluttering the hair of the women, the open shirt collars of the men.
They sat in their cars for a long time or they stood out on the rim of
the earth, saying nothing, and at last one by one turned to go.

As the first car drove back out past Bob and Will, the woman in it
nodded happily. "Thanks! Why, it is just like Rome!" "Did she say Rome
or home?" asked Will.

Another car wheeled toward the exit. "Yes, sir!" The driver reached out
to shake Bob's hand. "Just looking made me feel I could speak French!"

"French!" cried Bob. Both stepped forward swiftly as the third car made
to leave. An old man sat at the wheel, shaking his head. "Never seen the
like. I mean to say, fog and all, Westminster Bridge, better than a
postcard, and Big Ben off there in the distance. How do you do it? God
bless. Much obliged."

Both men, disquieted, let the old man drive away, then slowly wheeled to
look out along their small thrust of land toward the growing simmer of
noon. "Big Ben?" said Will Bantlin. "Westminster Bridge? Fog?"

Faintly, faintly, they thought they heard, they could not be sure, they
cupped their ears, wasn't that a vast clock striking three times off
there beyond land's rim? Weren't foghorns calling after boats and boat
horns calling down on some lost river?

"Almost speak French?" whispered Robert. "Big Ben? Home? Rome? Is that
Rome out

there, Will?"

The wind shifted. A broiling surge of warm air tumbled up, plucking
changes on an invisible harp. The fog almost solidified into gray stone
monuments. The sun almost built a golden statue on top of a breasted
mount of fresh-cut snow marble.

"How----" said William Bantlin, "how could it change? How could it be
four, five cities? Did we tell anyone what city they'd see? No. Well,
then, Bob, well!"

Now they fixed their gaze on their last customer, who stood alone at the
rim of the dry peninsula. Gesturing his friend to silence, Robert moved
silently to stand to one side and behind their paying visitor.

He was a man in his late forties with a vital, sunburned face, good,
warm, clear-water eyes, fine cheekbones, a receptive mouth. He looked as
if he had traveled a long way around in his life, over many deserts, in
search of a particular oasis. He resembled those architects found
wandering the rubbled streets below their buildings as the iron, steel
and glass go soaring up to block out, fill in an empty piece of the sky.
His face was that of such builders who suddenly see reared up before
them on the instant, from horizon to horizon, the perfect implementation
of an old, old dream. Now, only half aware of William and Robert beside
him, the stranger spoke at last in a quiet, an easy, a wondrous voice,
saying what he saw, telling what he felt:

"In Xanadu ... "

"What?" asked William.

The stranger half smiled, kept his eyes on the mirage and quietly, from
memory, recited.

"In Xanadu did Kubla Khan

A stately pleasure-dome decree

Where Alph, the sacred river, ran

Through caverns measureless to man,

Down to a sunless sea."

His voice spelled the weather and the weather blew about the other two
men and made them more still.

"So twice five miles of fertile ground

With walls and towers were girdled round

And here were gardens bright with sinuous rills,

Where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree.

And here were forests ancient as the hills,

Enfolding sunny spots of greenery."

William and Robert looked off at the mirage, and what the stranger said
was there, in the golden dust, some fabled Middle East or Far East
clustering of minarets, domes, frail towers risen up in a magnificent
sift of pollen from the Gobi, a spread of river stone baked bright by
the fertile Euphrates, Palmyra not yet ruins, only just begun, newly
minted, then abandoned by the departing years, now shimmered by heat,
now threatening to blow away forever.

The stranger, his face transformed, beautified by his vision, finished
it out:

"It was a miracle of rare device,

A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice"

And the stranger grew silent.

Which made the silence in Bob and Will all the deeper.

The stranger fumbled with his wallet, his eyes wet.

"Thank you, thank you."

"You already paid us," said William.

"If I had more, you'd get it all." He gripped William's hand, left a
five-dollar bill in it, jumped into his car, looked for a last time out
at the mirage, then sat down, started the car, idled it with wonderful
case at face glowing, eyes peaceful, drove away.

Robert walked a few steps after the car, stunned. Then William suddenly
exploded, flung his arms up, whooped, kicked his feet, wheeled around.

"Hallelujah! Fat of the land! Full dinner plate! New squeaky shoes! Look
at my fistfuls!"

But Robert said, "I don't think we should take it."

William stopped dancing. "What?"

Robert looked steadily at the desert. "We can't ever really own it. It's
way out there. Sure, we can homestead the land, but ... We don’t even
know what that thing is."

"Why, it's New York and-" "Ever been to New York?" "Always wanted. Never
did."

"Always wanted, never did." Robert nodded slowly. "Same as them. You
heard: Paris. Rome. London. And this last mate Xanadu. Willy, Willy, we
got hold of something strange an big here. I'm scared we don't do right
by it."

"Well, we're not keeping anyone out, are we?", "Who knows? Might be a
quarter's too much for some. It don't seem right, a natural thing
handled by unnatural rules. Look and tell me I'm wrong."

William looked. And the city was there like the first city he had seen
as a boy when his mother took him on a train across a long meadow of
heath early one morning and the city rose up head by head, tower by
tower to look at him, to watch him co near. It was that fresh, that new,
that old, that frightening, that wonderful.

"I think," said Robert, "we should take just enough to buy gas for a
week, put the rest of the money in the first poor-box we come to. That
mirage is a clear river running, and people coming by thirsty. If we're
wise, we dip one cup, drink it cool in the heat of the day and go. If we
stop, build dams, try to own the whole river ..."

William, peering out through the whispering dust wind, tried to relax,
accept. "If you say so."

"I don't. The wilderness all around says."

"Well, I say different!"

Both men jumped and spun about. Half up the slope stood a motorcycle.
Sitting it, rainbowed with oil, eyes goggled, grease masking his stubbly
cheeks, was a man of familiar arrogance and free-running contempt.

"Ned Hopper!"

Ned Hopper smiled his most evilly benevolent smile, unbraked the cycle
and glided the rest of the way down to halt by his old friends.
"You----,' said Robert.

"Me! Me! Me!" Ned Hopper honked his cycle horn four times, laughing
loud, head back. "Me!"

"Shut up!" cried Robert. "Bust it like a mirror."

"Bust what like a mirror?" William, catching Robert's concern, glanced
apprehensively out beyond at the desert.

The mirage flurried, trembled, misted away, then hung itself like a
tapestry once more on the air.

"Nothing out there! What you guys up to?" Ned peered down at the
treadmarked earth. "I was twenty miles on today when I realized you boys
was hiding back behind. Says to myself, that ain't like my buddies who
led me to that goldmine in forty-seven, lent me this cycle with a dice
roll in fifty-five. All those years we help each other and now you got
secrets from friend Ned. So I come back. Been up on that hill half the
day, spying." Ned lifted binoculars from his greasy jacket front. "You
know I can read lips. Sure!" Saw all the cars run in here, the cash.
Quite a show you’re running!"

"Keep your voice down," warned Robert. "So long."

Ned smiled sweetly. "Sorry to see you go. But I surely do respect your
getting off my property."

"Yours!" Robert and William caught themselves and said in a trembling
whisper, "Yours?"

Ned laughed. "When I saw what you was up to, I just cycled into Phoenix.
See this little bitty governmen’ paper sticking out my back pocket?"

The paper was there, neatly folded.

William put out his hand. "Don't give him the pleasure," said Robert.
William pulled his hand back. "You want us to believe you filed a
homestead claim?"

Ned shut up the smile inside his eyes. "I do. I don't. Even if I was
lying, I could still make Phoenix on my bike quicker'n your jalopy."

Ned surveyed the land with his binoculars. "So just put down all the
money you earned from two this afternoon, when I filed my claim, from
which time on you was trespassing my land."

Robert flung the coins into the dust. Ned Hopper glanced casually at the
bright litter. "The U.S. Government Mind. Hot dog, nothing out there,
but dumb bunnies willing to pay for it!"

Robert turned slowly to look at the desert. "You don't see nothing?"

Ned snorted. "Nothing, and you know it!"

"But we do!"" cried William. "We--" "William," said Robert. "But, Bob!"

"Nothing out there. Like he said." More cars were driving up now in a
great thrum of engines. "Excuse, gents, got to mind the box office!"

Ned strode off, waving. "Yes, sir, ma'am! This way! Cash in advance!"

"Why?" William watched Ned Hopper run off yelling. "Why are we letting
him do this?"

"Wait," said Robert, almost serenely. "You'll see."

They got out of the way as a Ford, a Buick and an ancient Moon motored
in.

Twilight. On a hill about two hundred yards above the Mysterious City
Mirage viewpoint, William Bantlin and Robert Greenhill fried and picked
at a small supper, hardly bacon, mostly beans. From time to time, Robert
used some battered opera glasses on the scene below.

"Had thirty customers since we left this afternoon," he observed. "Got
to shut down soon, though. Only ten minutes of sun left."

William stared at a single bean on the end of his fork. "Tell me again:
Why? Why every time our luck is good, Ned Hopper jumps out of the
earth."

Robert sighed on the opera-glass lenses and wiped them on his cuff.

"Because, friend Will, we are the pure in heart. We shine with a light.
And the villains of the world, they see that light beyond the hills and
say, "Why, now, there's some innocent, some sweet all-day sucker." And
the villains come to warm their hands at us. I don't know what we can do
about it, except maybe put out the light."

"I wouldn't want to do that." William brooded gently, his palms to the
fire. "It's just I was hoping this time was comeuppance time. A man like
Ned Hopper, living his white underbelly life, ain't he about due for a
bolt of lightning?"

"Due?" Robert screwed the opera glasses tighter into his eyes. "Why, it
just struck! Oh, ye of little faith!" William jumped up beside him.

They shared the glasses, one lens each, peering down. "Look!" And
William, looking, cried, "Peduncle Q. Mackinaw!"

"Also, Gullable M. Crackers!"

For, far below, Ned Hopper was stomping around outside a car. People
gesticulated at him. He handed them some money. The car drove off.
Faintly you could hear Ned's anguished cries.

William gasped. "He's giving money back! Now he almost hit that man
there. The man shook his fist at him! Ned’s paid him back, too!
Look-more fond farewells!"

"Yah-hee!" whooped Robert, happy with his half of the glasses.

Below, all the cars were dusting away now. Old Ned did a violent kicking
dance, threw his goggles into the dust, tore down the sign, let forth a
terrible oath.

"Dear me," mused Robert. "I'm glad I can't hear them words. Come on,
Willy!"

As William Bantlin and Robert Greenhill drove back up to the Mysterious
City turn-off, Ned Hopper rocketed out in a screaming fury. Braying,
roaring on his cycle, he hurled the painted cardboard through the air.
The sign whistled up, a boomerang. It hissed, narrowly missing Bob. Long
after Ned was gone in his banging thunder, the sign sank down and lay on
the earth, where William picked it up and brushed it off.

It was twilight indeed now and the sun touching the far hills and the
land quiet and hushed and Ned Hopper gone away, and the two men alone in
the abandoned territory in the thousand-treaded dust, looking out at the
sand and the strange air.

"Oh, no..."

"Yes," said Robert.

The desert was empty in the pink-gold light of the set ting sun. The
mirage was gone. A few dust devils whirled and fell apart, way out on
the horizon, but that was all.

William let out a huge groan of bereavement. "He did it! Ned! Ned
Hopper, come back, you! Oh, damn it, Ned, you spoiled it all! Blast you
to perdition!" He stopped. "Bob, how can you stand there!"

Robert smiled sadly. "Right now I'm feeling sorry for Ned Hopper. He
never saw what we saw. He never saw what anybody saw. He never believed
for one second. And you know what? Disbelief is catching. It rubs off on
people."

William searched the disinhabited land. "Is that what happened?" "Who
knows?" Robert shook his head. "One thing sure: when folks drove in
here, the city, the cities, the mirage, whatever, was there. But it's
awful hard to see when people stand in your way. Without so much as
moving, Ned Hopper put his big hand across the sun. First thing you
know, theater's closed for good."

"Can't we--" William hesitated. "Can't we open it up again?"

"How? How do you bring a thing like that back?"

They let their eyes play over the sand, the hills, the few long clouds,
the sky emptied of wind and very still. "Maybe if we just look out the
sides of our eyes, not direct at it, relax, take it easy..."

They both looked down at their shoes, their hands, the rocks at their
feet, anything. But at last William mourned, "Are we? Are we the pure in
heart?"

Robert laughed just a little bit. "Oh, not like the kids who came
through here today and saw anything they wanted to see, and not like the
big simple people born in the wheat fields and by God's grace wandering
the world and will never grow up. We're neither the little children nor
the big children of the world, Willy, but we are one thing: glad to be
alive. We know the air mornings on the road, how the stars go up and
then down the sky. That villain, he stopped being glad a long time ago.
I hate to think of him driving his cycle on the road the rest of the
night, the rest of the year."

As he finished this, Robert noticed that William was sliding his eyes
carefully to one side, toward the desert.

Robert whispered carefully, "See anything?"

A single car came down the highway. The two men glanced at each other. A
wild look of hope flashed in their eyes. But they could not quite bring
themselves to fling up their hands and yell. They simply stood with the
painted sign held in their arms.

The car roared by. The two men followed it with their wistful eyes.

The car braked. It backed up. In it were a man, a woman, a boy, a girl.
The man called out, "You closed for the night?" William said, "It's no
use--" Robert cut in "He means, no use giving us money! Last customer of
the day, and family, free! On the house!" "Thank you, neighbor, thank
you!"

The car roared out onto the viewpoint. William seized Robert's elbow.

"Bob, what offs you? Disappoint those kids, that nice family?" "Hush
up," said Robert gently. "Come on."

The kids piled out of the car. The man and his wife climbed slowly out
into the sunset. The sky was gold and blue now, and a bird sang
somewhere in the fields of send and bon-pollen. "Watch," said Robert.

And they moved up to stand behind the family where it was lined up now
to look out over the desert.

William held his breath. The man and wife squinted into the twilight
uneasily. The kids said nothing. Their eyes flexed and filled with a
distillation of late sunlight.

William cleared his throat, "It's late. Uh--can't see too--" The man was
going to reply, when the boy said, "Oh, we can see fine!"

"Sure!" The girl pointed. "There!" The mother and father followed her
gesture, as if it might help, and it did.

"Lord," said the woman, "for a moment I thought ... But now.. Yes, there
it is!" The man read his wife's face, saw a thing there, borrowed it and
placed it on the land and in the air.

"Yes," he said, at last "Oh, yes." William stared at them, at the desert
and then at Robert, who smiled and nodded.

The faces of the father, the mother, the daughter, the son were glowing
now, looking off at the desert. "Oh," murmured the girl, "is it really
there?"

And the father nodded, his face bright with what he saw that was just
within seeing and just beyond knowing. He spoke as if he stood alone in
a great forest church. "Yes. And, Lord, it's beautiful."

William started to lift his head, but Robert whispered, "Easy. It's
coming. Don’t try. Easy, Will." And then William knew what to do.

"I.." he said, "I am going to go stand with the kids."

And he walked slowly over and stood right behind the boy and the girl.
He stood for a long time there, like a man between two warm fires on a
cool evening, and they warmed him and he breathed easy and at last let
his eyes drift up, let his attention wander easy out toward the twilight
desert and the hoped-for city in the dusk.

And there in the dust softly blown high from the land, reassembled on
the wind into half-shapes of towers and spires and minarets, was the
mirage.

He felt Robert's breath on his neck, close, whispering, half talking to
himself.

"It was a miracle of rare device,

A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice

And the city was there. And the sun set and the first stars came out.
And the city was very clear, as William heard himself repeat, aloud or
perhaps for only his secret pleasure, "It was a miracle of rare
device..."

And they stood in the dark until they could not see.
