ICARUS MONTGOLFIER WRIGHT

Ray Bradbury

He lay on his bed and the wind blew through the window over his ears and
over his half-opened mouth so it whispered to him in his dream. It was
like the wind of time hollowing the Delphic caves to say what must be
said of yesterday, today, tomorrow. Sometimes one voice gave a shout far
off away, sometimes two, a dozen, an entire race of men cried out
through his mouth, but their words were always the same: "Look, look,
we've done it!" For suddenly he, they, one or many, were flung in the
dream, and flew. The air spread in a soft warm sea where he swam,
disbelieving. "Look, look! It's done!" But he didn't ask the world to
watch; he was only shocking his senses wide to see, taste, smell, touch
the air, the wind, the rising moon. He swam alone in the sky. The heavy
earth was gone. But wait, he thought, wait now! Tonight - what night is
this? The night before, of course. The night before the first flight of
a rocket to the Moon. Beyond this room on the baked desert floor one
hundred yards away the rocket waits for me. Well, does it now? Is there
really a rocket? Hold on! he thought, and twisted, turned, sweating,
eyes tight, to the wall, the fierce whisper in his teeth. Be certain -
sure! You, now, who are you? Me? he thought. My name? Jedediah Prentiss,
born 1938, college graduate 1959, licensed rocket pilot, 1965. Jedediah
Prentiss . . . Jedediah Prentiss . . . The wind whistled his name away!
He grabbed for it, yelling. Then, gone quiet, he waited for the wind to
bring his name back. He waited a long while, and there was only silence,
and then after a thousand heartbeats he felt motion. The sky opened out
like a soft blue flower. The Aegean Sea stirred soft white fans through
a distant wine-colored surf. In the wash of the waves on the shore, he
heard his name. Icarus. And again in a breathing whisper. Icarus.
Someone shook his arm and it was his father saying his name and shaking
away the night. And he himself lay small, half-turned to the window and
the shore below and the deep sky, feeling the first wind of morning
ruffle the golden feathers bedded in amber wax lying by the side of his
cot. Golden wings stirred half-alive in his father's arms, and the faint
down on his own shoulders quilled trembling as he looked at these wings
and beyond them to the cliff. "Father, how's the wind?" "Enough for me,
but never enough for you . . . "Father, don't worry. The wings seem
clumsy now, but my bones in the feathers will make them strong, my blood
in the wax will make it live!" "My blood, my bones too, remember; each
man lends his flesh to his children, asking that they tend it well.
Promise you'll not go high, Icarus. The sun or my son, the heat of one,
the fever of the other, could melt these wings. Take care!" And they
carried the splendid golden wings into the morning and heard them
whisper in their arms, whisper his name or a name or some name that
blew, span, and settled like a feather on the soft air. Montgolfier. His
hands touched fiery rope, bright linen, stitched thread gone hot as
summer. His hands fed wool and straw to a breathing flame. Montgolfier.
And his eye soared up along the swell and sway, the oceanic tug and
pull, the immensely wafted silver pear still filling with the shirmering
tidal airs channeled up from the blaze. Silent as a god tilted
slumbering above French countryside, this delicate linen envelope, this
swelling sack of oven-baked air would soon pluck itself free. Draughting
upward to blue worlds of silence, his mind and his brother's mind would
sail with it, muted, serene among island clouds where uncivilized
lightnings slept. Into that uncharted gulf and abyss where no birdsong
or shout of man could follow, the balloon would hush itself. So cast
adrift, he, Montgolfier, and all men, might hear the unmeasured
breathing of God and the cathedral tread of eternity. "Ah . . ." He
moved, the crowd moved, shadowed by the warm balloon. "Everything's
ready, everything's right . . ." Right. His lips twitched in his dream.
Right. Hiss, whisper, flutter, rush. Right. From his father's hands a
toy jumped to the ceiling, whirled in its own wind, suspended, while he
and his brother stared to see it flicker, rustle, whistle, heard it
murmuring their names. Wright. Whispering: wind, sky, cloud, space,
wing, fly . . . "Wilbur, Orville? Look, how's that ?" Ah. In his sleep,
his mouth sighed. The toy helicopter hummed, bumped the ceiling,
murmured eagle, raven, sparrow, robin, hawk; murmured eagle, raven,
sparrow, robin, hawk. Whispered eagle, whispered raven, and at last,
fluttering to their hands with a susurration, a wash of blowing weather
from summers yet to come, with a last whir and exhalation, whispered
hawk. Dreaming, he smiled. He saw the clouds rush down the Aegean sky.
He felt the balloon sway drunkenly, its great bulk ready for the clear
running wind. He felt the sand hiss up the Atlantic shelves from the
soft dunes that might save him if he, a fledgling bird, should fall. The
framework struts hummed and chorded like a harp, and himself caught up
in its music. Beyond this room he felt the primed rocket glide on the
desert field, its fire-wings folded, its fire-breath kept, held ready to
speak for three billion men. In a moment he would wake and walk slowly
out to that rocket. And stand on the rim of the cliff. Stand cool in the
shadow of the warm balloon. Stand whipped by tidal sands drummed over
Kitty Hawk. And sheathe his boy's wrists, arms, hands, lingers with
golden wings in golden wax. And touch for a final time the captured
breath of man, the warm gasp of awe and wonder siphoned and sewn to lift
their dreams. And spark the gasoline engine. And take his father's hand
and wish him well with his own wings, flexed and ready, here on the
precipice. Then whirl and jump. Then cut the cords to free the great
balloon. Then rev the motor, prop the plane on air. And crack the
switch, to fire the rocket fuse. And together in a single leap, swim,
rush, flail, jump, sail, and glide, upturned to sun, moon, stars, they
would go above Atlantic, Mediterranean; over country, wilderness, city,
town; in gaseous silence, riffling feather, rattle-drum frame, in
volcanic eruption, in timid, sputtering roar; in start, jar, hesitation,
then steady ascension, beautifully held, wondrously transported, they
would laugh and cry each his own name to himself. Or shout the names of
others unborn or others long-dead and blown away by the wine wind or the
salt wind or the silent hush of balloon wind or the wind of chemical
fire. Each feeling the bright feathers stir and bud deep-buried and
thrusting to burst from their riven shoulder blades! Each leaving behind
the echo of their flying, a sound to encircle, recircle the earth in the
winds and speak again in other years to the sons of the sons of their
sons, asleep but hearing the restless midnight sky. Up, yet further up,
higher, higher! A spring tide, a summer flood, an unending river of
wings! A bell rang softly. No, he whispered, I'll wake in a moment. Wait
. . . The Aegean slid away below the window, gone; the Atlantic dunes,
the French countryside, dissolved down to New Mexico desert. In his room
near his cot stirred no plumes in golden wax. Outside, no wind-sculpted
pear, no trap-drum butterfly machine. Outside only a rocket, a
combustible dream, walting for the friction of his hand to set it off.
In the last moment of sleep someone asked his name. Quietly, he gave the
answer as he had heard it during the hours from midnight on. "Icarus
Montgolfier Wright." He repeated it slowly so the questioner might
remember the order and spelling down to the last incredible letter.
"Icarus Montgolfier Wright. "Born: nine hundred years before Christ.
Grammar school: Paris, 1783. High school, college: Kitty Hawk, 1903.
Graduation from Earth to Moon: this day, God willing, August 1, 1970.
Death and burial, with luck, on Mars, summer 1999 in the Year of Our
Lord." Then he let himself drift awake.

Moments later, crossing the desert Tarmac, he heard someone shouting
again and again and again. And if no one was there or if someone was
there behind him, he could not tell. And whether it was one voice or
many, young or old, near or very far away, rising or falling, whispering
or shouting to him all three of his brave new names, he could not tell,
either. He did not turn to see. For the wind was slowly rising and he
let it take hold and blow him all the rest of the way across the desert
to the rocket which stood waiting there.
