                                 
                              Long After Midnight
                                      1963

     The  police  ambulance  went up into the palisades at the wrong hour. It is
always  the  wrong  hour  when  the police ambulance goes anywhere, but this was
especially  wrong,  for  it was long after midnight and nobody imagined it would
ever  be day again, because the sea coming in on the light-less shore below said
as much, and the wind blowing salt cold in from the Pacific reaffirmed this, and
the  fog  muffling  the  sky  and  putting  out  the  stars  struck  the  final,
unfelt-but-disabling  blow.  The  weather said it had been here forever, man was
hardly  here at all, and would soon be gone. Under the circumstances it was hard
for  the  men  gathered  on the cliff, with several cars, the headlights on, and
flashlights  bobbing,  to  feel real, trapped as they were between a sunset they
hardly remembered and a sunrise that would not be imagined.
     The  slender  weight  hanging from the tree, turning in the cold salt wind,
did not diminish this feeling in any way.
     The  slender  weight  was  a  girl, no more than nineteen, in a light green
gossamer  party  frock, coat and shoes lost somewhere in the cool night, who had
brought  a  rope up to these cliffs and found a tree with a branch half out over
the  cliff  and  tied  the  rope  in  place and made a loop for her neck and let
herself  out  on  the  wind to hang there swinging. The rope made a dry scraping
whine  on the branch, until the police came, and the ambulance, to take her down
out of space and place her on the ground.
     A single phone call had come in about midnight telling what they might find
out here on the edge of the cliff and whoever it was hung up swiftly and did not
call again, and now the hours had passed and all that could be done was done and
over, the police were finished and leaving, and there was just the ambulance now
and the men with the ambulance to load the quiet burden and head for the morgue.
     Of  the three men remaining around the sheeted form there were Carlson, who
had  been at this sort of thing for thirty years, and Moreno, who had been at it
for  ten,  and Latting, who was new to the job a few weeks back. Of the three it
was  Latting  now  who stood on the edge of the cliff looking at that empty tree
limb,  the  rope  in  his  hand, not able to take his eyes away. Carlson came up
behind  him.  Hearing  him,  Latting said, "What a place, what an awful place to
die."
     "Any  place  is  awful,  if  you  decide  you  want to go bad enough," said
Carlson. "Come on, kid."
     Latting  did  not  move.  He  put  out  his hand to touch the tree. Carlson
grunted and shook his head. "Go ahead. Try to remember it all."
     "Any  reason  why  I  shouldn't?"  Latting  turned  quickly to look at that
emotionless gray face of the older man. "You got any objections?"
     "No  objections.  I was the same way once. But after a while you learn it's
best  not  to  see. You eat better. You sleep better. After a while you learn to
forget."
     "I  don't  want  to forget," said Latting. "Good God, somebody died up here
just a few hours ago. She deserves -"
     "She  deserved,  kid,  past tense, not present. She deserved a better shake
and  didn't  get  it. Now she deserves a decent burial. That's all we can do for
her. It's late and cold. You can tell us all about it on the way."
     "That could be your daughter there."
     "You  won't  get  to  me  that  way, kid. It's not my daughter, that's what
counts.  And  it's  not  yours,  though  you  make  it sound like it was. It's a
nineteen-year-old girl, no name, no purse, nothing. I'm sorry she's dead. There,
does that help?"
     "It could if you said it right."
     "I'm sorry, now pick up the other end of the stretcher."
     Latting  picked  up  one  end of the stretcher but did not walk with it and
only looked at the figure beneath the sheet.
     "It's awful being that young and deciding to just quit."
     "Sometimes," said Carlson, at the other end of the stretcher, "I get tired,
too."
     "Sure, but you're -" Latting stopped.
     "Go  ahead,  say it, I'm old. Somebody fifty, sixty, it's okay, who gives a
damn,  somebody nineteen, everybody cries. So don't come to my funeral, kid, and
no flowers."
     "I didn't mean..." said Latting.
     "Nobody means, but everybody says, and luckily I got the hide of an iguana.
March."
     They moved with the stretcher toward the ambulance where Moreno was opening
the doors wider.
     "Boy," said Latting, "she's light. She doesn't weigh anything."
     "That's  the  wild  life for you, you punks, you kids." Carlson was getting
into  the  back  of the ambulance now and they were sliding the stretcher in. "I
smell whiskey.
     You  young  ones  think  you can drink like college fullbacks and keep your
weight. Hell, she don't even weigh ninety pounds, if that."
     Latting  put the rope in on the floor of the ambulance. "I wonder where she
got this?"
     "It's  not  like  poison,"  said Moreno. "Anyone can buy rope and not sign.
This  looks  like  block-and-tackle rope. She was at a beach party maybe and got
mad at her boyfriend and took this from his car and picked herself a spot...."
     They took a last look at the tree out over the cliff, the empty branch, the
wind rustling in the leaves, then Carlson got out and walked around to the front
seat with Moreno, and Latting got in the back and slammed the doors.
     They  drove away down the dim incline toward the shore where the ocean laid
itself,  card  after  white card, in thunders, upon the dark sand. They drove in
silence  for  a while, letting their headlights, like ghosts, move on out ahead.
Then Latting said, "I'm getting myself a new job."
     Moreno  laughed.  "Boy, you didn't last long. I had bets you wouldn't last.
Tell  you  what,  you'll be back. No other job like this. All the other jobs are
dull.  Sure,  you  get sick once in a while. I do. I think: I'm going to quit. I
almost do. Then I stick with it. And here I am."
     "Well,  you  can  stay,"  said  Latting.  "But I'm full up. I'm not curious
anymore.  I  seen a lot the last few weeks, but this is the last straw. I'm sick
of being sick. Or worse, I'm sick of your not caring."
     "Who doesn't care?"
     "Both of you!"
     Moreno  snorted.  "Light  us  a  couple,  huh,  Carlie?"  Carlson  lit  two
cigarettes  and  passed  one  to  Moreno,  who  puffed on it, blinking his eyes,
driving  along by the loud strokes of the sea. "Just because we don't scream and
yell and throw fits -"
     "I  don't  want  fits,"  said Latting, in the back, crouched by the sheeted
figure. "l just want a little human talk, I just want you to look different than
you  would  walking  through  a  butcher's shop. If I ever get like you two, not
worrying, not bothering, all thick skin and tough -"
     "We're  not  tough,"  said  Carlson,  quietly,  thinking  about  it, "we're
acclimated."
     "Acclimated, hell, when you should be numb?"
     "Kid, don't tell us what we should be when you don't even know what we are.
Any doctor is a lousy doctor who jumps down in the grave with every patient. All
doctors did that, there'd be no one to help the live and kicking. Get out of the
grave, boy, you can't see nothing from there."
     There  was  a  long  silence  from  the  back,  and at last Latting started
talking, mainly to himself:
     "I  wonder  how  long she was up there alone on the cliff, an hour, two? It
must  have  been  funny  up there looking down at all the campfires, knowing you
were  going  to wipe the whole business clean off. I suppose she was to a dance,
or a beach party, and she and her boyfriend broke up. The boyfriend will be down
at the station tomorrow to identify her. I'd hate to be him. How he'll feel? -"
     "He  won't  feel  anything. He won't even show up," said Carlson, steadily,
mashing out his cigarette in the front-seat tray. "He was probably the one found
her and made the call and ran. Two bits will buy you a nickel he's not worth the
polish  on her little fingernail. Some slobby lout of a guy with pimples and bad
breath. Christ, why don't these girls learn to wait until morning."
     "Yeah," said Moreno. "Everything's better in the morning."
     "Try telling that to a girl in love," said Latting.
     "Now  a  man,"  said  Carlson,  lighting  a  fresh cigarette, lie just gets
himself drunk, says to hell with it, no use killing yourself for no woman."
     They drove in silence awhile past all the small dark ach houses with only a
light here or there, it was so late.
     "Maybe," said Latting, "she was going to have a baby."
     "It happens."
     "And  then  the  boyfriend runs off with someone and s one just borrows his
rope and walks up on the cliff," lid Latting. "Answer me, now, is that or isn 't
it love?"
     "It,"  said  Carlson,  squinting,  searching, the dark, "is a id of love. I
give up on what kind."
     "Well,  sure,"  said Moreno, driving. "I'll go along with you, kid. I mean,
it's nice to know somebody in this world a love that hard."
     They  all  thought  for  a  while,  as  the  ambulance purred between quiet
palisades  and  now  quiet sea and maybe two of them thought fleetingly of their
wives  and  tract  houses and sleeping children and all the times years ago when
they  had driven to the beach and broken out the beer and necked up in the rocks
and lay around on the blankets with guitars, singing and feeling like life would
go  on  just as far as the ocean went, which was very far, and maybe they didn't
think  that  at  all.  Latting,  looking  up at the backs of the two older men's
necks,  hoped  or  perhaps  only nebulously wondered if these men remembered any
first  kisses,  the  taste  of salt on the lips. Had there ever been a time when
they  had  stomped the sand like mad bulls and yelled out of sheer joy and dared
the universe to put them down?
     And  by their silence, Latting knew that yes, with all his talking, and the
night,  and  the  wind,  and  the cliff and the tree and the rope, he had gotten
through  to them; it, the event, had gotten through to them. Right now, they had
to  be  thinking  of  their  wives  in  their  warm  beds, long dark miles away,
unbelievable,  suddenly  unattainable  while  here  they  were  driving  along a
salt-layered  road  at a dumb hour half between certainties, bearing with them a
strange thing on a cot and a used length of rope.
     "Her  boyfriend,"  said  Latting,  "will be out dancing tomorrow night with
somebody else. That gripes my gut."
     "I wouldn't mind," said Carlson, "beating the hell out of him."
     Latting  moved  the sheet. "They sure wear their hair crazy and short, some
of them. All curls, but short. Too much makeup. Too -" He stopped.
     "You were saying?" asked Moreno.
     Latting  moved  the  sheet  some  more. He said nothing. In the next minute
there  was  a  rustling sound of the sheet, moved now here, now there. Latting's
face was pale.
     "Hey," he murmured, at last. "Hey."
     Instinctively, Moreno slowed the ambulance.
     "Yeah, kid?"
     "I  just found out something," said Latting. "I had this feeling all along,
she's wearing too much make-up, and the hair, and -"
     "So?"
     "Well,  for  God's sake," said Latting, his lips hardly moving, one hand up
to feel his own face to see what its expression was. "You want to know something
funny?"
     "Make us laugh," said Carlson.
     The  ambulance slowed even more as Latting said, "It's not a woman. I mean,
it's not a girl. I mean, well, it's not a female. Understand?"
     The ambulance slowed to a crawl.
     The wind blew in off the vague morning sea through the window as the two up
front turned and stared into the back of the ambulance at the shape there on the
cot.
     "Somebody tell me," said Latting, so quietly they almost could not hear the
words. "Do we stop feeling bad now? Or do we feel worse?"
     Nobody answered.
     A  wave,  and  then  another,  and then another, moved in and fell upon the
mindless shore.