prose_contemporaryRayBradburyTHE LOST CITY OF MARScutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
THE LOST CITY OF MARS
The great eye floated in space. And behind the great eye somewhere
hidden away within metal and machinery was a small eye that belonged to
a man who looked and could not stop looking at all the multitudes of
stars and the diminishings and growings of lightabillion billion miles
away.
The small eye closed with tiredness. Captain John Wilder stood holding
to the telescopic devices which probed the universe and at last
murmured, "Which one?"
The astronomer with him said, "Take your pick."
"I wish it were that easy." Wilder opened his eyes. "What's the data on
this star?"
"Alpha-Cygne II. Same size and reading as our sun. Planetary system,
possible."
"Possible. Not certain. If we pick the wrong star, God help the people
we send on a two-hundred-year journey to find a planet that may not be
there. No, God help me, for the final selection is mine, and I may well
send myself on that journey. So, how can we be sure?"
"We can't. We just make the best guess, send our starship out, and
pray."
"You are not very encouraging. That's it. I'm tired."
Wilder touched a switch that shut up tight the greater eye, this
rocket-powered space lens that stared cold upon the abyss, saw far too
much and knew little, and now knew nothing. The rocket laboratory
drifted sightless on an endless night.
"Home," said the captain. "Let's go home."
And the blind beggar-after-stars wheeled on a spread of fire and ran
away.
The frontier cities on Mars looked very fine from above. Coming down for
a landing, Wilder saw the neons among the blue hills and thought, We'll
light those worlds a billion miles off, and the children of the people
living under those lights this instant, we'll make them immortal. Very
simply, if we succeed, they will live forever.
Live forever. The rocket landed. Live forever.
The wind that blew from the frontier town smelled of grease. An
aluminum-toothed jukebox banged somewhere. A junkyard rusted beside the
rocket port. Old newspapers danced alone on the windy tarmac.
Wilder, motionless at the top of the gantry elevator, suddenly wished
not to move down. The lights suddenly had become people and not words
that, huge in the mind, could be handled with elaborate ease.
He sighed. The freight of people was too heavy. The stars were too far
away.
"Captain?" said someone behind him.
He stepped forward. The elevator gave way. They sank with a silent
screaming toward a very real land with real people in it, who were
waiting for him to choose.
At midnight the telegram-bin hissed and exploded out a message
projectile. Wilder, at his desk, surrounded by tapes and computation
cards, did not touch it for a long while. When at last he pulled the
message out, he scanned it, rolled it in a tight ball, then uncrumpled
the message and read again:
FINAL CANAL BEING FILLED TOMORROW WEEK. YOU ARE INVITED CANAL YACHT
PARTY. DISTINGUISHED GUESTS. FOUR-DAY JOURNEY TO SEARCH FOR LOST CITY.
KINDLY ACKNOWLEDGE.
—I. V. AARONSON
Wilder blinked, and laughed quietly. He crumpled the paper again, but
stopped, lifted the telephone and said:
"Telegram to I. V. Aaronson, Mars City I. Answer affirmative. No sane
reason why, but still—affirmative."
And hung up the phone. To sit for a long while watching this night which
shadowed all the whispering, ticking, and motioning machines.
The dry canal waited.
It had been waiting twenty thousand years for nothing but dust to filter
through in ghost tides.
Now, quite suddenly, it whispered.
And the whisper became a rush and wall-caroming glide of waters.
As if a vast machined fist had struck the rocks somewhere, clapped the
air and cried "Miracle!," a wall of water came proud and high along the
channels, and lay down in all the dry places of the canal and moved on
toward ancient deserts of dry-bone, surprising old wharves and lifting
up the skeletons of boats abandoned thirty centuries before when the
water burnt away to nothing.
The tide turned a corner and lifted up—a boat as fresh as the morning
itself, with new-minted silver screws and brass pipings, and bright new
Earth-sewn flags. The boat, suspended from the side of the canal, bore
the nameAaronson I.
Inside the boat, a man with the same name smiled. Mr. Aaronson sat
listening to the waters live under the boat.
And the sound of the water was cut across by the sound of a hovercraft,
arriving, and a motorbike, arriving, and in the air, as if summoned with
magical timing, drawn by the glimmer of tides in the old canal, a number
of gadfly people flew over the hills on jet-pack machines, and hung
suspended as if doubting this collision of lives caused by one rich man.
Scowling up with a smile, the rich man called to his children, cried
them in from the heat with offers of food and drink.
"Captain Wilder! Mr. Parkhill! Mr. Beaumont!"
Wilder set his hovercraft down.
Sam Parkhill discarded his motorbike, for he had seen the yacht and it
was a new love.
"My God," cried Beaumont, the actor, part of the frieze of people in the
sky dancing like bright bees on the wind. "I've timed my entrance wrong.
I'm early. There's no audience!"
"I'll applaud you down!" shouted the old man, and did so, then added,
"Mr. Aikens!"
"Aikens?" said Parkhill. "The big-game hunter?"
"None other!"
And Aikens dived down as if to seize them in his harrying claws. He
fancied his resemblance to the hawk. He was finished and stropped like a
razor by the swift life he had lived. Not an edge of him but cut the air
as he fell, a strange plummeting vengeance upon people who had done
nothing to him. In the moment before destruction, he pulled up) on his
jets and, gently screaming, simmered himself to touch the marble jetty.
About his lean middle hung a rifle belt. His pockets bulged like those
of a boy from the candy store. One guessed he was stashed with sweet
bullets and rare bombs. In his hands, like an evil child, he held a
weapon that looked like a bolt of lightning fallen straight from the
clutch of Zeus, stamped nevertheless:Made in U.S.A.His face was
sunblasted dark. His eyes were cool surprises in the sunwrinkled flesh,
all mint-blue-green crystal. He wore a white porcelain smile set in
African sinews. The earth did not quite tremble as he landed.
"The lion prowls the land of Judah!" cried a voice from the heavens.
"Now do behold the lambs driven forth to slaughter!"
"Oh for God's sake, Harry, shut up!" said a woman's voice.
And two more kites fluttered their souls, their dread humanity on the
wind.
The rich man jubilated.
"Harry Harpwell!"
"Behold the angel of the Lord who comes with Annunciations!" the man in
the sky said, hovering. "And the Annunciation is—"
"He's drunk again," his wife supplied, flying ahead of him, not looking
back.
"Megan Harpwell," said the rich man, like an entrepreneur introducing
his troupe.
"The poet," said Wilder.
"And the poet's barracuda wife," muttered Park-hill.
"I am not drunk," the poet shouted down the wind. "I am simplyhigh."
And here he let loose such a deluge of laughter that those below almost
raised their hands to ward off the avalanche.
Lowering himself, like a fat dragon kite, the poet, whose wife's mouth
was now clamped shut, bumbled over the yacht. He made the motions of
blessing same, and winked at Wilder and Parkhill.
"Harpwell," he called. "Isn't that a name to go with being a great
modern poet who suffers in the present, lives in the past, steals bones
from old dramatists' tombs, and flies on this new egg-beater wind-suck
device, to call down sonnets on your head? I pity the old euphoric
saints and angels who had no invisible wings like this so as to dart in
oriole convolutions and ecstatic convulsions on the air as they sang
their lines or damned souls to Hell. Poor earth-bound sparrows, wings
clipped. Only their genius flew. Only their Muse knew air-sickness—"
"Harry," said his wife, her feet on the ground, eyes shut.
"Hunter!" called the poet. "Aikens! Here's the greatest game in all the
world, a poet on the wing. I bare my breast. Let fly your honeyed bee
sting! Bring me, Icarus, down, if your gun be sunbeams kindled in one
tube and let free in a single forest fire that escalates the sky and
turns tallow, mush, candlewick and lyre to mere tarbaby. Ready, aim,
fire!"
The hunter, in good humor, raised his gun.
The poet, at this, laughed a mightier laugh and, literally, exposed his
chest by tearing aside his shirt.
At which moment a quietness came along the canal rim.
A woman appeared walking. Her maid walked behind her. There was no
vehicle in sight, and it seemed almost as if they had wandered a long
way out of the Martian hills and now stopped.
The very quietness of her entrance gave dignity and attention to Cara
Corelli.
The poet shut up his lyric in the sky and landed.
The company all looked together at this actress who gazed back without
seeing them. She was dressed in a black jumpsuit which was the same
color as her dark hair. She walked like a woman who has spoken little in
her life and now stood facing them with the same quietness, as if
waiting for someone to move without being ordered. The wind blew her
hair out and down over her shoulders. The paleness of her face was
shocking. Her paleness, rather than her eyes, stared at them.
Then, without a word, she stepped down into the: yacht and sat in the
front of the craft, like a figurehead that knows its place and goes
there.
The moment of silence was over.
Aaronson ran his finger down his printed guest list,
"An actor, a beautiful woman who happens to be an actress, a hunter, a
poet, a poet's wife, a rocket captain, a former technician. All aboard!"
On the afterdeck of the huge craft, Aaronson spread forth his maps.
"Ladies, gentlemen," he said. "This is more than a four-day drinking
bout, party, excursion. This is a Search!"
He waited for their faces to light, properly, and for them to glance
from his eyes to the charts, and then said:
"We are seeking the fabled lost City of Mars, once called Dia-Sao. The
City of Doom, it was called. Something terrible about it. The
inhabitants fled as from a plague. The City left empty. Still empty now,
centuries later."
"We," said Captain Wilder, "have charted, mapped, and cross-indexed
every acre of land on Mars in the last fifteen years. You can't mislay a
city the size of the one you speak of."
"True," said Aaronson, "you've mappeditfrom the sky, from the land. But
you havenotcharted it via water! For the canals have been empty until
now! So now we shall take the new waters that fill this last canal and
go where the boats once went in the olden days, and see the very last
new things that need to be seen on Mars." The rich man continued: "And
somewhere on our traveling, as sure as the breath in our mouths, we
shall find the most beautiful, the most fantastic, the most awful city
in the history of this old world. And walk in that city—who knows?—find
the reason why the Martians ran screaming away from it, as the legend
says, ten thousand years ago."
Silence. Then:
"Bravo! Well done." The poet shook the old man's hand.
"And in that city," said Aikens, the hunter, "mightn't there be weapons
the like of which we've never seen?"
"Most likely, sir."
"Well" The hunter cradled his bolt of lightning. "I was bored of Earth,
shot every animal, ran fresh out of beasts, and came here looking for
newer, better, more dangerous maneaters of any size or shape. Plus, now,
new weapons! What more can one ask? Fine!"
And he dropped his blue-silver lightning bolt over the side. It sank in
the clear water, bubbling.
"Let's get the hell out of here."
"Let us, indeed," said Aaronson, "get the good hell out."
And he pressed the button that launched the yacht.
And the water flowed the yacht away.
And the yacht went in the direction toward which Cara Corelli's quiet
paleness was pointed: beyond.
As the poet opened the first champagne bottle. The cork banged. Only the
hunter did not jump.
The yacht sailed steadily through the day into night. They found an
ancient ruin and had dinner there and a good wine imported, one hundred
million miles from Earth. It was noted that it had traveled well.
With the wine came the poet, and after quite a bit of the poet, came
sleep on board the yacht which moved away in search of a City that would
not as yet be found.
At three in the morning, restless, unaccustomed to the gravity of a
planet pulling at all of his body and not freeing him to dream, Wilder
came out on the afterdeck of the yacht and found the actress there.
She was watching the waters slip by in dark revelations and discardments
of stars.
He sat beside her and thought a question.
Just as silently, Cara Corelli asked herself the same question, and
answered it.
"I am here on Mars because not long ago for the first time in my life, a
man told me the truth."
Perhaps she expected surprise. Wilder said nothing. The boat moved as on
a stream of soundless oil.
"I am a beautiful woman. I have been beautiful all of my life. Which
means that from the start people lied because they simply wished to be
with me. I grew up surrounded by the untruths of men, women, and
children who could not risk my displeasure. When beauty pouts, the world
trembles.
"Have you ever seen a beautiful woman surrounded by men, seen them
nodding, nodding? Heard their laughter? Men will laugh at anything a
beautiful woman says. Hate themselves, yes, but they will laugh, say no
for yes and yes for no.
"Well, that's how it was every day of every year for me. A crowd of
liars stood between me and anything unpleasant. Their words dressed me
in silks.
"But quite suddenly, oh, no more than six weeks ago, this man told me a
truth. It was a small thing. I don't remember now what it was he said.
But he didn't laugh. He didn't even smile.
"And no sooner was it out and over, the words spoken, that I knew a
terrible thing had happened.
"I was growing old."
The yacht rocked gently on the tide.
"Oh, there would be more men who would, lying, smile again at what I
said. But I saw the years ahead, when Beauty could no longer stomp its
small foot, and shake down earthquakes, make cowardice a custom among
otherwise good men.
"The man? He took back his truth immediately, when he saw that he had
shocked me. But it was too late. I bought a one-way fare to Mars.
Aaronson's invitation, when I arrived, put me on this new journey that
will end … who knows where."
Wilder found that during this last he had reached out and taken her
hand.
"No," she said, withdrawing. "No word. No touch. No pity. No self-pity."
She smiled for the first time. "Isn't it strange? I always thought,
wouldn't it be nice, someday, to hear the truth, to give up the
masquerade? How wrong I was. It's no fun at all."
She sat and watched the black waters pour by the boat. When she thought
to lookagain,some hours later, the seat beside her was empty. Wilder was
gone.
On the second day, letting the new waters take them where they wished to
go, they sailed toward a high range of mountains and lunched, on the
way, in an old shrine, and had dinner that night in a further ruin. The
Lost City was not much talked about. They were sure it would never be
found.
But on the third day, without anyone's saying, they felt the approach of
a great Presence.
It was the poet who finally put it in words.
"Is God humming under His breath somewhere?"
"What a fierce scum you are," said his wife. "Can't you speak plain
English even when you gossip?"
"Dammit, listen!" cried the poet.
So they listened.
"Don't you feel as if you stood on the threshold of a giant
blast-furnace kitchen and inside somewhere, all comfortably warm, vast
hands, flour-gloved, smelling of wondrous tripes and miraculous viscera,
bloodied and proud of the blood, somewhere God cooks out the dinnertime
of Life? In that cauldron sun, a brew to make the flowering forth of
life on Venus, in that vat a stew broth of bones and nervous heart to
run in animals on planets ten billion light-years gone. And isn't God
content at His fabulous workings in the great kitchen Universe, where He
has meriu'd out a history of feasts, famines, deaths and reburgeonings
for a billion billion years? And if God be content, would He not hum
under His breath? Feel your bones. Aren't the marrows teeming with that
hum? For that matter, God not only hums, He sings in the elements. He
dances in molecules. Eternal celebration swarms us. Something is Near.
Sh."
He pressed his fat finger to his pouting lips.
And now all were silent, and Cara Corelli's paleness searchlighted the
darkening waters ahead.
They all felt it. Wilder did. Parkhill did. They smoked to cover it.
They put the smokes out. They waited in the dusk.
And the humming grew nearer. And the hunter, smelling it, went to join
the silent actress at the bow of the yacht. And the poet sat to write
out the words he had spoken.
"Yes," he said, as the stars came out. "It's almost upon us. It has." He
took a breath. "Arrived."
The yacht passed into a tunnel.
The tunnel went under a mountain.
And the City was there.
It was a city within a hollow mountain with its own meadows surrounding
it and its own strangely colored and illumined stone sky above it. And
it had been lost and remained lost for the simple reason that people had
tried flying to discover it or had unraveled roads to find it, when all
the while the canals which led to it stood waiting for simple walkers to
tread where once waters had tread.
And now the yacht filled with strange people from another planet touched
an ancient wharf.
And the City stirred.
In the old days, cities were alive or dead if there were or were not
people in them. It was that simple. But in the later days of life on
Earth or Mars, cities did not die. They slept. And in their dreamful
coggeries and enwheeled slumbers they remembered how once it was or how
it might be again.
So as, one by one, the party filed out on the dock, they felt a great
personage, the hidden, oiled, the metaled and shining soul of the
metropolis slide in a landfall of muted and hidden fireworks toward
becoming fully awake.
The weight of the new people on the dock caused a machined exhalation.
They felt themselves on a delicate scale. The dock sank a millionth of
an inch.
And the City, the cumbrous Sleeping Beauty of a nightmare device, sensed
this touch, this kiss, and slept no more.
Thunder.
In a wall a hundred feet high stood a gate seventy feet wide. This gate,
in two parts, now rumbled back, to hide within the wall.
Aaronson stepped forward,
Wilder moved to intercept him. Aaronson sighed.
"Captain, no advice, please. No warnings. No patrols going on ahead to
flush out villains. The City wants us in. It welcomes us. Surely you
don't imagine anything'salivein there? It's a robot place. And don't
look as if you think it's a time bomb. It hasn't seen fun and games
in—what?—twenty centuries? Do you read Martian hieroglyphs? That
cornerstone. The City was built at least nineteen hundred years ago."
"And abandoned," said Wilder.
"You make it sound like a plague drove them—"
"Not a plague." Wilder stirred uneasily, feeling himself weighed on the
great scale sunk beneath his feet. "Something. Something … "
"Let's find out! In, all of you!"
Singly, and in pairs, the people from Earth stepped over the threshold.
Wilder, last of all, stepped across.
And the City came more alive.
The metal roofs of the City sprang wide like the petals of a flower.
Windows flicked wide like the lids of vast eyes to stare down upon them.
A river of sidewalks gently purled and washed at their feet, machined
creekways which gleamed off through the City.
Aaronson gazed at the metal tides with pleasure. "Well, by God, the
burden's off me! I was going to picnic you all. But that's the City's
business now. Meet you back here in two hours to compare notes! Here
goes."
And saying this he leapt out on the scurrying silver carpet that treaded
him swiftly away.
Wilder, alarmed, moved to follow. But Aaronson cried jovially back:
"Come on in, the water's fine!"
And the metal river whisked him, waving, off.
And one by one they stepped forward and the moving sidewalk drifted them
away. Parkhill, the hunter, the poet and his wife, the actor, and then
the beautiful woman and her maid, They floated like statues mysteriously
borne on volcanic fluids that swept them anywhere, or nowhere, they
could only guess.
Wilder jumped. The river seized his boots gently. Following, he went
away into the avenues and around the bends of parks and through fiords
of buildings.
And behind them, the dock and the gate stood empty. There was no trace
to show they had arrived. It was almost as if they had never been.
Beaumont, the actor, was the first to leave the traveling pathway. A
certain building caught his eye. And the next thing he knew, he had
leapt off and edged near, sniffing.
He smiled.
For now he knew what kind of building he stood before because of the
odor that drifted from it.
"Brass polish. And, by God, that means only one thing!"
Theater.
Brass doors, brass rails, brass rings on velvet curtains.
He opened the door of the building and stepped in. He sniffed and
laughed aloud. Yes. Without a sign or a light, the smell alone, the
special chemistry of metals and dust torn free of a million tickets.
And above all … he listened. The silence.
"The silence that waits. No other silence in the world waits. Only in a
theater will you find that. The very particles of air chafe themselves
in readiness. The shadows sit back and hold their breath. Well … ready
or not … here I come … "
The lobby was green velvet undersea.
The theater itself: red velvet undersea, only dimly perceived as he
opened the double doors. Somewhere beyond was a stage.
Something shuddered like a great beast. His breath had dreamt it alive.
The air from his half-opened mouth caused the curtains one hundred feet
away to softly furl and unfurl in darkness like all-covering wings.
Hesitantly, he took a step.
A light began to appear everywhere in a high ceiling where a school of
miraculous prism fish swam upon themselves.
The oceanarium light played everywhere. He gasped.
The theater was full of people.
A thousand people sat motionless in the false dusk. True, they were
small, fragile, rather dark, they wore silver masks, yet—people!
He knew, without asking, they had sat here for ten thousand years.
Yet they were not dead.
They were—he reached out a hand. He tapped the wrist of a man seated on
the aisle.
The hand tinkled quietly.
He touched the shoulder of a woman. She chimed. Like a bell.
Yes, they had waited a few thousand years. But then, machines have a
property of waiting.
He took a further step and froze.
For a sigh had passed over the crowd.
It was like the sound, the first small sound a newborn babe must make in
the moment before it really sucks, bleats and shocks out its wailing
surprise at being alive.
A thousand such sighs faded in the velvet portieres.
Beneath the masks, hadn't a thousand mouths drifted ajar?
Two moved. He stopped.
Two thousand eyes blinked wide in the velvet dusk.
He moved again.
A thousand silent heads wheeled on their ancient but well-oiled cogs.
They looked at him.
An unquenchable cold ran wild in him.
He turned to run.
But their eyes would not let him go.
And from the orchestra pit: music.
He looked and saw, slowly rising, an insect agglomeration of
instruments, all strange, all grotesquely acrobatic in their
configurations. These were being softly thrummed, piped, touched, and
massaged in tune.
The audience, with a motion, turned their gaze to the stage.
A light flashed on. The orchestra struck a grand fanfare chord.
The red curtains parted. A spotlight fixed itself to front center,
blazing upon an empty dais where sat an empty chair.
Beaumont waited.
No actor appeared.
A stir. Several hands were lifted to left and right. The hands came
together. They beat softly in applause.
Now the spotlight wandered off the stage, and up the aisle.
The heads of the audience turned to follow the empty ghost of light. The
masks glinted softly. The eyes behind the masks beckoned with warm
color.
Beaumont stepped back.
But the light came steadily. It painted the floor with a blunt cone of
pure whiteness.
And stopped, nibbling, at his feet.
The audience, turned, applauded even louder now. The theater banged,
roared, ricocheted with their ceaseless tide of approbation.
Everything dissolved within him, from cold to warm. He felt as if he had
been thrust raw into a downpour of summer rain. The storm rinsed him
with gratitude. His heart jumped in great compulsive beats. His fists
let go of themselves. His skeleton relaxed. He waited a moment longer,
with the rain drenching over his upthrust and thankful cheeks and
hammering his hungry eyelids so they fluttered to lock against
themselves, and then he felt himself, like a ghost on battlements, led
by a ghost light, lean, step, drift, move, down and along the incline,
sliding to beautiful ruin, now no longer walking but striding, not
striding but in full-tilted run, and the masks glittering, the eyes hot
with delight and fantastic welcoming, the flights of hands on the
disturbed air in upflung dove-winged rifle-shot flight. He felt the
steps collide with his shoes. The applause slammed to a shutdown.
He swallowed. Then slowly he ascended the steps and stood in the full
light with a thousand masks fixed to him and two thousand eyes watchful,
and lie sat in the empty chair, and the theater grew darker, and the
immense hearth-bellow breathing softer out of the lyre-metal throats,
and there was only the sound of a mechanical beehive thrived with
machinery-musk in the dark.
He held to his knees. He let go. And at last he spoke:
"To be or not to be—"
The silence was complete.
Not a cough. Not a stir. Not a rustle. Not a blink. All waited.
Perfection. The perfect audience. Perfect, forever and forever. Perfect.
Perfect.
He tossed his words slowly into that perfect pond and felt the soundless
ripples disperse and gentle away.
"—that is the question."
He talked. They listened. He knew that they would never let him go now.
They would beat him insensible with applause. He would sleep) a child's
sleep arid rise to speak again. All of Shakespeare, all of Shaw, all of
Moliere, every bit, crumb, lump, joint, and piece.Himselfin repertory!
He arose to finish.
Finished, he thought: Bury me! Cover me! Smother me deep!
Obediently, the avalanche came down the mountain.
Cara Corelli found a palace of mirrors.
The maid remained outside.
And Cara Corelli went in.
As she walked through a maze, the mirrors took away a day, and then a
week, and then a month and then a year and then two years of time from
her face.
It was a palace of splendid and soothing lies. It was like being young
once more. It was being surrounded by all those tall bright glass mirror
men who would never again in your life tell you the truth.
Cara walked to the center of the palace. By the time she stopped she saw
herself twenty-five-years old, in every tall bright mirror face.
She sat down in the middle of the bright maze. She beamed around in
happiness.
The maid waited outside for perhaps an hour. And then she went away.
This was a dark place with shapes and sizes as yet unseen. It smelled of
lubricating oil, the blood of tyrant lizards with cogs and wheels for
teeth, which lay strewn and silent in the dark waiting.
A titan's door slowly gave a slithering roar like a swept-back armored
tail, and Parkhill stood in the rich oily wind blowing out around him.
He felt as if someone has pasted a white flower on his face. But it was
only a sudden surprise of a smile.
His empty hands hung at his sides and they made impulsive and completely
unconscious gestures forward. They beggared the air. So, paddling
silently, he let himself be moved into the Garage, Machine Shop, Repair
Shed, whatever it was.
And rilled with holy delight and a child's holy and unholy glee at what
he beheld, he walked and slowly turned.
For as far as his eye could see stood vehicles.
Vehicles that ran on the earth. Vehicles that flew in the air. Vehicles
that stood ready with wheels to go in any direction. Vehicles with two
wheels. Vehicles with three or four or six or eight. Vehicles that
looked like butterflies. Vehicles that resembled ancient motorbikes.
Three thousand stood ranked here, four thousand glinted ready there.
Another thousand were tilted over, wheels off, viscera exposed, waiting
to be repaired. Still another thousand were lifted high on spidery
repair hoists, their lovely undersides revealed to view, their discs and
tubes and coggeries all intricate and fine and needful of touching,
unbolting, revalving, rewiring, oiling, delicately lubricating
Parkhill's palms itched.
He walked forward through the primeval smell of swamp oils among the
dead and waiting to be revived ancient but new armored mechanical
reptiles, and the more he looked the more he ached his grin.
The City was a city all right, and, to a point, self-sustaining. But,
eventually, the rarest butterflies of metal gossamer, gaseous oil, and
fiery dream sank to earth, the machines that repaired the machines that
repaired the machines grew old, ill, and damaging of themselves. Here
then was the Bestial Garage, the slumbrous Elephant's Boneyard where the
aluminum dragons crawled rusting out their souls, hopeful of one live
person left among so much active but dead metal, that person to put
things right. One God of the machines to say, you Lazarus-elevator, rise
up! You hovercraft, be reborn! And anoint them with leviathan oils, tap
them with magical wrench and send them forth to almost eternal lives in
and on the air and above the quicksilver paths.
Parkhill moved among nine hundred robot men and women slaughtered by
simple corrosion. He would cure their rust.
Now. If he started now, thought Parkhill, rolling up his sleeves, and
staring off down a corridor of machines that ran waiting for a solid
mile of garage, shed, hoist, lift, storage bin, oil tank, and strewn
shrapnel of tools glittering and ready for his grip; if he started now,
he might work his way to the end of the giant's ever-constant garage,
accident, collision, and repair works shed in thirty years!
A billion bolts to be tightened. A billion motors to be tinkered! A
billion iron tripes to lie under, a grand oil-dripped-upon orphan,
alone, alone, alone with the always beautiful and never talking back
humming-bird-commotion devices, accoutrements and miraculous
contraptions.
His hands weighed him toward the tools. He clutched a wrench. He found a
forty-wheeled low running sled. He lay down on it. He sculled the garage
in a long whistling ride. The sled scuttled.
Parkhill vanished beneath a great car of some ancient design.
Out of sight, you could hear him working on the gut of the machine. On
his back, he talked up at it. And when he slapped it to life, at last,
the machine talked back.
Always the silver pathways ran somewhere.
Thousands of years now they had run empty, carrying only dust to
destinations away and away among the high and dreaming buildings.
Now, on one traveling path, Aaronson came borne like an aging statue.
And the more the road propelled him, the faster the City exposed itself
to his view, the more buildings that passed, the more parks that sprang
into sight, the more his smile faded. His color changed.
"Toy," he heard himself whisper. The whisper was ancient. "Just
another," and here his voice grew so small it faded away, " … another
Toy."
A super-Toy, yes. But his life was full of such and had always been so.
If it was not some slot machine it was the next-size dispenser or a
jumbo-size razzmatazz hi-fi stereo speaker. From a lifetime of handling
metallic sandpaper, he felt his arms rubbed away to a nub. Mere pips,
his fingers. No, handless, and lacking wrists. Aaronson, the Seal Boy!!!
His mindless flippers clapped applause to a city that was, in reality,
no more and no less than an economy-size jukebox ravening under its
idiot breath. And—he knew the tune! God help him. Heknewthe tune.
He blinked just once.
An inner eyelid came down like cold steel.
He turned and tread the silver waters of the path.
He found a moving river of steel to take him back toward the Great Gate
itself.
On the way, he met the Corelli maid, wandering lost on her own silver
stream.
As for the poet and his wife, their running battle tore echoes
everywhere. They cried down thirty avenues, cracked panes in two hundred
shops, battered leaves from seventy varieties of park bush and tree, and
only ceased when drowned by a thundering fountain display they passed
like a rise of clear fireworks upon the metropolitan air.
"The whole thing is," said his wife, punctuating one of his dirtier
responses, "you only came along so you could lay hands on the nearest
woman and spray her ears with bad breath and worse poetry."
The poet muttered a foul word.
"You're worse than the actor," said his wife. "Always at it. Don't you
ever shut tip?"
"Don't you?" he cried. "Ah God, I've curdled inside. Shut up, woman, or
I'll throw myself in the founts!"
"No. You haven't bathed in years. You're the pig of the century! Your
picture will grace the Swine Herder's Annual next month!"
"Thatdidit!"
Doors slammed on a building.
By the time she got off and ran back and fisted the doors, they were
locked.
"Coward!" she shrieked. "Open up!"
A foul word came echoing out, dimly.
"Ah, listen to that sweet silence," he whispered, to himself, in the
great shelled dark.
Harpwell found himself in a soothing hugeness, a vast womb-like
building, over which hung a canopy of pure serenity, a starless void.
In the middle of this room which was roughly a two-hundred-foot circle
stood a device, a machine. In this machine were dials and rheostats and
switches, a seat, and a steering wheel
"What kind of vehicle is this?" whispered the poet, but edged near, and
bent to touch. "Christ-off-the-cross-and-bearing-mercy, it smells of
what? Blood and mere guts? No, for it's clean as a virgin's frock. Still
it does fill the nose. Violence. Simple destruction. I can feel the damn
carcass tremble like a nervous highbred hound. It's full ofstuffs.Let's
try a swig."
He sat in the machine.
"What do I swig first? This?"
He snapped a switch.
The Baskerville-hound machine whimpered in its dog slumberings.
"Good beast." He flicked another switch. "How do you go, brute? When the
damn device is in full tilt, where to? You lack wheels. Well, surprise
me. I dare."
The machine shivered.
The machine bolted.
It ran. It dashed.
He held tight to the steering wheel.
"Holy God!"
For he was on a highway, racing fast.
Air sluiced by. The sky flashed over in running colors.
The speedometer read seventy, eighty.
And the highway ribboned away ahead, flashing toward him. Invisible
wheels slapped and banged on an increasingly rough road.
Far away, ahead, a car appeared.
It was running fast. And—
"It's on the wrong side of the road! Do you see that, wife? The wrong
side."
Then he realized his wife was not here.
He was alone in a car racing—ninety miles an hour now—toward another car
racing at a similar speed.
He veered the wheel.
His vehicle moved to the left.
Almost instantly the other car did a compensating move, and ran back
over to the right.
"The damn fool, what does he think—where's the blasted brake?"
He stomped the floor. There was no brake. Here was a strange machine
indeed. One that ran as fast as you wished, but never stopped until
what? it ran itself down? There was no brake. Nothing but-further
accelerators. A whole series of round-buttons on the floor, which, as he
tromped them, surged power into the motor.
Ninety, one hundred, one hundred twenty miles an hour.
"God in heaven!" he screamed. "We're going to hit! How do you like that,
girl?"
And in the last instant before collision, he imagined she rather liked
it fine.
The cars hit. They erupted in gaseous flame. They burst apart in
flinders. They tumbled. He felt himself jerked now this way and that. He
was a torch hurtled skyward. His arms and legs danced a crazy rigadonn
in midair as he felt his peppermint stick bones snap in brittle and
agonizing ecstasies. Then, clutching death as a dark mate,
gesticulating, he fell away in a black surprise, drifting toward further
nothings.
He lay dead.
He lay dead a long while.
Then he opened one eye.
He felt the slow burner under his soul. He feltthebubbled water rising
to the top of his mind like tea brewing.
"I'm dead," he said, "but alive. Did you see all that, wife? Dead but
alive."
He found himself sitting in the vehicle, upright.
He sat there for ten minutes thinking about all that had happened.
"Well now," he mused. "Was that not interesting? Not to say fascinating?
Not to say, almost exhilarating? I mean, sure, it knocked the stuff out
of me, scared the soul out one ear and back in the other, hit my wind
and tore my gut, broke the bones and shook the wits, but, but, but,
wife, but, but, but, clear sweet Meg, Meggy, Megan, I wish you were
here, it might tamp the tobacco tars out of your half-ass lungs and bray
the mossy graveyard backbreaking meanness from your marrow. Let me see
here now, wife, let's have a look, Harpwell-my-husband-the-poet."
He tinkered with the dials.
He thrummed the great hound motor.
"Shall we chance another diversion? Try another embattled picnic
excursion? Let's."
And he set the car on its way.
Almost immediately, the vehicle was traveling one hundred and then one
hundred fifty miles per hour.
Almost immediately, the opposing car appeared ahead.
"Death," said the poet. "Are you always here, then? Do you hang about?
Is this your questing place? Let's test your mettle!"
The car raced. The other car hurtled.
He wheeled over into the other lane.
The other car followed, homing toward Destroy.
"Yes, I see, well, then, this," said the poet.
And switched a switch and jumped another throttle.
In the instant before impact, the two cars transformed themselves.
Shuttering through illusory veils, they became jet craft at take-off.
Shrieking, the two jets banged flame, tore air, yammered back
sound-barrier explosions before the mightiest one of all—as the two
bullets impacted, fused, interwove, interlaced blood, mind, and eternal
blackness, and fell away into a net of strange and peaceful midnight
I'm dead, he thought again.
And it feels fine, thanks.
He awoke to feel a smile on his face.
He was seated in the vehicle.
Twice dead, he thought, and feeling better each time. Why? isn't that
odd? Curiouser and curiouser. Queer beyond queerness.
He thrummed the motor again.
What this time?
Does it locomote? he wondered. How about a big black choo-choo train out
of half-primordial times?
And he was on his way, an engineer. The sky flicked over, and the
motion-picture screens or whatever they were pressed in with swift
illusions of pouring smoke and steaming whistle and huge wheel within
wheel on grinding track, and the track ahead wound through hills, and
far on up around a mountain came another train, black as a buffalo herd,
pouring belches of smoke, on the same two rails, the same track, heading
toward wondrous accident.
"I see," said the poet. "I do begin to see. I begin to know what this
and what used for, for such as me, the poor wandering idiots of a world,
confused, and sore put upon by mothers as soon as dropped from wombs,
insulted with Christian guilt, and gone mad from the need of
destruction, and collecting a pittance of hurt here and scar tissue
there, and a larger portable wife grievance beyond, but one thing sure,
we do want to die, we do want to be killed, and here's the very thing
for it, in convenient quick pay! So pay it out, machine, dole it out,
sweet raving device! Rape away, death! I'm your very man."
And the two locomotives met and climbed each other. Up a black ladder of
explosion they wheeled and locked their drive shafts and plastered their
slick Negro bellies together and rubbed boilers and beautifully banged
the night in a single outflung whirl and flurry of shrapnel and flame.
Then the locomotives, in a cumbrous rapine dance, seized and melted
together with their violence and passion, gave a monstrous curtsy and
fell off the mountain and took a thousand years to go all the way down
to the rocky pits.
The poet awoke and immediately grabbed the controls. He was humming
under his breath, stunned. He was singing wild tunes. His eyes flashed.
His heart beat swiftly.
"More, more, I see it now, I know what to do, more, more, please, Oh
God, more, for the truth shall set me free, more!"
He hoofed three, four, five pedals.
He snapped six switches.
The vehicle was auto-jet-locomotive-glider-missile-rocket.
He ran, he steamed, he roared, he soared, he flew.
Cars veered toward him. Locomotives loomed. Jets rammed. Rockets
screamed.
And in one wild three-hour spree he hit two hundred cars, rammed twenty
trains, blew up ten gliders, exploded forty missiles, and, far out in
space, gave up his glorious soul in a final Fourth of July Death
celebration as an interplanetary rocket going two hundred thousand miles
an hour struck an iron meteor and went beautifully to hell.
In all, in a few short hours he figured he must have been torn apart and
put back together a few times less than five hundred.
When it was all over, he sat not touching the wheel, his feet free of
the pedals.
After a half hour of sitting there, he began to laugh. He threw his head
back and let out great war-whoops. Then he got up, shaking his head,
drunker than ever in his life, really drunk now, and he knew he would
stay that way forever, and never need drink again.
I'm punished, he thought, really punished at last. Really hurt at last,
and hurt enough, over and over, so I will never need hurt again, never
need to be destroyed again, never have to collect another insult, or
take another wound, or ask for a simple grievance. God bless the genius
of man and the inventors of such machines, that enable the guilty to pay
and at last be rid of the dark albatross and the awful burden. Thank
you, City, thank you, old blueprinter of needful souls. Thank you. And
which way out?
A door slid open.
His wife stood waiting for him.
"Well, there you are," she said. "And still drunk."
"No," he said. "Dead."
"Drunk."
"Dead," he said, "beautifully dead at last. Which means, free. I won't
need you any more, dead Meg, Meggy-Megan. You're set free, also, like an
awful conscience. Go haunt someone else, girl. Go destroy. I forgive you
your sins on me, for I have at last forgiven myself. I am off the
Christian hook. I am the dear wandering dead who, dead, can at last:
live. Go and do likewise, lady. Inside with you. Be punished and set
free. So long, Meg. Farewell. Toodle-oo."
He wandered away.
"Where do you think you're going?" she cried.
"Why, out into life and the blood of life and happy at last."
"Come back here!" she screamed.
"You can't stop the dead, for they wander the universe, happy as
children in the dark field."
"Harpwell!" she brayed. "Harpwell!"
But he stepped on a river of silver metal.
And let the dear river bear him laughing until the tears glittered on
his cheeks, away and away from the shriek and the bray and the scream of
that woman, what was her name? no matter, back there, and gone.
And when he reached the Gate he walked out and along the canal in the
fine day, heading toward the far towns.
By that time, he was singing every old tune he had known as a child of
six.
It was a church.
No, not a church.
Wilder let the door swing shut.
He stood in cathedral darkness, waiting.
The roof, if roof there was, breathed up in a great susoense, flowed up
beyond reach or sight.
The floor, if floor there was, was a mere firmness beneath. It, too, was
black.
And then, the stars came out. It was like that first night of childhood
when his father had taken him out beyond the city to a hill where the
lights could not diminish the Universe. And there were a thousand, no
ten thousand, no ten million billion stars filling the darkness. The
stars were manifold arid bright, and they did not care. Even then he had
known: they do not care. If I breathe or do not breathe, live or die,
the eyes that look from all around don't care. And he had seized his
father's hand and gripped tight, as if he might fall up into that abyss.
Now, in this building, he was full of the old terror and the old sense
of beauty and the old silent crying out after mankind. The stars filled
him with pity for small men lost in so much size.
Then yet another thing happened.
Beneath his feet, space opened wide and let through yet another billion
sparks of light.
He was suspended as a fly is held upon a vast telescopic lens. He walked
on a water of space. He stood upon a transparent flex of great eye, and
all about him, as on a night in winter, beneath foot and above head, in
all directions, were nothing but stars.
So, in the end, it was a church, it was a cathedral, a multitude of
farflung universal shrines, here a worshipping of Horsehead Nebula,
there Orion's galaxy, and there Andromeda, like the head of God,
fiercely gazed and thrust through the raw dark stuffs of night to stab
his soul and pin it writhing against the backside of his flesh.
God, everywhere, fixed him with shutterless and unblinking eyes.
And he, a bacterial shard of that same Flesh, stared back and winced but
the slightest.
He waited. And a planet drifted upon the void. It spun by once with a
great mellow autumn face. It circled and came under him.
And he stood upon a far world of green grass and great lush trees, where
the air was fresh, and a river ran by like the rivers of childhood,
flashing the sun and leaping with fish.
He knew that he had traveled very far to reach this world. Behind him
lay the rocket. Behind lay a century of travel, of sleeping, of waiting,
and now, here was the reward.
"Mine?" he asked the simple air, the simple grass, the long simplicity
of water that spelled by in the shallow sands.
And the world answered wordless: yours.
Yours without the long travel and the boredom, yours without ninety-nine
years of flight from Earth, of sleeping in kept tubes, of intravenous
feedings, of nightmares dreamt of Earth lost and gone, yours without
torture, without pain, yours without trial and error, failure and
destruction. Yours without sweat and terror. Yours without a falling
down of tears. Yours. Yours.
But Wilder did not put out his hands to accept.
And the sun dimmed in the alien sky.
And the world drifted from under his feet.
And yet another world swam up and passed in a huge parade of even
brighter glories.
And this world, too, spun up to take his weight. And here, if anything,
the fields were richer green, the mountains capped with melting snows,
far fields ripening with strange harvests, and scythes waiting on the
edge of fields for him to lift and sweep arid cut the grain and live out
his life any way that he might.
Yours. The merest touch of weather upon the hairs within his ear said
this. Yours.
And Wilder, without shaking his head, moved back. He did not say no. He
thought his rejection.
And the grass died in the fields.
The mountains crumbled.
The river shallows ran to dust.
And the world sprang away.
And Wilder stood again in space where God had stood before creating a
world out of Chaos.
And at last he spoke and said to himself:
"It would be easy. O Lord, yes, I'd like that. No work, nothing, just
accept. But … You can't give rnc what I want."
He looked at the stars.
"Nothing can be given, ever."
The stars were growing dim.
"It's really very simple. I must borrow, I must earn. I must take."
The stars quivered and died.
"Much obliged and thank you, no."
The stars were all gone.
He turned and, without looking back, walked upon darkness: He hit the
door with his palm. He strode out into the City.
He refused to hear if the machine universe behind him cried out in a
great chorus, all cries and wounds, like a woman scorned. The crockery
in a vast robot kitchen fell. By the time it hit the floor, he was gone.
It was a Museum of Weapons.
The hunter walked among the cases.
He opened a case and hefted a weapon, constructed like a spider's
antennae.
It hummed, and a flight of metal bees sizzled out the rifle bore, flew
away, and stung a target-mannequin some fifty yards away, then fell
lifeless, clattering to the floor.
The hunter nodded with admiration, and put the rifle back in the case.
He prowled on, curious as a child, testing yet other weapons here and
there which dissolved glass or caused metal to run in bright yellow
pools of molten lava.
"Excellent!" "Fine!" "Absolutely great!"
His cry rang out again and again as he slammed cases open and shut, and
finally chose the gun.
It was a gun that, without fuss or fury, did away with matter. You
pressed the button, there was a brief discharge of blue light, and the
target simply vanished. No blood. No bright lava. No trace.
"All right," he announced, leaving the Place of Guns, "we have the
weapon. How about the Game, the Grandest Beast ever in the Long Hunt?"
He leapt onto the moving sidewalk.
An hour later he had passed a thousand buildings and scanned a thousand
open parks without itching his finger.
He moved uneasily from treadway to treadway, shifting speeds now in this
direction, now in that.
Until at last he saw a river of metal that sped underground.
Instinctively, he jumped toward that.
The metal stream carried him down into the secret gut of the City.
Here all was warm blood darkness. Here strange pumps moved the pulse of
the City. Here were distilled the sweats that lubricated the roadways
and lifted the elevators and swarmed the offices and stores with motion.
The hunter half crouched on the roadway. His eyes squinted. Perspiration
gathered in his palms. His trigger finger greased the metal gun,
sliding.
"Yes," he whispered. "By God, now. This is it. The City itself … the
Great Beast. Why didn't I think of that? The Animal City, the terrible
prey. It has men for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. It kills them with
machines. It munches their bones like breadsticks. It spits them out
like toothpicks. It lives long after they die. The City, by God, the
City. Well now … "
He glided through dark grottoes of television eyes which showed him
remote parkways and high towers.
Deeper within the belly of the underground world he sank as the river
lowered itself. He passed a school of computers that chattered in maniac
chorus. He shuddered as a cloud of paper confetti from one titan
machine, holes punched out to perhaps record his passing, fell upon him
in a whispered snow.
He raised his gun. He fired.
The machine disappeared.
He fired again. A skeleton strutwork under yet another machine vanished.
The City screamed.
At first very low and then very high, then, rising, falling, like a
siren. Lights flashed. Bells began to ricochet alarums. The metal river
shuddered under his feet, slowed. He fired at television screens which
glared all white upon him. They blinked out and did not exist.
The City screamed higher until he raved against it, himself, and the
marrow of his bones shook out an insanity of black dust.
He did not see, until it was too late, that the road on which he sped
fell into the gnashing maw of a machine that was used for some purpose
long forgotten centuries before.
He thought that by pressing the trigger he would make the terrible mouth
disappear. It did indeed vanish. But as the roadway sped on and he
whirled and fell as it picked up speed, he realized at last that his
weapon did not truly destroy, it merely made invisible what was there
and what still remained though unseen.
He gave a terrible cry to match the cry of the City. He flung out the
gun in a last blow. The gun went into cogs and wheels and teeth and was
twisted down.
The last thing he saw was a deep elevator shaft that fell away for
perhaps a mile into the earth.
He knew that it might take him two minutes to hit the bottom. He
shrieked.
The worst thing was, he would be conscious … all the way down …
The rivers shook. The silver rivers trembled. The pathways, shocked,
convulsed the metal shores through which they sped.
Wilder, traveling, was almost knocked flat by the concussion.
What had caused the concussion, he could not see. Perhaps, far off,
there was a cry, a murmur of dreadful sound, which swiftly faded.
Wilder moved on. The silver track threaded on. But the City seemed
poised, agape. The City seemed tensed. Its huge and various muscles were
cramped, alert.
Feeling this, Wilder began to walk as well as be moved by the swift
path.
"Thank God. There's the Gate. The sooner I'm out of this place the
happier I'll—"
The Gate was indeed there, not a hundred yards away. But, on the
instant, as if hearing his declaration, the river stopped. It shivered.
Then it started to move back, taking him where he did not wish to go.
Incredulous, Wilder spun about, and, in spinning, fell. He clutched at
the stuffs of the rushing sidewalk.
His face, pressed to the vibrant grillework of the river-rushing
pavement, heard the machineries mesh and mill beneath, humming and
agroan, forever sluicing, forever feverish for journeys and mindless
excursions. Beneath the calm metal, embattlements of hornets stung and
buzzed, lost bees bumbled and subsided. Collapsed, he saw the Gate lost
away behind. Burdened, he remembered at last the extra weight upon his
back, the jet-power equipment which might give him wings.
He jammed his hand to the switch on his belt. And in the instant before
the sidewalk might have pulsed him off among sheds and museum walls, he
was airborne.
Flying, he hovered, then swam the air back to hang above a casual
Parkhill gazing up, all covered with grease and smiling from a dirty
face. Beyond Parkhill, at the Gate, stood the frightened maid. Beyond
even further, near the yacht at the landing, stood Aaronson, back turned
to the City, nervous to be moving on.
"Where are the others?" cried Wilder.
"Oh, they won't be back," said Parkhill, easily. "It figures, doesn't
it? I mean, it's quite a place."
"Place!" said Wilder, hovered now up, now down, turning slowly,
apprehensive. "We've got to get them out! It's not safe."
"It's safe if you like it. I like it," said Parkhill.
And all the while there was a gathering of earthquake in the ground and
in the air, which Parkhill chose to ignore.
"You're leaving, of course," he said, as if nothing were wrong. "I knew
you would. Why?"
"Why?" Wilder wheeled like a dragonfly before a trembling of storm wind.
Buffeted up, buffeted down, he flung his words at Parkhill, who didn't
bother to duck but smiled up and accepted. "Good God, Sam, the place is
Hell. The Martians had enough sense to get out. They saw they had
overbuilt themselves. The damn City does everything, which is too much!
Sam!"
But at that instant, they both looked round and up. For the sky was
shelling over. Great lids were vising in the ceiling. Like an immense
flower, the tops of buildings were petalling out to cover themselves.
Windows were shutting down. Doors were slamming. A sound of fired
cannons echoed through the streets.
The Gate was thundering shut.
The twin jaws of the Gate, shuddering, were in motion.
Wilder cried out, spun round, and dived.
He heard the maid below him. He saw her reach up. Then, swooping, he
gathered her in. He kicked the air. The jet lifted them both.
Like a bullet to a target he rammed for the Gate. But an instant before,
burdened, he reached it, the Gates banged together. He was barely able
to veer course and soar upward along the raw metal as the entire City
shook with the roar of the steel.
Parkhill shouted below. And Wilder was flying up, up along the wall,
looking this way and that.
Everywhere, the sky was closing in. The petals were coming down, coming
down. There was only a last small patch of stone sky to his right. He
blasted for that. And kicking, made it through, flying, as the final
flange of steel clipped into place, and the City was closed to itself.
He hung for a moment, suspended, and then flew down along the outer wall
to the dock where Aaron-son stood by the yacht staring at the huge shut
Gates.
"Parkhill," whispered Wilder, looking at the City, the walls, the Gates.
"You fool. You damned fool."
"Fools, all of them," said Aaronson, and turned away. "Fools. Fools."
They waited a moment longer and listened to the City, humming, alive,
kept to itself, its great mouth filled with a few bits of warmth, a few
lost people somewhere hid away in there. The Gates would stay shut now,
forever. The City had what it needed to go on a long while.
Wilder looked back at the place, as the yacht took them back out of the
mountain and away up die canal.
They passed the poet a mile further on, walking along the rim of the
canal. He waved them on. "No. No, thanks. I feel like walking. It's a
fine day. Goodbye. Go on."
The towns lay ahead. Small towns. Small enough to be run by men instead
of running them. He heard the brass music. He saw the neon lights at
dusk. He made out the junkyards in the fresh night under tire stars.
Beyond the towns stood the silver rockets, tall, waiting to be fired off
and away toward the wilderness of stars.
"Real," whispered the rockets, "real stuff. Real travel. Real time. Real
space. No gifts. Nothing free. Just a lot of good hard work."
The yacht touched into its home dock.
"Rockets, by God," he murmured. "Wait till I get my hands on you."
He ran away in the night, to do just that.

