prose_contemporaryRayBradburyThe Beautiful ShavecutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
The Beautiful Shave
He came into town riding fast and firing his guns at the blue sky. He
shot a chicken in the dust and kicked it around, using his horse as a
mauler, and then, reloading and yelling, his three-week beard red and
irritable in the sunlight, he rode on to the Saloon where he tethered
his horse and carried his guns, still hot, into the bar where he glared
at his own sunburned image in the mirror and yelled for a glass and a
bottle.
The bartender slid them over the edge of the bar and went away.
The men along the bar moved down to the free lunch at the far end, and
conversation withered.
‘What in hell’s wrong with everyone?!’ cried Mr James Malone. ‘Talk,
laugh, everyone. Go on, now, or I’ll shoot your damn eyebrows off!’
Everyone began to talk and laugh.
‘That’s better,’ said James Malone, drinking his drinks one upon
another.
He rammed the wing doors of the Saloon wide and in the resulting wind
stomped out like an elephant into the afternoon street where other men
were riding up from the mines or the mountains and tying their horses to
the worn hitching poles.
The barber shop was directly across the street.
Before crossing to it, he rechecked his bright blue pistols and snuffed
at them with his red nose, saying Ah! at the scent of gunpowder. Then he
saw a tin can in the talcumy dust and shot it three times ahead of him
as he strode laughing, and the horses all along the street jumped
nervously and flickered their ears. Reloading again, he kicked the
barber shop door wide and confronted a full house. The four barber
chairs were full of lathered customers, waiting with magazines in their
hands, and the mirrors behind them repeated the comfort and the creamy
lather and the pantomime of efficient barbers.
Along the wall on a bench sat six other men waiting to be cleansed of
the mountain and the desert.
‘Have a seat,’ said one of the barbers, glancing up.
‘I sure will,’ said Mr James Malone, and pointed his pistol at the first
chair. ‘Get out of there, mister, or I’ll sew you right back into the
upholstery.’
The man’s eyes were startled, then angry, then apprehensive in turn
above his creamy mask, but after a long hesitation, he levered himself
up with difficulty, swiped the white stuff off his chin with the apron,
flung the apron to the floor, and walked over to shove in and sit with
the other waiting men.
James Malone snorted at this, laughed, jounced into the black leather
chair, and cocked his two pistols.
‘Ineverhave to wait,’ he said to no one and everyone at once. His gaze
wandered over their heads and touched on the ceiling. ‘If you live
right, you don’t have to wait for anything. You ought to know that by
now!’
The men looked at the floor. The barber cleared his throat and put an
apron over Jamie Malone. The pistols stuck up, making white tents
underneath. There was a sharp click as he knocked the pistols together,
just to let everyone know they were there, and pointed.
‘Give me the works,’ he said to the barber, not looking at him. ‘A shave
first, I feel itchy and mean, then a haircut. You men there, starting on
the right, tell jokes. Make ’em good jokes. I want entertainment while
I’m being shorn. Ain’t been entertained in months. You, there, mister,
you start.’
The man who had been evicted from his comfortable chair unfroze himself
slowly and rolled his eyes at the other men and talked as if someone had
hit him in the mouth.
‘I knew a gent once who …’ he said, and word by word, white-faced, he
launched himself into a tale. ‘That gent, he …’
To the barber, James Malone now said, ‘Listen, you, I want a shave, I
want a beautiful shave. But I got a fine-skinned face and it’s a pretty
face with the beard off, and I been in the mountains for a long time and
I had no luck with gold-panning, so I’m feeling mean. I just want to
warn you of one little thing. If you so much as nick my face once with
your straight razor, I’ll kill you. You hear that? I mean I’ll kill you.
If you so much as bring one little speck of blood to the surface, I’ll
plug you clean through the heart. You hear?’
The barber nodded quietly. The barber shop was silent. Nobody was
telling jokes or laughing.
‘Not one drop of blood, not one little cut, mind you,’ repeated Mr James
Malone, ‘or you’ll be dead on the floor a second later.’
‘I’m a married man,’ said the barber.
‘I don’t give a damn if you’re a Mormon with six wives and fifty-seven
children. You’re dead if you scratch me once.’
‘I happen to have two children,’ said the barber. ‘A fine little girl
and a boy.’
‘Don’t hand me any of that,’ said Malone, settling back, closing his
eyes. ‘Start.’
The barber began to get the hot towels ready. He put them on James
Malone’s face, and under them the man cursed and yelled and waved his
pistols under the white apron. When the hot towels came off and the hot
lather was put on his beard, James Malone still chewed on his profanity
and threats, and the men waiting sat white-faced and stiff with the
pistols pointing at them. The other barbers had almost stopped moving
and stood like statues by their customers in the chairs, and the barber
shop was cold for a summer day.
‘What’s wrong with the stories?’ snapped James Malone. ‘All right, then
sing. You four there, sing something like “My Darling Clementine.” Start
it up. You heard me.’
The barber was stropping his razor slowly with a trembling hand. ‘Mr
Malone,’ he said.
‘Shut up and get to work.’ Malone tilted his head back, grimacing.
The barber stropped his razor some more and looked at the men seated all
around the shop. He cleared his throat and said, ‘Did all of you
gentlemen hear what Mr Malone said to me?’
Everyone nodded mutely.
‘You heard him threaten to kill me,’ said the barber, ‘if I so much as
drew a drop of blood to his skin?’
The men nodded again.
‘And you’d swear to it in a court of law, if necessary?’ asked the
barber.
The men nodded for the last time.
‘Cut the malarkey,’ said Mr James Malone. ‘Get to work.’
‘That’s all I wanted to be sure of,’ said the barber, letting the
leather strop fall and clatter against the chair. He raised the razor in
the light and it gleamed and glittered with cold metal there.
He tilted Mr James Malone’s head back and put the razor against the
hairy throat.
‘We’ll start here,’ he said. ‘We’ll starthere.’

