                                  
                                   Hopscotch
                                      1978

     Vinia  woke  to  the  sound  of a rabbit running down and across an endless
moonlit  field; but it was only the soft, quick beating of her heart. She lay on
the bed for a moment, getting her breath. Now the sound of the running faded and
was  gone  at  a  great  distance.  At  last she sat up and looked down from her
second-story  bedroom window and there below, on the long sidewalk, in the faint
moonlight before dawn, was the hopscotch.
     Late  yesterday,  some  child  had  chalked  it  out, immense and endlessly
augmented,  square  upon square, line after line, numeral following numeral. You
could  not  see the end of it. Down the street it built its crazy pattern, 3, 4,
5,  on  up to 10, then 30, 50, 90, on away to turn far corners. Never in all the
children's  world  a  hopscotch  like  this!  You  could Jump forever toward the
horizon.
     Now  in  the  very early, very quiet morning, her eyes traveled and jumped,
paused  and  hopped,  along  that presumptuous ladder of chalk-scratches and she
heard herself whisper:
     "Sixteen. "
     But she did not run on from there.
     The next square waited, she knew, with the scribbled blue chalk 17, but her
mind  flung  out  its  arms  and  balanced, teetering, poised with her numb foot
planted across the 1 and the 6, and could go no further.
     Trembling, she lay back down.
     The  room  was  like  the bottom of a cool well all night and she lay in it
like  a  white  stone  in  a  well,  enjoying it, floating in the dark yet clear
element of half dreams and half wakening. She felt the breath move in small jets
from  her  nostrils  and  she felt the immense sweep of her eyelids shutting and
opening again and again. And at last she felt the fever brought into her room by
the presence of the sun beyond the hills.
     Morning,  she  thought.  It  might  be  a  special  day. After all, it's my
birthday. Anything might happen. And I hope it does.
     The air moved the white curtains like a summer breath.
     "Vinia ... ?"
     A  voice  was  calling.  But  it  couldn't  be  a  voice.  Yet-Vinia raised
herself-there it was again.
     "Vinia ... ?"
     She slipped from bed and ran to the window of her high second-story window.
     There  on  the fresh lawn below, calling up to her in the early hour, stood
James  Conway,  no older than she, seventeen, very seriously smiling, waving his
hand now as her head appeared.
     "Jim,  what're  you doing here?" she said, and thought, Does he know _what_
day this is?
     "I've been up an hour already," he replied. "I'm going for a walk, starting
early, all day. Want to come along?"
     Oh  but  I  couldn't  .  .  . my folks won't be back till late tonight, I'm
alone, I'm supposed to stay . . ."
     She  saw  the  green  hills  beyond the town and the roads leading out into
summer,  leading out into August and rivers and places beyond this town and this
house and this room and this particular moment.
     "I can't go . . ." she said faintly.
     "I  can't  hear  you!"  he  protested  mildly,  smiling  up  at her under a
shielding hand.
     "Why did you ask me to walk with you, and not someone else?"
     He considered this for a moment. "I don't know," he admitted. He thought it
over  again, and gave her his most pleasant and agreeable look. "Because, that's
all, just because."
     "I'll be down," she said.
     "Hey!" he said.
     But the window was empty.
     They  stood  in the center of the perfect, jeweled lawn, over which one set
of  prints,  hers, had run, leaving marks, and another, his, had walked in great
slow  strides  to  meet  them.  The  town was silent as a stopped clock. All the
shades were still down.
     "My  gosh,"  said  Vinia, "it's early. It's crazy-early. I've never been up
this early and out this early in years. Listen to everyone sleeping."
     They  listened  to  the trees and the whiteness of the houses in this early
whispering  hour,  the  hour  when  mice  went  back  to sleep and flowers began
untightening their bright fists.
     "Which way do we go?"
     "Pick a direction."
     Vinia  closed  her  eyes,  whirled,  and  pointed  blindly. "Which way am I
pointing?"
     "North. "
     She  opened her eyes. "Lefts go north out of town, then. I don't suppose we
should."
     "Why?"
     And  they  walked out of town as the sun rose above the hills and the grass
burned greener on the lawns.
     There  was a smell of hot chalk highway, of dust and sky and waters flowing
in  a  creek  the color of grapes. The sun was a new lemon. The forest lay ahead
with  shadows  stirring  like  a  million  birds  under  each  tree, each bird a
leaf-darkness,  trembling.  At  noon,  Vinia  and  James Conway had crossed vast
meadows that sounded brisk and starched underfoot. The day had grown warm, as an
iced glass of tea grows warm, the frost burning off, left in the sun.
     They  picked a handful of grapes from a wild barbed-wire vine. Holding them
up  to  the  sun,  you  could see the clear grape thoughts suspended in the dark
amber  fluid,  the little hot seeds of contemplation stored from many afternoons
of  solitude  and  plant philosophy. The grapes tasted of fresh, clear water and
something  that they had saved from the morning dews and the evening rains. They
were  the  warmed-over  flesh  of  April  ready now, in August, to pass on their
simple  gain  to  any passing stranger. And the lesson was this; sit in the sun,
head down, within a prickly vine, in flickery light or open light, and the world
will  come  to  you. The sky will come in its time, bringing rain, and the earth
will rise through you, from beneath, and make you rich and make you full.
     "Have a grape," said James Conway. "Have _two._"
     They munched their wet, full mouths.
     They  sat on the edge of a brook and took off their shoes and let the water
cut their feet off to the ankles with an exquisite cold razor.
     My  feet  are  gone!  thought  Vinia. But when she looked, there they were,
underwater,  living  comfortably  apart  from  her,  completely acclimated to an
amphibious existence.
     They ate egg sandwiches Jim had brought with him in a paper sack.
     "Vinia,''  said  Jim, looking at his sandwich before he bit it. ''would you
mind if I kissed you?"
     "I don't know," she said, after a moment. "I hadn't thought. "
     "Will you think it over?" he asked.
     "Did we come on this picnic just so you could kiss me?" she asked suddenly.
     "Oh,  don't  get me wrong! It's been a swell day! I don't want to spoil it.
But  if  you should decide, later, that it's all right for me to kiss you, would
you tell me?"
     "I'll  tell  you,"  she  said,  starting on her second sandwich, "if I ever
decide."

     
     
     The rain came as a cool surprise.
     It  smelled  of soda water and limes and oranges and the cleanest, freshest
river in the world, made of snow-water, falling from the high, parched sky.
     First  there  had  been  a  motion, as of veils, in the sky. The clouds had
enveloped each other softly. A faint breeze had lifted Vinia's hair, sighing and
evaporating  the  moisture from her upper lip, and then, as she and Jim began to
run,  the  raindrops  fell down all about without touching them and then at last
began  to  touch  them,  coolly, as they leaped green-moss logs and darted among
vast trees into the deepest, muskiest cavern of the forest. The forest sprang up
in wet murmurs overhead, every leaf ringing and painted fresh with water.
     "This way!" cried Jim.
     And  they  reached  a hollow tree so vast that they could squeeze in and be
warmly cozy from the rain. They stood together, arms about each other, the first
coldness  from the rain making them shiver, raindrops on their noses and cheeks,
laughing. "Hey!" He gave her brow a lick. "Drinking water!"
     "Jim!"
     They  listened to the rain, the soft envelopment of the world in the velvet
clearness  of  falling  water, the whispers in deep grass, evoking odors of old,
wet wood and leaves that had lain a hundred years, moldering and sweet.
     Then they heard another sound. Above and inside the hollow warm darkness of
the tree was a constant humming, like someone in a kitchen, far away, baking and
crusting  pies  contentedly,  dipping  in  sweet  sugars  and  snowing in baking
powders,  someone  in  a warm, dim, summer-rainy kitchen making a vast supply of
food, happy at it, humming between lips over it.
     "Bees, Jim, up there! Bees!"
     "Shh!"
     Up  the  channel of moist, warm hollow they saw little yellow flickers. Now
the  last  bees, wettened, were hurrying home from whatever pasture or meadow or
field  they had covered, dipping by Vinia and Jim, vanishing up the warm flue of
summer into hollow dark.
     "They won't bother us. Just stand still."
     Jim  tightened  his  arms; Vinia tightened hers. She could smell his breath
with  the  wild  tart grapes still on it. And the harder the rain drummed on the
tree,  the  tighter  they held, laughing, at last quietly letting their laughter
drain  away  into  the  sound  of  the  bees home from the far fields. And for a
moment, Vinia thought that she and Jim might be caught by a sudden drop of great
masses  of  honey from above, sealing them into this tree forever, enchanted, in
amber,  to  be  seen by anyone in the next thousand years who strolled by, while
the weather of all ages rained and thundered and turned green outside the tree.
     It  was so warm, so safe, so protected here, the world did not exist, there
was raining silence, in the sunless, forested day.
     "Vinia," whispered Jim, after a while. "May I now?"
     His face was very large, near her, larger than any face she had ever seen.
     "Yes," she said.
     He kissed her.
     The  rain  poured  hard  on the tree for a full minute while everything was
cold outside and everything was tree-warmth and hidden away inside.
     It  was a very sweet kiss. It was very friendly and comfortably warm and it
tasted like apricots and fresh apples and as water tastes when you rise at night
and walk into a dark, warm summer kitchen and drink from a cool tin cup. She had
never imagined that a kiss could be so sweet and immensely tender and careful of
her.  He  held  her not as he had held her a moment before, hard, to protect her
from  the  green  rain  weather,  but he held her now as if she were a porcelain
clock,  very  carefully  and  with  consideration.  His eyes were closed and the
lashes were glistening dark; she saw this in the instant she opened her eyes and
closed them again.
     The rain stopped.
     It  was  a  moment before the new silence shocked them into an awareness of
the  climate  beyond  their  world.  Now there was nothing but the suspension of
water in all the intricate branches of the forest. Clouds moved away to show the
blue sky in great quilted patches.
     They looked out at the change with some dismay. They waited for the rain to
come back, to keep them, by necessity, in this hollow tree for another minute or
an hour. But the sun appeared, shining through upon everything, making the scene
quite commonplace again.
     They  stepped  from  the hollow tree slowly and stood with their hands out,
balancing,  finding  their  way,  it  seemed, in these woods where the water was
drying fast on every limb and leaf.
     "I think we'd better start walking," said Vinia. "That way."
     They walked off into the summer afternoon.

     
     
     They  crossed the town limits at sunset and walked hand in hand in the last
glowing  of  the  summer  day.  They  had  talked  very  little  the rest of the
afternoon,  and now as they turned down one street after another, they looked at
the passing sidewalk under their feet.
     "Vinia,"  he  said  at  last.  "Do  you  think  this  is  the  beginning of
something?"
     "Oh, gosh, Jim, I don't know."
     "Do you think maybe we're in love?"
     "Oh, I don't know that either!"
     They  passed down into the ravine and over the bridge and up the other side
to her street.
     "Do you think we'll ever be married?"
     "It's too early to tell, isn't it?" she said.
     "I guess you're right." He bit his lip. "Will we go walking again soon?"
     'I don't know. I don't know. Let's wait and see, Jim."
     The  house  was dark, her parents not home yet. They stood on her porch and
she shook his hand gravely.
     "Thanks, Jim, for a really fine day," she said.
     "You're welcome," he said.
     They stood there.
     Then  he  turned and walked down the steps and across the dark lawn. At the
far edge of lawn he stopped in the shadows and said, "Good night."
     He was almost out of sight, running, when she, in turn, said good night.

     
     
     In the middle of the night, a sound wakened her.
     She  half  sat  up  in  bed,  trying to hear it again. The folks were home,
everything  was  locked  and  secure,  but  it  hadn't been them. No, this was a
special  sound.  And  lying there, looking out at the summer night that had, not
long  ago,  been  a summer day, she heard the sound again, and it was a sound of
hollowing  warmth  and moist bark and empty, tunneled tree, the rain outside but
comfortable  dryness  and  secretness  inside, and it was the sound of bees come
home  from  distant  fields,  moving upward in the flue of summer into wonderful
darkness.
     And  this sound, she realized, putting her hand up in the summer-night room
to touch it, was coming from her drowsy, half-smiling mouth.
     Which  made  her  sit  bolt  upright, and very quietly move downstairs, out
through the door, onto the porch, and across the wet-grass lawn to the sidewalk,
where the crazed hopscotch chalked itself way off into the future.
     Her  bare feet hit the first numbers, leaving moist prints up to 10 and 12,
thumping, until she stopped at 16, staring down at 17, hesitating, swaying. Then
she gritted her teeth, made fists, reared back, and . . .
     Jumped right in the middle of the square 17.
     She stood there for a long moment, eyes shut, seeing how it felt.
     Then  she  ran upstairs and lay out on the bed and touched her mouth to see
if  a  summer  afternoon  was breathing out of it, and listening for that drowsy
hum, the golden sound, and it was there.
     And it was this sound, eventually, which sang her to sleep.