prose_contemporaryRayBradburyThe Toynbee ConvectorcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
The Toynbee Convector
‘Good! Great! Bravo for me!’
Roger Shumway flung himself into the seat, buckled himself in, revved
the rotor and drifted his Dragonfly Super-6 helicopter up to blow away
on the summer sky, heading south toward La Jolla.
‘How lucky can you get?’
For he was on his way to an incredible meeting.
The time traveler, after a hundred years of silence, had agreed to be
interviewed. He was, on this day, 130 years old. And this afternoon, at
four o’clock sharp, Pacific time, was the anniversary of his one and
only journey in time.
Lord, yes! One hundred years ago, Craig Bennett Stiles had waved,
stepped into hisImmense Clock, as he called it, and vanished from the
present. He was and remained the only man in history to travel in time.
And Shumway was the one and only reporter, after all these years, to be
invited in for afternoon tea. And? The possible announcement of a second
and final trip through time. The traveler had hinted at such a trip.
‘Old man,’ said Shumway, ‘Mr Craig Bennett Stiles – here I come!’
The Dragonfly, obedient to fevers, seized a wind and rode it down the
coast.
The old man was there waiting for him on the roof of the Time Lamasery
at the rim of the hang gliders’ cliff in La Jolla. The air swarmed with
crimson, blue and lemon kites from which young men shouted, while young
women called to them from the land’s edge.
Stiles, for all his 130 years, was not old. His face, blinking up at the
helicopter, was the bright face of one of those hang-gliding Apollo
fools who veered off as the helicopter sank down.
Shumway hovered his craft for a long moment, savoring the delay.
Below him was a face that had dreamed architectures, known incredible
loves, blueprinted mysteries of seconds, hours, days, then dived in to
swim upstream through the centuries. A sunburst face, celebrating its
own birthday.
For on a single night, one hundred years ago, Craig Bennett Stiles,
freshly returned from time, had reported by Telstar around the world to
billions of viewers and told them their future.
‘We made it!’ he said. ‘We did it! The future is ours. We rebuilt the
cities, freshened the small towns, cleaned the lakes and rivers, washed
the air, saved the dolphins, increased the whales, stopped the wars,
tossed solar stations across space to light the world, colonized the
moon, moved on to Mars, then Alpha Centauri. We cured cancer and stopped
death. We did it – Oh Lord, much thanks – we did it. Oh, future’s bright
and beauteous spires, arise!’
He showed them pictures, he brought them samples, he gave them tapes and
LP records, film and sound cassettes of his wondrous roundabout flight.
The world went mad with joy. It ran to meet and make that future, fling
up the cities of promise, save all and share with the beasts of land and
sea.
The old man’s welcoming shout came up the wind. Shumway shouted back and
let the Dragonfly simmer down in its own summer weather.
Craig Bennett Stiles, 130 years old, strode forward briskly and,
incredibly, helped the young reporter out of his craft, for Shumway was
suddenly stunned and weak at this encounter.
‘I can’t believe I’m here,’ said Shumway.
‘You are, and none too soon,’ laughed the time traveler. ‘Any day now, I
may just fall apart and blow away. Lunch is waiting. Hike!’
A parade of one, Stiles marched off under the fluttering rotor shadows
that made him seem a flickering newsreel of a future that had somehow
passed.
Shumway, like a small dog after a great army, followed.
‘What do you want to know?’ asked the old man as they crossed the roof,
double time.
‘First,’ gasped Shumway, keeping up, ‘why have you broken silence after
a hundred years? Second, why tome? Third, what’s the big announcement
you’re going to make this afternoon at four o’clock, the very hour when
your younger self is due to arrive from the past – when, for a brief
moment, you will appear in two places, the paradox: the person you were,
the man you are, fused in one glorious hour for us to celebrate?’
The old man laughed. ‘How youdogo on!’
‘Sorry.’ Shumway blushed. ‘I wrote that last night. Well. Those are the
questions.’
‘You shall have your answers.’ The old man shook his elbow gently. ‘All
in good – time.’
‘You must excuse my excitement,’ said Shumway. ‘After all, youarea
mystery. You were famous, world-acclaimed. You went, saw the future,
came back, told us, then went into seclusion. Oh, sure; for a few weeks,
you traveled the world in ticker-tape parades, showed yourself on TV,
wrote one book, gifted us with one magnificent two-hour television film,
then shut yourself away here. Yes, the time machine is on exhibit below,
and crowds are allowed in each day at noon to see and touch. But you
yourself have refused fame—’
‘Not so.’ The old man led him along the roof. Below in the gardens,
other helicopters were arriving now, bringing TV equipment from around
the world to photograph the miracle in the sky, that moment when the
time machine from the past would appear, shimmer, then wander off to
visit other cities before it vanished into the past. ‘I have been busy,
as an architect, helping build that very future I saw when, as a young
man, I arrived in our golden tomorrow!’
They stood for a moment watching the preparations below. Vast tables
were being set up for food and drink. Dignitaries would be arriving soon
from every country of the world to thank – for a final time, perhaps –
this fabled, this almost mythic traveler of the years.
‘Come along,’ said the old man. ‘Would you like to come sit in the time
machine? No one else ever has, you know. Would you like to be the
first?’
No answer was necessary. The old man could see that the young man’s eyes
were bright and wet.
‘There, there,’ said the old man. ‘Oh, dear me; there, there.’
A glass elevator sank and took them below and let them out in a pure
white basement at the center of which stood—
The incredible device.
‘There.’ Stiles touched a button and the plastic shell that had for one
hundred years encased the time machine slid aside. The old man nodded.
‘Go. Sit.’
Shumway moved slowly toward the machine.
Stiles touched another button and the machine lit up like a cavern of
spider webs. It breathed in years and whispered forth remembrance.
Ghosts were in its crystal veins. A great god spider had woven its
tapestries in a single night. It was haunted and it was alive. Unseen
tides came and went in its machinery. Suns burned and moons hid their
seasons in it. Here, an autumn blew away in tatters; there, winters
arrived in snows that drifted in spring blossoms to fall on summer
fields.
The young man sat in the center of it all, unable to speak, gripping the
armrests of the padded chair.
‘Don’t be afraid,’ said the old man gently. ‘I won’t send you on a
journey.’
‘I wouldn’t mind,’ said Shumway.
The old man studied his face. ‘No, I can see you wouldn’t. You look like
me one hundred years ago this day. Damn if you aren’t my honorary son.’
The young man shut his eyes at this, and the lids glistened as the
ghosts in the machine sighed all about him and promised him tomorrows.
‘Well, what do you think of myToynbee Convector?’ said the old man
briskly, to break the spell.
He cut the power. The young man opened his eyes.
‘TheToynbee Convector? What—’
‘More mysteries, eh? The great Toynbee, that fine historian who said any
group, any race, any world that did not run to seize the future and
shape it was doomed to dust away in the grave, in the past.’
‘Did he saythat?’
‘Or some such. He did. So, what better name for my machine, eh? Toynbee,
wherever you are, here’s your future-seizing device!’
He grabbed the young man’s elbow and steered him out of the machine.
‘Enough of that. It’s late. Almost time for the great arrival, eh? And
the earth-shaking final announcement of that old time traveler Stiles!
Jump!’
Back on the roof, they looked down on the gardens, which were now
swarming with the famous and the near famous from across the world. The
nearby roads were jammed; the skies were full of helicopters and
hovering biplanes. The hang gliders had long since given up and now
stood along the cliff rim like a mob of bright pterodactyls, wings
folded, heads up, staring at the clouds, waiting.
‘All this,’ the old man murmured, ‘my God, forme.’
The young man checked his watch.
‘Ten minutes to four and counting. Almost time for the great arrival.
Sorry; that’s what I called it when I wrote you up a week ago for
theNews. That moment of arrival and departure, in the blink of an eye,
when, by stepping across time, you changed the whole future of the world
from night to day, dark to light. I’ve often wondered—’
‘What?’
Shumway studied the sky. ‘When you went ahead in time, didno onesee you
arrive? Did anyone atallhappen to look up, do you know, and see your
device hover in the middle of the air, here and over Chicago a bit
later, and then New York and Paris?No one?’
‘Well,’ said the inventor of theToynbee Convector, ‘I don’t suppose
anyone wasexpectingme! And if people saw, they surely did not know what
in blazes they were looking at. I was careful, anyway, not to linger too
long. I needed only time to photograph the rebuilt cities, the clean
seas and rivers, the fresh, smog-free air, the unfortified nations, the
saved and beloved whales. I moved quickly, photographed swiftly and ran
back down the years home. Today, paradoxically, is different. Millions
upon millions of mobs of eyes will be looking up with great
expectations. They will glance, will they not, from the young fool
burning in the sky to the old fool here, still glad for his triumph?’
‘They will,’ said Shumway. ‘Oh, indeed, theywill!’
A cork popped. Shumway turned from surveying the crowds on the nearby
fields and the crowds of circling objects in the sky to see that Stiles
had just opened a bottle of champagne.
‘Our own private toast and our own private celebration.’
They held their glasses up, waiting for the precise and proper moment to
drink.
‘Five minutes to four and counting. Why,’ said the young reporter, ‘did
no one else ever travel in time?’
‘I put a stop to it myself,’ said the old man, leaning over the roof,
looking down at the crowds. ‘I realized how dangerous it was. I was
reliable, of course, no danger. But, Lord, think of it –
justanyonerolling about the bowling-alley time corridors ahead, knocking
tenpins headlong, frightening natives, shocking citizens somewhere else,
fiddling with Napoleon’s life line behind or restoring Hitler’s cousins
ahead? No, no. And the government, of course, agreed – no, insisted –
that we put theToynbee Convectorunder sealed lock and key. Today, you
were the first and last to fingerprint its machinery. The guard has been
heavy and constant, for tens of thousands of days, to prevent the
machine’s being stolen. What time do you have?’
Shumway glanced at his watch and took in his breath.
‘One minute and counting down—’
He counted, the old man counted. They raised their champagne glasses.
‘Nine, eight, seven—’
The crowds below were immensely silent. The sky whispered with
expectation. The TV cameras swung up to scan and search.
‘Six, five—’
They clinked their glasses.
‘Four, three, two—’
They drank.
‘One!’
They drank their champagne with a laugh. They looked to the sky. The
golden air above the La Jolla coastline waited. The moment for the great
arrival was here.
‘Now!’ cried the young reporter, like a magician giving orders.
‘Now,’ said Stiles, gravely quiet.
Nothing.
Five seconds passed.
The sky stood empty.
Ten seconds passed.
The heavens waited.
Twenty seconds passed.
Nothing.
At last, Shumway turned to stare and wonder at the old man by his side.
Stiles looked at him, shrugged and said:
‘I lied.’
‘You what!?’ cried Shumway.
The crowds below shifted uneasily.
‘I lied,’ said the old man simply.
‘No!’
‘Oh, but yes,’ said the time traveler. ‘I never went anywhere. I stayed
but made it seem I went. There is no time machine – only something
thatlookslike one.’
‘But why?’ cried the young man, bewildered, holding on to the rail at
the edge of the roof. ‘Why?’
‘I see that you have a tape-recording button on your lapel. Turn it on.
Yes. There. I want everyone to hear this. Now.’
The old man finished his champagne and then said:
‘Because I was born and raised in a time, in the sixties, seventies and
eighties, when people had stopped believing in themselves. I saw that
disbelief, the reason that no longer gave itself reasons to survive, and
was moved, depressed and then angered by it.
‘Everywhere, I saw and heard doubt. Everywhere, I learned destruction.
Everywhere was professional despair, intellectual ennui, political
cynicism. And what wasn’t ennui and cynicism was rampant skepticism and
incipient nihilism.’
The old man stopped, having remembered something. He bent and from under
a table brought forth a special bottle of red Burgundy with the label
1984 on it. This, as he talked, he began to open, gently plumbing the
ancient cork.
‘You name it, we had it. The economy was a snail. The world was a
cesspool. Economics remained an insoluble mystery. Melancholy was the
attitude. The impossibility of change was the vogue. End of the world
was the slogan.
‘Nothing was worth doing. Go to bed at night full of bad news at eleven,
wake up in the morn to worse news at seven. Trudge through the day
underwater. Drown at night in a tide of plagues and pestilence. Ah!’
For the cork had softly popped. The now-harmless 1984 vintage was ready
for airing. The time traveler sniffed it and nodded.
‘Not only the four horsemen of the Apocalypse rode the horizon to fling
themselves on our cities but a fifth horseman, worse than all the rest,
rode with them: Despair, wrapped in dark shrouds of defeat, crying only
repetitions of past disasters, present failures, future cowardices.
‘Bombarded by dark chaff and no bright seed, what sort of harvest was
there for man in the latter part of the incredible twentieth century?
‘Forgotten was the moon, forgotten the red landscapes of Mars, the great
eye of Jupiter, the stunning rings of Saturn. We refused to be
comforted. We wept at the grave of our child, and the child wasus.’
‘Was that how it was,’ asked Shumway quietly, ‘one hundred years ago?’
‘Yes.’ The time traveler held up the wine bottle as if it contained
proof. He poured some into a glass, eyed it, inhaled, and went on. ‘You
have seen the newsreels and read the books of that time. You know it
all.
‘Oh, of course, there were a few bright moments. When Salk delivered the
world’s children to life. Or the night whenEaglelanded and that one
great step for mankind trod the moon. But in the minds and out of the
mouths of many, the fifth horseman was darkly cheered on. With high
hopes, it sometimes seemed, of his winning. So all would be gloomily
satisfied that their predictions of doom were right from day one. So the
self-fulfilling prophecies were declared; we dug our graves and prepared
to lie down in them.’
‘And you couldn’t allow that?’ asked the young reporter.
‘You know I couldn’t.’
‘And so you built theToynbee Convector—’
‘Not all at once. It took years to brood on it.’
The old man paused to swirl the dark wine, gaze at it and sip, eyes
closed.
‘Meanwhile, I drowned, I despaired, wept silently late nights thinking,
What can I do to save us from ourselves? How to save my friends, my
city, my state, my country, the entireworldfrom this obsession with
doom? Well, it was in my library late one night that my hand, searching
along shelves, touched at last on an old and beloved book by H. G.
Wells. His time device called, ghostlike, down the years. Iheard! I
understood. I truly listened. Then I blueprinted. I built. I traveled,
or so itseemed. The rest, as you know, is history.’
The old time traveler drank his wine, opened his eyes.
‘Good God,’ the young reporter whispered, shaking his head. ‘Oh, dear
God. Oh, the wonder, the wonder—’
There was an immense ferment in the lower gardens now and in the fields
beyond and on the roads and in the air. Millions were still waiting.
Where was the great arrival?
‘Well, now,’ said the old man, filling another glass with wine for the
young reporter. ‘Aren’t I something? I made the machines, built
miniature cities, lakes, ponds, seas. Erected vast architectures against
crystal-water skies, talked to dolphins, played with whales, faked
tapes, mythologized films. Oh, it took years, years of sweating work and
secret preparation before I announced my departure, left and came back
with good news!’
They drank the rest of the vintage wine. There was a hum of voices. All
of the people below were looking up at the roof.
The time traveler waved at them and turned.
‘Quickly, now. It’s up to you from here on. You have the tape, my voice
on it, just freshly made. Here are three more tapes, with fuller data.
Here’s a film-cassette history of my whole inspired fraudulence. Here’s
a final manuscript. Take, take it all, hand it on. I nominate you as son
to explain the father. Quickly!’
Hustled into the elevator once more, Shumway felt the world fall away
beneath. He didn’t know whether to laugh or cry, so gave, at last, a
great hoot.
The old man, surprised, hooted with him, as they stepped out below and
advanced upon theToynbee Convector.
‘You see the point, don’t you, son? Life hasalwaysbeen lying to
ourselves! As boys, young men, old men. As girls, maidens, women, to
gently lie and prove the lie true. To weave dreams and put brains and
ideas and flesh and the truly real beneath the dreams. Everything,
finally, is a promise. What seems a lie is a ramshackle need, wishing to
be born. Here. Thus and so.’
He pressed the button that raised the plastic shield, pressed another
that started the time machine humming, then shuffled quickly in to
thrust himself into theConvector’s seat.
‘Throw the final switch, young man!’
‘But—’
‘You’re thinking,’ here the old man laughed, ‘if the time machine is a
fraud, it won’t work, what’s the use of throwing a switch, yes? Throw
it, anyway.Thistime, itwillwork!’
Shumway turned, found the control switch, grabbed hold, then looked at
Craig Bennett Stiles.
‘I don’t understand. Where are yougoing?’
‘Why, to be one with the ages, of course. To exist now, only in the deep
past.’
‘How can thatbe?’
‘Believe me, this time it will happen. Good-bye, dear, fine, nice young
man.’
‘Good-bye.’
‘Now. Tell me my name.’
‘What?’
‘Speak my name and throw the switch.’
‘Time traveler?’
‘Yes!Now!’
The young man yanked the switch. The machine hummed, roared, blazed with
power.
‘Oh,’ said the old man, shutting his eyes. His mouth smiled gently.
‘Yes.’
His head fell forward on his chest.
Shumway yelled, banged the switch off and leaped forward to tear at the
straps binding the old man in his device.
In the midst of so doing, he stopped, felt the time traveler’s wrist,
put his fingers under the neck to test the pulse there and groaned. He
began to weep.
The old man had, indeed, gone back in time, and its name was death. He
was traveling in the past now, forever.
Shumway stepped back and turned the machine on again. If the old man
were to travel, let the machine – symbolically, anyway – go with him. It
made a sympathetic humming. The fire of it, the bright sun fire, burned
in all of its spider grids and armatures and lighted the cheeks and the
vast brow of the ancient traveler, whose head seemed to nod with the
vibrations and whose smile, as he traveled into darkness, was the smile
of a child much satisfied.
The reporter stood for a long moment more, wiping his cheeks with the
backs of his hands. Then, leaving the machine on, he turned, crossed the
room, pressed the button for the glass elevator and, while he was
waiting, took the time traveler’s tapes and cassettes from his jacket
pockets and, one by one, shoved them into the incinerator trash flue set
in the wall.
The elevator doors opened, he stepped in, the doors shut. The elevator
hummed now, like yet another time device, taking him up into a stunned
world, a waiting world, lifting him up into a bright continent, a future
land, a wondrous and surviving planet …
That one man with one lie had created.

