                                 
                                Heart Transplant
                                      1981

     "Would  I  what?" he asked, in the dark, lying there easily, looking at the
ceiling.
     "You heard me," she said, lying there beside him with similar ease, holding
his  hand,  but  staring  rather  than looking at that ceiling, as if there were
something there that she was trying to see. "Well. . . ?"
     "Say it again," he said.
     "If,"  she  said,  after a long pause, "if you could fall in love with your
wife again . . . _ would_ you?"
     "What a strange question."
     "Not  so strange. This is the best of all possible worlds, if the world ran
the  way  worlds  _ should_  run. Wouldn't it make sense, finally, for people to
fall  in love again and live happily ever after? After all, you were once wildly
in love with Anne."
     "Wildly."
     "You can never forget that."
     "Never. Agreed."
     "Well, then, that being true-would you-"
     "_ Could_  would be more like it."
     "Forget  about  could.  Let's imagine new circumstances, everything running
right  for a change, your wife behaving the way you describe her once-perfection
instead of the way she acts now. What_ then_ ?"
     He leaned up on his elbow and looked at her.
     "You're in a strange mood tonight. What gives?"
     "I don't know. Maybe it's tomorrow. I'm forty, next month you're forty-two.
If  men  go  mad at forty-two, shouldn't women become sane two years earlier? Or
maybe  I'm  thinking,  What  a shame. What a shame people don't fall in love and
stay  in  love  with  the same people all their lives, instead of having to find
others to be with, laugh with or cry with; what a shame ..."
     He  reached  over  and  touched  her  cheek and felt a wetness there. "Good
grief, you're crying."
     "Just  a  little  bit. It's so damned sad. We are. _ They _ are. Everybody.
Everyone. Sad. Was it always this way?"
     "And hidden, I think. Nobody said."
     "I think I envy those people a hundred years ago."
     "Don't  envy  what  you  can't even guess. There was a lot of quiet madness
under their serene no-talk."
     He leaned over and kissed the tears from under her eyes, lightly.
     "Now, what brought all this on?"
     She sat up and didn't know what to do with her hands.
     "What  a  joke,"  she  said. "Neither you nor I smoke. In books and movies,
when  people  lie in bed after, they light cigarettes." She put her hands across
her  breast  and  held on, as she talked. "It's just, I was thinking of good old
Robert,  good  old  Bob,  and  how crazy I was for him once, and what am I doing
here,  loving  you,  when I should be home minding my thirty-seven-year-old-baby
husband?"
     "And?"
     "And  I  was  thinking  how  much  I really, truly like Anne. She's a great
woman; do you know that?"
     "Yes, but I try not to think of it, everything considered. She's not you."
     "But  what  if,  suddenly"-she clasped her hands around her knees and fixed
him with a bright, clear-blue gaze-"what if she _ were _ me?"
     "I _ beg _ your pardon?" He blinked.
     "What  if  all  the  qualities you lost in her and found in me were somehow
given back to her? Would you, could you, love her all over again?"
     "Now I really do wish I smoked!" He dropped his feet out onto the floor and
kept  his  back  to  her, staring out the window. "What's the use of asking that
kind of question, when there can never be an answer!?"
     "That  is the problem, though, isn't it?" She addressed his back. "You have
what my husband lacks and I have what your wife lacks. What's needed is a double
soul-no,  a  double  heart  transplant!"  She  almost laughed and then, deciding
against it, almost cried.
     "There's an idea there for a story, a novel, maybe a film."
     "It's our story and we're sunk with it, and no way out, unless-"
     "Unless?"
     She got up and moved restlessly about the room, then went to stand and look
out at the stars in the summer night sky.
     "What  makes  it  so  rough  is Bob's beginning to treat me the way he once
treated me. The last month he's been so ... fine, so terrific."
     "Oh, my God." He sighed and shut his eyes.
     "Yes. Oh, my God."
     There  was  a  long  silence. At last, he said, "Anne's been acting better,
too."
     "Oh,  my  God," she repeated, in a whisper, shutting her own eyes. Then, at
last,  she  opened  them and traced the stars. "What's the old thing? 'If wishes
were horses, beggars would ride'?"
     "You've lost me for the third or fourth time in as many minutes."
     She  came  and knelt on the floor by him and took both of his hands in hers
and looked into his face.
     "My  husband,  your wife are both out of town tonight, yes, at the far ends
of the country, one in New York, the other in San Francisco. Correct? And you're
sleeping  over  in this hotel room with me and we have all night together, but-"
She  stopped,  searched,  located  and  then tried the words: "But what if, just
before  we  go  to sleep, what if we made a kind of mutual wish, me for you, you
for me?"
     "A  _  wish'?"_  He  started  to  laugh.  "Don't."  She shook his hands. He
quieted. She went on: "A wish that while we slept, somehow, by a miracle, please
God,  please  all  the  Graces  and  Muses  and  magical times and great dreams,
somehow,  some way, we would both"-she slowed and then continued-"both fall back
in  love, you with your wife, me with my husband." He said nothing. "There," she
said.
     He reached over, found some matches on the side table, struck one, and held
it  up  to light her face. The fire glowed in her eyes and would not go away. He
exhaled. The match went out.
     "I'll  be  damned,"  he whispered. "You _ mean _ it." "I do, and we_ are_ .
Damned, that is. Would you _ try?"_
     "Lord-"
     "Don't say Lord as if I had gone crazy on you."
     "Look-"
     "No,  you  look." She took his hands again and pressed them, hard. "For me.
Would you do me the favor? And I'd do the same for you." "Make a wish?"
     "We  often  did,  as  kids. They sometimes worked. They worked because they
weren't really wishes, they were prayers."
     He lowered his eyes. "I haven't prayed in years." "Yes, you have. Count the
times  you wish you were back in the first month of your marriage. That's a kind
of  forlorn  wish, a lost prayer." He looked at her and swallowed several times.
"Don't say anything," she said. "Why not?" "Because right now, you feel you have
nothing to
     say."
     "I'll  be  quiet, then. Let me think. Do you, God, do you really want me to
make a wish for you?"
     She  sank  back  and  sat  on  the  floor, her hands in her lap, eyes shut.
Quietly, tears began to slide down her cheeks.
     "Dear, oh, my dear," he said softly.
     It  was  three in the morning and the talking was done and they had ordered
some  hot  milk and drunk it and brushed their teeth, and now, as he came out of
the  bathroom,  he  saw  her arranging the pillows on the bed, as if this were a
special theater in a special new time.
     "What  am I doing here?" he said. She turned. "Once we used to know. Now we
don't. Come along." She gestured and patted his side of the bed.
     He rounded the bed. "I feel silly." "You have to feel silly just so you can
feel better." She pointed at the bed.
     He  got  in  and put his head on the properly plumped pillow and folded the
sheets  neatly  over  his  chest and clasped his hands on the sheets. "Does this
look right?" he asked. "Perfect. Now."
     She put out the light and slid in on her side and took one of his hands and
lay  back  perfectly  straight  and  neat on her pillow. "Feeling tired, feeling
sleepy?" "Enough," he said.
     "All  right, then. Be serious now. Don't say anything. Just think. You know
what." "I know."
     "Shut  your  eyes  now.  There. Good." She shut her own and they lay there,
with  just  their  hands  clasped  and nothing in the room now that stirred save
their breathing. "Take a breath," she whispered. He took a breath. "Now exhale."
He exhaled. She did the same.
     "Now," she murmured. "Begin." She whispered _"Wish."_
     Thirty seconds ticked by on their watches.
     "Are you wishing?" she asked softly, at last.
     "Wishing," he said, just as softly.
     "Good," she whispered. And then: "Good night."
     Perhaps a minute later, his quiet voice, inaudible, moved in the dark room:
     "Goodbye."
     He  awoke  for  no reason except that he had had a dream that the earth had
shrugged,  or  an  earthquake  had  happened ten thousand miles away that no one
felt,  or  that  there  had been a second Annunciation but everyone was deaf, or
perhaps  it  was  only that the moon had come into the room during the night and
changed the shape of the room and changed the looks on their faces and the flesh
on  their  bones  and  now  had  stopped  so abruptly that the quick silence had
stirred  his  eyes wide. In the moment of opening, he knew the streets were dry,
there had been no rain. Only, perhaps, some sort of crying.
     And, lying there, he knew that somehow the wish had been granted.
     He  didn't know it immediately, of course. He sensed and guessed it because
of an incredible new
     warmth  in  the room, nearby, which came from the lovely woman lying by his
side.
     The  sureness,  the  regularity,  the serene rise and fall of her breathing
told him more. A spell had arrived, resolved itself, and passed straight on into
truthful  existence  while  she  slept.  Celebration  was in her blood now, even
though she was not awake to know it. Only her dream knew, and whispered it every
time she exhaled.
     He rose up onto his elbow, afraid to trust his intuition.
     He bent to look at that face, more beautiful than he had ever known it.
     Yes,  the  sign  was there. The absolute certainty was there. The peace was
there.  The  sleeping  lips smiled. If her eyes had opened, they would have been
blazing with light.
     Wake up, he wanted to say. I know your happiness. Now you must discover it.
Wake up.
     He  reached to touch her cheek but pulled his hand away. Her eyelids moved.
Her mouth opened.
     Quickly, he turned and lay huddled over on his side of the bed and waited.
     After  a long while, he heard her sit up. Then, as if struck a lovely blow,
she exclaimed something, cried out, reached over, touched him, found him asleep,
and sat beside him, discovering what he already knew.
     He heard her get up and run around the room like a bird wishing to be free.
She  came  and  kissed him on the cheek, went away, came back, kissed him again,
laughed  softly,  then  went  off  quickly  into  the sitting room. He heard her
dialing long distance and shut his eyes, tightly.
     "Robert?"  her  voice  said, at last. "Bob? Where are you? Silly. Stupid of
me.  I _ know_ where you are. Robert. Bob, oh, God, can I fly there, will you be
there when I arrive, today, this afternoon, tonight, yes? Would it be all right?
. . . What's come _ over_ me? I don't know. Don't ask. Can I come? Yes? Say yes!
. . . Oh, grand! Goodbye!" He heard the telephone click. After a while, he heard
her  blowing  her nose as she entered the room and sat on the bed next to him in
the  first  light  of  dawn. She had dressed quickly and haphazardly, and now he
reached out and took
     her hand.
     "Something happened," he whispered.
     "Yes."
     "The wish. It came true."
     "Isn't it incredible? Impossible, but it did! Why?
     How?"
     "Because both of us believed," he said, quietly. "I
     wished very hard, for you."
     "And I for you. Oh, Lord, isn't it wonderful that both of us could shift at
the  same  time,  move,  change, all in a night? Otherwise, it would be terrible
wouldn't  it,  if just one changed and the other 3 left behind?" o'Terrible," he
admitted.
     "Is  it  really a miracle?" she asked. "Did we wish hard enough and someone
or  something or God heard us and lent us back our old loves to warm us and tell
us  to behave, we might never have another wish or another chance again, is that
it?" "I don't know. Do you?"
     "Or was it just our secret selves knowing the time was over, a new time had
come, and time for us to both turn around and go, is that the real
     truth?" "All I know is I heard you on the phone just now.
     When you're gone, I'll call Anne." "Will you?" "I will."
     "Oh,  Lord,  I'm so happy for you, for me, for us!" "Get out of here.  Go. 
Get. Run. Fly away
     home."
     She  jumped  to  her  feet  and banged at her hair with a comb and gave up,
laughing. "I don't care if I look funny-"
     "Beautiful," he corrected.
     "Beautiful to you, maybe."
     "Always and forever."
     She came and bent down and kissed him and
     "Is this our last kiss?
     "Yes." He thought about it. "The last."
     "One more, then."
     "Just one."
     She held his face in her hands and stared into it.
     "Thanks for your wish," she said.
     "Thanks for _ yours._
     "You calling Anne right now?"
     "Now."
     "Best to Anne."
     "Best to Bob. God love you, dear lady. Goodbye."
     She was out the door and in the next room and the outside door shut and the
hotel  suite  was  very quiet. He heard her footsteps fade a long way off in the
hall toward the elevator.
     He sat looking at the phone but did not touch it.
     He  looked  in  the mirror and saw the tears beginning to stream unendingly
out of his eyes.
     "You, there," he said to his image. "You. Liar." And again: "Liar!"
     And  he  turned  and lay back down in the bed and put one hand out to touch
that empty pillow there.