prose_contemporaryRayBradburyOn the Orient, NorthcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
On the Orient, North
It was on the Orient Express heading north from Venice to Paris to
Calais that the old woman noticed the ghastly passenger.
He was a traveler obviously dying of some dread disease.
He occupied compartment 22 on the third car back, and had his meals sent
in and only at twilight did he rouse to come sit in the dining car
surrounded by the false electric lights and the sound of crystal and
women’s laughter.
He arrived this night, moving with a terrible slowness to sit across the
aisle from this woman of some years, her bosom like a fortress, her brow
serene, her eyes with a kindness that had mellowed with time.
There was a black medical bag at her side, and a thermometer tucked in
her mannish lapel pocket.
The ghastly man’s paleness caused her left hand to crawl up along her
lapel to touch the thermometer.
‘Oh, dear,’ whispered Miss Minerva Halliday.
The maître d’ was passing. She touched his elbow and nodded across the
aisle.
‘Pardon, but where is that poor man going?’
‘Calais and London, madame. If God is willing.’
And he hurried off.
Minerva Halliday, her appetite gone, stared across at that skeleton made
of snow.
The man and the cutlery laid before him seemed one. The knives, forks
and spoons jingled with a silvery cold sound. He listened, fascinated,
as if to the sound of his inner soul as the cutlery crept, touched,
chimed; a tintinnabulation from another sphere. His hands lay in his lap
like lonely pets, and when the train swerved around a long curve his
body, mindless, swayed now this way, now that, toppling.
At which moment the train took a greater curve and knocked the
silverware, chittering. A woman at a far table, laughing, cried out:
‘I don’tbelieveit!’
To which a man with a louder laugh shouted:
‘Nor doI!’
The coincidence caused, in the ghastly passenger, a terrible melting.
The doubting laughter had pierced his ears.
He visibly shrank. His eyes hollowed and one could almost imagine a cold
vapor gasped from his mouth.
Miss Minerva Halliday, shocked, leaned forward and put out one hand. She
heard herself whisper:
‘Ibelieve!’
The effect was instantaneous.
The ghastly passenger sat up. Color returned to his white cheeks. His
eyes glowed with a rebirth of fire. His head swiveled and he stared
across the aisle at this miraculous woman with words that cured.
Blushing furiously, the old nurse with the great warm bosom caught hold,
rose, and hurried off.
Not five minutes later, Miss Minerva Halliday heard the maître d’
hurrying along the corridor, tapping on doors, whispering. As he passed
her open door, he glanced at her.
‘Could it be that you are—’
‘No,’ she guessed, ‘not a doctor. But a registered nurse. Is it that old
man in the dining car?’
‘Yes, yes! Please, madame, this way!’
The ghastly man had been carried back to his own compartment.
Reaching it, Miss Minerva Halliday peered within.
And there the strange man lay strewn, his eyes wilted shut, his mouth a
bloodless wound, the only life in him the joggle of his head as the
train swerved.
My God, she thought, he’sdead!
Out loud she said, ‘I’ll call if I need you.’
The maître d’ went away.
Miss Minerva Halliday quietly shut the sliding door and turned to
examine the dead man – for surely he was dead. And yet.…
But at last she dared to reach out and touch the wrists in which so much
ice-water ran. She pulled back, as if her fingers had been burned by dry
ice. Then she leaned forward to whisper into the pale man’s face.
‘Listen very carefully.Yes?’
For answer, she thought she heard the coldest throb of a single
heartbeat.
She continued. ‘I do not know how I guess this. I know who you are, and
what you are sick of—’
The train curved. His head lolled as if his neck had been broken.
‘I’ll tell you what you’re dying from!’ she whispered. ‘You suffer a
disease – ofpeople!’
His eyes popped wide, as if he had been shot through the heart. She
said:
‘The people on this train are killing you.Theyare your affliction.’
Something like a breath stirred behind the shut wound of the man’s
mouth.
‘Yesssss … ssss.’
Her grip tightened on his wrist, probing for some pulse:
‘You are from some middle European country, yes? Somewhere where the
nights are long and when the wind blows, peoplelisten? But now things
have changed, and you have tried to escape by travel, but …’
Just then, a party of young, wine-filled tourists bustled along the
outer corridor, firing off their laughter.
The ghastly passenger withered.
‘How do … you …’ he whispered, ‘… know … thissss?’
‘I am a special nurse with a special memory. I saw, I met, someone like
you when I was six—’
‘Saw?’ the pale man exhaled.
‘In Ireland, near Kileshandra. My uncle’s house, a hundred years old,
full of rain and fog and there was walking on the roof late at night,
and sounds in the hall as if the storm had come in, and then at last
this shadow entered my room. It sat on my bed and the cold from his body
mademecold. I remember and know it was no dream, for the shadow who came
to sit on my bed and whisper … was much … like you.’
Eyes shut, from the depths of his arctic soul, the old sick man mourned
in response:
‘And who … andwhat …am I?’
‘You are not sick. And you are not dying.… Youare–’
The whistle on the Orient Express wailed a long way off.
‘– a ghost,’ she said.
‘Yesssss!’ he cried.
It was a vast shout of need, recognition, assurance. He almost bolted
upright.
‘Yes!’
At which moment there arrived in the doorway a young priest, eager to
perform. Eyes bright, lips moist, one hand clutching his crucifix, he
stared at the collapsed figure of the ghastly passenger and cried, ‘May
I—?’
‘Last rites?’ The ancient passenger opened one eye like the lid on a
silver box. ‘From you? No.’ His eye shifted to the nurse.‘Her!’
‘Sir!’ cried the young priest.
He stepped back, seized his crucifix as if it were a parachute ripcord,
spun, and scurried off.
Leaving the old nurse to sit examining her now even more strange patient
until at last he said:
‘How,’ he gasped, ‘canyounurseme?’
‘Why—’ she gave a small self-deprecating laugh. ‘We mustfinda way.’
With yet another wail, the Orient Express encountered more mileages of
night, fog, mist, and cut through it with a shriek.
‘You are going to Calais?’ she said.
‘And beyond, to Dover, London, and perhaps a castle outside Edinburgh,
where I will be safe—’
‘That’s almost impossible—’ She might as well have shot him through the
heart. ‘No, no, wait, wait!’ she cried. ‘Impossible … withoutme! I will
travel with you to Calais and across to Dover.’
‘But you do notknowme!’
‘Oh, but I dreamed you as a child, long before I met someone like you,
in the mists and rains of Ireland. At age nine I searched the moors for
the Baskerville Hound.’
‘Yes,’ said the ghastly passenger. ‘You are English and the
Englishbelieve!’
‘True. Better than Americans, whodoubt. French? Cynics! English is best.
There is hardly an old London house that does not have its sad lady of
mists crying before dawn.’
At which moment the compartment door, shaken by a long curve of track,
sprang wide. An onslaught of poisonous talk, of delirious chatter, of
what could only be irreligious laughter poured in from the corridor. The
ghastly passenger wilted.
Springing to her feet, Minerva Halliday slammed the door and turned to
look with the familiarity of a lifetime of sleep-tossed encounters at
her traveling companion.
‘You, now,’ she asked, ‘who exactly areyou?’
The ghastly passenger, seeing in her face the face of a sad child he
might have encountered long ago, now described his life:
‘I have “lived” in one place outside Vienna for two hundred years. To
survive, assaulted by atheists as well as true believers, I have hidden
in libraries in dust-filled stacks there to dine on myths and moundyard
tales. I have taken midnight feasts of panic and terror from bolting
horses, baying dogs, catapulting tomcats … crumbs shaken from tomb lids.
As the years passed, my compatriots of the unseen world vanished one by
one as castles tumbled or lords rented out their haunted gardens to
women’s clubs or bed-and-breakfast entrepreneurs. Evicted, we ghastly
wanderers of the world have sunk in tar, bog, and fields of disbelief,
doubt, scorn, or outright derision. With the populations and disbeliefs
doubling by the day, all of my specter friends have fled. I am the last,
trying to train across Europe to some safe, rain-drenched castle-keep
where men are properly frightened by soots and smokes of wandering
souls. England and Scotland for me!’
His voice faded into silence.
‘And your name?’ she said, at last.
‘Ihaveno name,’ he whispered. ‘A thousand fogs have visited my family
plot. A thousand rains have drenched my tombstone. The chisel marks were
erased by mist and water and sun. My name has vanished with the flowers
and the grass and the marble dust.’ He opened his eyes.
‘Whyare you doing this?’ he said. ‘Helpingme?’
And at last she smiled, for she heard the right answer fall from her
lips:
‘I have never in my life had alark.’
‘Lark!’
‘My life was that of a stuffed owl. I was not a nun, yet never married.
Treating an invalid mother and a half-blind father, I gave myself to
hospitals, tombstone beds, cries at night, and medicines that are not
perfume to passing men. So, I am something of a ghost myself, yes? And
now, tonight, sixty-six years on, I have at last found in you a patient,
magnificently different, fresh, absolutely new. Oh, Lord, what a
challenge. A race! I will pace you, to face people off the train,
through the crowds in Paris, then the trip to the sea, off the train, on
to the ferry! It will indeed be a—’
‘Lark!’ cried the ghastly passenger. Spasms of laughter shook him.
‘Larks? Yes,thatis what we are!’
‘But,’ she said, ‘in Paris, do they noteatlarks even while they roast
priests?’
He shut his eyes and whispered, ‘Paris? Ah, yes.’
The train wailed. The night passed.
And they arrived in Paris.
And even as they arrived, a boy, no more than six, ran past and froze.
He stared at the ghastly passenger and the ghastly passenger shot back a
remembrance of antarctic ice floes. The boy gave a cry and fled. The old
nurse flung the door wide to peer out.
The boy was gibbering to his father at the far end of the corridor. The
father charged along the corridor, crying:
‘What goesonhere? Who has frightened my—?’
The man stopped. Outside the door he now fixed his gaze on this ghastly
passenger on the slowing, braking Orient Express. He braked his own
tongue. ‘– my son,’ he finished.
The ghastly passenger looked at him quietly with fog-gray eyes.
‘I—’ The Frenchman drew back, sucking his teeth in disbelief. ‘Forgive
me!’ He gasped. ‘Regrets!’
And he turned to run, shove at his son. ‘Troublemaker. ‘Get!’ Their door
slammed.
‘Paris!’ echoed through the train.
‘Hush and hurry!’ advised Minerva Halliday as she bustled her ancient
friend out on to a platform milling with bad tempers and misplaced
luggage.
‘I ammelting!’ cried the ghastly passenger.
‘Not whereI’mtaking you!’ She displayed a picnic hamper and flung him
forth to the miracle of a single remaining taxi. And they arrived under
a stormy sky at the Père Lachaise cemetery. The great gates were
swinging shut. The nurse waved a handful of francs. The gate froze.
Inside, they wandered at peace among ten thousand monuments. So much
cold marble was there, and so many hidden souls, that the old nurse felt
a sudden dizziness, a pain in one wrist, and a swift coldness on the
left side of her face. She shook her head, refusing this. And they
walked on among the stones.
‘Where do we picnic?’ he said.
‘Anywhere,’ she said. ‘But carefully! For this is aFrenchcemetery!
Packed with cynics!Armiesof egotists who burned people for their faith
one year only to be burned fortheirfaith the next! So, pick. Choose!’
They walked. The ghastly passenger nodded. ‘This first stone. Beneath
it:nothing. Death final, not awhisperof time. Thesecondstone: a woman, a
secret believer because she loved her husband and hoped to see him again
in eternity … a murmur of spirit here, the turning of a heart.Better.
Now this third gravestone: a writer of thrillers for a French magazine.
But helovedhis nights, his fogs, his castles.Thisstone is a proper
temperature, like a good wine. So here we shall sit, dear lady, as you
decant the champagne and we wait to go back to the train.’
She offered a glass, happily. ‘Canyou drink?’
‘One can try.’ He took it. ‘One can only try.’
The ghastly passenger almost ‘died’ as they left Paris. A group of
intellectuals, fresh from seminars about Sartre’s ‘nausea,’ and hot-air
ballooning about Simone de Beauvoir, streamed through the corridors,
leaving the air behind them boiled and empty.
The pale passenger became paler.
The second stop beyond Paris, another invasion! A group of Germans
surged aboard, loud in their disbelief of ancestral spirits, doubtful of
politics, some even carrying books titledWas God Ever Home?
The Orient ghost sank deeper in his X-ray image bones.
‘Oh, dear,’ cried Miss Minerva Halliday, and ran to her own compartment
to plunge back and toss down a cascade of books.
‘Hamlet!’she cried, ‘his father, yes?A Christmas Carol.
Fourghosts!Wuthering Heights. Kathyreturns, yes? To haunt the snows?
Ah,The Turn of the Screw, and …Rebecca! Then – my favorite!The Monkey’s
Paw! Which?’
But the Orient ghost said not a Marley word. His eyes were locked, his
mouth sewn with icicles.
‘Wait!’ she cried.
And opened the first book …
Where Hamlet stood on the castle wall and heard his ghost-of-a-father
moan and so she said these words:
‘“Mark me … my hour is almost come … when I to sulfurous and tormenting
flames … must render up myself …”’
And then she read:
‘“I am thy father’s spirit,/Doomed for a certain term to walk the night
…”’
And again:
‘“… If thou didst ever thy dear father love … O, God!… Revenge his foul
and most unnatural murder …”’
And yet again:
‘“… Murder most foul …”’
And the train ran in the night as she spoke the last words of Hamlet’s
father’s ghost:
‘“… Fare thee well at once …”’
‘“… Adieu, adieu! Remember me.”’
And she repeated:
‘“… remember me!”’
And the Orient ghost quivered. She pretended not to notice but seized a
further book:
‘“… Marley was dead, to begin with …”’
As the Orient train thundered across a twilight bridge above an unseen
stream.
Her hands flew like birds over the books.
‘“I am the Ghost of Christmas Past!”’
Then:
‘“The Phantom Rickshaw glided from the mist and clop-clopped off into
the fog—”’
And wasn’t there the faintest echo of a horse’s hooves behind, within
the Orient ghost’s mouth?
‘“The beating beating beating, under the floorboards of the Old Man’s
Telltale Heart!”’ she cried, softly.
Andthere! like the leap of a frog. The first faint pulse of the Orient
ghost’s heart in more than an hour.
The Germans down the corridor fired off a cannon of disbelief.
Butshepoured the medicine:
‘“The Hound bayed out on the Moor—”’
And the echo of that bay, that most forlorn cry, came from her traveling
companion’s soul, wailed from his throat.
And the night grew on and the moon arose and a Woman in White crossed a
landscape, as the old nurse said and told, and a bat that became a wolf
that became a lizard scaled a wall on the ghastly passenger’s brow.
And at last the train was silent with sleeping, and Miss Minerva
Halliday let the last book drop with the thump of a body to the floor.
‘Requiescat in pace?’whispered the Orient traveler, eyes shut.
‘Yes.’ She smiled, nodding.‘Requiescat in pace.’And they slept.
And at last they reached the sea.
And there was mist, which became fog, which became scatters of rain,
like a proper drench of tears from a seamless sky.
Which made the ghastly passenger open, ungum his mouth, and murmur
thanks for the haunted sky and the shore visited by phantoms of tide as
the train slid into the shed where the mobbed exchange would be made, a
full train becoming a full boat.
The Orient ghost who stood well back, the last figure on a now
self-haunted train.
‘Wait,’ he cried, softly, piteously. ‘That boat! There’s no place on it
to hide! And thecustoms!’
But the customs men took one look at the pale face snowed under the dark
cap and earmuffs, and swiftly flagged the wintry soul on to the ferry.
To be surrounded by dumb voices, ignorant elbows, layers of people
shoving as the boat shuddered and moved and the nurse saw her fragile
icicle melt yet again.
It was a mob of children shrieking by that made her say: ‘Quickly!’
And she all but lifted and carried the wicker man in the wake of the
boys and girls.
‘No,’ cried the old passenger. ‘The noise!’
‘It’s special!’ The nurse hustled him through a door. ‘A medicine!
Here!’
The old man stared around.
‘Why,’ he murmured. ‘This is – a playroom.’
And she steered him into the midst of all the screams and running.
‘Children!’ she called.
The children froze.
‘Story-telling time!’
They were about to run again when she added, ‘Ghoststory-telling time!’
She pointed casually to the ghastly passenger, whose pale moth fingers
grasped the scarf about his icy throat.
‘All falldown!’ said the nurse.
The children plummeted with squeals to the floor. All about the Orient
traveler, like Indians around a tepee, they stared up along his body to
where blizzards ran odd temperatures in his gaping mouth.
He wavered. She quickly said:
‘Youdobelieve in ghosts,yes?’
‘Oh,yes!’ was the shout. ‘Yes!’
It was as if a ramrod had shot up his spine. The Orient traveler
stiffened. The most brittle of tiny flinty sparks fired his eyes. Winter
roses budded in his cheeks. And the more the children leaned, the taller
he grew, and the warmer his complexion. With one icicle finger he
pointed at their faces.
‘I,’ he whispered, ‘I,’ a pause. ‘Shall tell you a frightful tale. About
arealghost!’
‘Oh,yes!’ cried the children.
And he began to talk and as the fever of his tongue conjured fogs, lured
mists and invited rains, the children hugged and crowded close, a bed of
charcoals on which he happily baked. And as he talked Nurse Halliday,
backed off near the door, saw what he saw across the haunted sea, the
ghost cliffs, the chalk cliffs, the safe cliffs of Dover and not so far
beyond, waiting, the whispering towers, the murmuring castle-keeps,
where phantoms were as they had always been, with the still attics
waiting. And staring, the old nurse felt her hand creep up her lapel
toward her thermometer. She felt her own pulse. A brief darkness touched
her eyes.
And then one child said: ‘Whoareyou?’
And gathering his gossamer shroud, the ghastly passenger whetted his
imagination, and replied.
It was only the sound of the ferry landing whistle that cut short the
long telling of midnight tales. And the parents poured in to seize their
lost children, away from the Orient gentleman with the ghastly eyes
whose gently raving mouth shivered their marrows as he whispered and
whispered until the ferry nudged the dock and the last boy was dragged,
protesting, away, leaving the old man and his nurse alone in the
children’s playroom as the ferry stopped shuddering its delicious
shudders, as if it had listened, heard, and deliriously enjoyed the
long-before-dawn tales.
At the gangplank, the Orient traveler said, with a touch of briskness,
‘No. I’ll need no help going down. Watch!’
And he strode down the plank. And even as the children had been tonic
for his color, height and vocal cords, so the closer he came to England,
pacing, the firmer his stride, and when he actually touched the dock, a
small happy burst of sound erupted from his thin lips and the nurse,
behind him, stopped frowning, and let him run toward the train.
And seeing him dash, like a child before her, she could only stand,
riven with delight and something more than delight. And he ran and her
heart ran with him and suddenly knew a stab of amazing pain, and a lid
of darkness struck her, and she swooned.
Hurrying, the ghastly passenger did not notice that the old nurse was
not beside or behind him, so eagerly did he go.
At the train he gasped, ‘There!’ safely grasping the compartment handle.
Only then did he sense a loss, and turned.
Minerva Halliday was not there.
And yet, an instant later, she arrived, looking paler than before, but
with an incredibly radiant smile. She wavered and almost fell. This time
it was he who reached out.
‘Dear lady,’ he said, ‘you have been so kind.’
‘But,’ she said, quietly, looking at him, waiting for him to truly see
her, ‘I am not leaving.’
‘You …?’
‘I am going with you,’ she said.
‘But your plans?’
‘Have changed. Now, I have nowhereelseto go.’
She half-turned to look over her shoulder.
At the dock, a swiftly gathering crowd peered down at someone lying on
the planks. Voices murmured and cried out. The word ‘doctor’ was called
several times.
The ghastly passenger looked at Minerva Halliday. Then he looked at the
crowd and the object of the crowd’s alarm lying on the dock: a medical
thermometer lay broken under their feet. He looked back at Minerva
Halliday, who still stared at the broken thermometer.
‘Oh, my dear kind lady,’ he said, at last. ‘Come.’
She looked into his face. ‘Larks?’ she said.
He nodded and said, ‘Larks!’
And he helped her up into the train, which soon jolted and then dinned
and whistled away along the tracks toward London and Edinburgh and moors
and castles and dark nights and long years.
‘I wonder who she was?’ said the ghastly passenger looking back at the
crowd on the dock.
‘Oh, Lord,’ said the old nurse. ‘I never really knew.’
And the train was gone.
It took a full twenty seconds for the tracks to stop trembling.

