antiqueRayBradburyDeath is a Lonely BusinessundRayBradburycalibre
0.8.6522.8.2012c18795e7-0b97-4698-87f8-bedcc20417af1.0
DEATH IS A LONELY BUSINESS
Ray Bradbury
 
[18 oct 2001 - scanned for #bookz]
[20 oct 2001 - proofed for #bookz – by bookleech, v 1.0]
Venice, California, in the old days had much to recommend it to people
who liked to be sad. It had fog almost every night and along the shore
the moaning of the oil well machinery and the slap of dark water in the
canals and the hiss of sand against the windows of your house when the
wind came up and sang among the open places and along the empty walks.
Those were the days when the Venice pier was falling apart and dying in
the sea and you could find there the bones of a vast dinosaur, the
rollercoaster, being covered by the shifting tides.
At the end of one long canal you could find old circus wagons that had
been rolled and dumped, and in the cages, at midnight, if you looked,
things lived, fish and crayfish moving with the tide; and it was all the
circuses of time somehow gone to doom and rusting away.
And there was a loud avalanche of big red trolley car that rushed toward
the sea every half-hour and at midnight skirled the curve and threw
sparks on the high wires and rolled away with a moan which was like the
dead turning in their sleep, as if the trolleys and the lonely men who
swayed steering them knew that in another year they would be gone, the
tracks covered with concrete and tar and the high spider-wire collected
on rolls and spirited away.
And it was in that time, in one of those lonely years when the fogs
never ended and the winds never stopped their laments, that riding the
old red trolley, the high-bucketing thunder, one night I met up with
Death's friend and didn't know it.
It was a raining night, with me reading a book in the back of the old,
whining, roaring railcar on its way from one empty confetti-tossed
transfer station to the next. Just me and the big, aching wooden car and
the conductor up front slamming the brass controls and easing the brakes
and letting out the hell-steam when needed.
And the man down the aisle who somehow had got there without my
noticing.
I became aware of him finally because of him swaying, swaying, standing
there behind me for a long time, as if undecided because there were
forty empty seats and late at night it is hard with so much emptiness to
decide which one to take. But finally I heard him sit and I knew he was
there because I could smell him like the tidelands coming in across the
fields. On top of the smell of his clothes, there was the odor of too
much drink taken in too little time.
I did not look back at him. I learned long ago, looking only encourages.
I shut my eyes and kept my head firmly turned away. It didn't work.
"Oh," the man moaned.
I could feel him strain forward in his seat. I felt his hot breath on my
neck. I held on to my knees and sank away.
"Oh," he moaned, even louder. It was like someone falling off a cliff,
asking to be saved, or someone swimming far out in the storm, wanting to
be seen.
"Ah!"
It was raining hard now as the big red trolley bucketed across a
midnight stretch of meadow-grass and the rain banged the windows,
drenching away the sight of open fields. We sailed through Culver City
without seeing the film studio and ran on, the great car heaving, the
floorboard whining underfoot, the empty seats creaking, the train
whistle screaming.
And a blast of terrible air from behind me as the unseen man cried,
"Death!"
The train whistle cut across his voice so he had to start over.
"Death...”
Another whistle.
"Death," said the voice behind me, "is a lonely business."
I thought he might weep. I stared ahead at the flashing rain that rushed
to meet us. The train slowed. The man rose up in a fury of demand, as if
he might beat at me if I didn't listen and at last turn. He wanted to be
seen. He wished to drown me in his need. I felt his hand stretch out,
and whether as fists or claws, to rake or beat me, I could not guess. I
clutched the seat in front of me. His voice exploded.
"Oh, death!"
The train braked to a halt.
Go on, I thought, finish it!
"Is a lonely business!" he said, in a dreadful whisper, and moved away.
I heard the back door open. At last I turned.
The car was empty. The man had gone, taking his funeral with him. I
heard gravel crunching on the path outside the train.
The unseen man was muttering out there to himself as the doors banged
shut. I could still hear him through the window. Something about the
grave. Something about the grave. Something about the lonely.
The train jerked and roared away through the long grass and the storm.
I threw the window up to lean out and stare back into wet darkness.
If there was a city back there, and people, or one man and his terrible
sadness, I could not see, nor hear.
The train was headed for the ocean.
I had this awful feeling it would plunge in.
I slammed the window down and sat, shivering. I had to remind myself all
the rest of the way, you're only twenty-seven. You don't drink. But . .
.
I had a drink, anyway.
Here at this far lost end of the continent, where the trail wagons had
stopped and the people with them, I found a last-stand saloon, empty
save for a bartender in love with Hopalong Cassidy on late night TV.
"One double vodka, please."
I was astounded at my voice. Why was I drinking? For courage to call my
girlfriend, Peg, two thousand miles away in Mexico City? To tell her
that I was all right? But nothing had happened to me, had it?
Nothing but a train ride and cold rain and a dreadful voice behind me,
exhaling vapors of fear. But I dreaded going back to my apartment bed,
which was as empty as an icebox abandoned by the Okies on the way west.
The only thing emptier was my Great American Novelist's bank account in
an old Roman temple bank building on the edge of the sea, about to be
washed away in the next recession. The tellers waited in rowboats every
morning, while the manager drowned himself in the nearest bar. I rarely
saw any of them. With only an occasional sale to a pulp detective
magazine, there was no cash to deposit. So ...
I drank my vodka. I winced.
"Jesus," said the bartender, "you look like you never had booze before!"
"I never did."
"You look horrible."
"I feel horrible. You ever think something awful is going to happen, but
you don't know what?"
"It's called the heebie-jeebies."
I swallowed more vodka and shivered.
"No, no. Something really terrible, closing in on you, is what I mean."
The bartender looked over my shoulder as if he saw the ghost of the man
on the train there.
"Did you bring it in with you?"
"No."
"Then it's not here."
"But," I said, "he spoke to me, one of the Furies."
"Furies?"
"I didn't see his face. God, I feel worse now. Good night."
"Lay off the booze!"
But I was out the door and peering in all directions to catch the thing
that was waiting for me. Which way home, so as not to meet up with
darkness? I chose.
And knowing it was the wrong choice, I hurried along the dark rim of the
old canal toward the drowned circus wagons.
How the lion cages got in the canal no one knew. For that matter, no one
seemed to remember how the canals had gotten there in the middle of an
old town somehow fallen to seed, the seeds rustling against the doors
every night along with the sand and bits of seaweed and unravelings of
tobacco from cigarettes tossed along the strand-shore as far back as
1910.
But there they were, the canals and, at the end of one, a dark green and
oil scummed waterway, the ancient circus wagons and cages, flaking their
white enamel and gold paint and rusting their thick bars.
A long time before, in the early Twenties, these cages had probably
rolled by like bright summer storms with animals prowling them, lions
opening their mouths to exhale hot meat breaths. Teams of white horses
had dragged their pomp through Venice and across the fields long before
MGM put up its false fronts and made a new kind of circus that would
live forever on bits of film.
Now all that remained of the old parade had ended here. Some of the cage
wagons stood upright in the deep waters of the canal, others were tilted
flat over on their sides and buried in the tides that revealed them some
dawns or covered them some midnights. Fish swarmed in and out of the
bars. By day small boys came and danced about on the huge lost islands
of steel and wood and sometimes popped inside and shook the bars and
roared.
But now, long after midnight with the last trolley gone to destinations
north along the empty sands, the canals lapped their black waters and
sucked at the cages like old women sucking their empty gums.
I came running, head down against the rain which suddenly cleared and
stopped. The moon broke through a rift of darkness like a great eye
watching me. I walked on mirrors which showed me the same moon and
clouds. I walked on the sky beneath, and something happened. . . .
From somewhere a block or so away, a tidal surge of salt water came
rolling black and smooth between the canal banks. Somewhere a sandbar
had broken and let the sea in. And here the dark waters came. The tide
reached a small overpass bridge at the same moment I reached the center.
The water hissed about the old lion cages.
I quickened. I seized the rail of the bridge.
For in one cage, directly below me, a dim phosphorescence bumped the
inside of the bars.
A hand gestured from within the cage.
Some old lion-tamer, gone to sleep, had just wakened to find himself in
a strange place.
An arm outstretched within the cage, behind the bars, languidly. The
lion-tamer was coming full awake.
The water fell and rose again.
And a ghost pressed to the bars.
Bent over the rail, I could not believe.
But now the spirit-light took shape. Not only a hand, an arm, but an
entire body sagged and loosely gesticulated, like an immense marionette,
trapped in iron.
A pale face, with empty eyes which took light from the moon, and showed
nothing else, was there like a silver mask.
Then the tide shrugged and sank. The body vanished.
Somewhere inside my head, the vast trolley rounded a curve of rusted
track, choked brakes, threw sparks, screamed to a halt as somewhere an
unseen man jolted out those words with every run, jump, rush.
"Death is a lonely business."
No.
The tide rose again in a gesture like a seance remembered from some
other night.
And the ghost shape rose again within the cage.
It was a dead man wanting out.
Somebody gave a terrible yell.
I knew it was me, when a dozen lights flashed on in the little houses
along the rim of the dark canal.
"All right, stand back, stand back!"
More cars were arriving, more police, more lights going on, more people
wandering out in their bathrobes, stunned with sleep, to stand with me,
stunned with more than sleep. We looked like a mob of miserable clowns
abandoned on the bridge, looking down at our drowned circus.
I stood shivering, staring at the cage, thinking, why didn't I look
back? Why didn't I see that man who knew all about the man down there in
the circus wagon?
My God, I thought, what if the man on the train had actually shoved this
dead man into the cage?
Proof? None. All I had was five words repeated on a night train an hour
after midnight. All I had was rain dripping on the high wire repeating
those words. All I had was the way the cold water came like death along
the canal to wash the cages and go back out colder than when it had
arrived.
More strange clowns came out of the old bungalows.
"All right, folks, it's three in the morning. Clear away!"
It had begun to rain again, and the police when they had arrived had
looked at me as if to say, why didn't you mind your own business? or
wait until morning and phone it in, anonymous?
One of the policemen stood on the edge of the canal in a pair of black
swim trunks, looking at the water with distaste. His body was white from
not having been in the sun for a long while. He stood watching the tide
move into the cage and lift the sleeper there, beckoning. A face showed
behind the bars. The face was so gone-far-off-away it was sad. There was
a terrible wrenching in my chest. I had to back off, because I heard the
first trembling cough of grief start up in my throat.
And then the white flesh of the policeman cut the water. He sank.
I thought he had drowned, too. The rain fell on the oily surface of the
canal.
And then the officer appeared, inside the cage, his face to the bars,
gagging.
It shocked me, for I thought it was the dead man come there for a last
in-sucked gasp of life.
A moment later, I saw the swimmer thrashing out of the far side of the
cage, pulling a long ghost shape like a funeral streamer of pale
seaweed.
Someone was mourning. Dear Jesus, it can't be me!
They had the body out on the canal bank now, and the swimmer was
toweling himself. The lights were blinking off in the patrol cars. Three
policemen bent over the body with flashlights, talking in low voices.
"…I'd say about twenty-four hours."
"…Where's the coroner?"
"…Phone's off the hook. Tom went to get him."
"Any wallet, I.D.?"
"He's clean. Probably a transient."
They started turning the pockets inside out.
"No, not a transient," I said, and stopped.
One of the policemen had turned to flash his light in my face. With
great curiosity he examined my eyes, and heard the sounds buried in my
throat.
"You know him?"
"No."
"Then why…?"
"Why am I feeling lousy? Because. He's dead, forever. Christ. And I
found him."
My mind jumped.
On a brighter summer day years back I had rounded a corner to find a man
sprawled under a braked car. The driver was leaping from the car to
stand over the body. I stepped forward, then stopped.
Something pink lay on the sidewalk near my shoe.
I remembered it from some high school laboratory vat. A lonely bit of
brain tissue.
A woman, passing, a stranger, stood for a long time staring at the body
under the car. Then she did an impulsive thing she could not have
anticipated. She bent slowly to kneel by the body. She patted his
shoulder, touched him gently as if to say, oh there, there, there, oh,
oh, there.
"Was he killed?" I heard myself say.
The policeman turned. "What made you say that?"
"How would, I mean, how would he get in that cage, underwater, if
someone didn't, stuff him there?"
The flashlight switched on again and touched over my face like a
doctor's hand, probing for symptoms.
"You the one who phoned the call in?"
"No." I shivered. "I'm the one who yelled and made all the lights come
on."
"Hey," someone whispered.
A plainclothes detective, short, balding, kneeled by the body and turned
out the coat pockets. From them tumbled wads and clots of what looked
like wet snowflakes, papier-mâché.
"What in hell's that?" someone said.
I know, I thought, but didn't say.
My hand trembling, I bent near the detective to pick up some of the wet
paper mash. He was busy emptying the other pockets of more of the junk.
I kept some of it in my palm and, as I rose, shoved it in my pocket, as
the detective glanced up.
"You're soaked," he said. "Give your name and address to that officer
over there and get home. Dry off."
It was beginning to rain again and I was shivering. I turned, gave the
officer my name and address, and hurried away toward my apartment.
I had jogged along for about a block when a car pulled up and the door
swung open. The short detective with the balding head blinked out at me.
"Christ, you look awful," he said.
"Someone else said that to me, just an hour ago."
"Get in."
"I only live another block...”
"Get in!"
I climbed in, shuddering, and he drove me the last two blocks to my
thirty-dollar-a-month, stale, crackerbox flat. I almost fell, getting
out, I was so weak with trembling.
"Crumley," said the detective. "Elmo Crumley. Call me when you figure
out what that paper junk is you stuck in your pocket."
I started guiltily. My hand went to that pocket. I nodded. "Sure."
"And stop worrying and looking sick," said Crumley. "He wasn't
anybody..." He stopped, ashamed of what he had said, and ducked his head
to start over.
"Why do I think he was somebody?" I said. "When I remember who, I'll
call."
I stood frozen. I was afraid more terrible things were waiting just
behind me. When I opened my apartment door, would black canal waters
flood out?
"Jump!" and Elmo Crumley slammed his door.
His car was just two dots of red light going away in a fresh downpour
that beat my eyelids shut.
I glanced across the street at the gas station phone booth which I used
as my office to call editors who never phoned back. I rummaged my
pockets for change, thinking, I'll call Mexico City, wake Peg, reverse
the charges, tell her about the cage, the man, and, Christ, scare her to
death!
Listen to the detective, I thought.
Jump.
I was shaking so violently now that I couldn't get the damn key in the
lock.
Rain followed me inside.
Inside, waiting for me was . . .
An empty twenty-by-twenty studio apartment with a body-damaged sofa, a
bookcase with fourteen books in it and lots of waiting space, an easy
chair bought on the cheap from Goodwill Industries, a Sears, Roebuck
unpainted pinewood desk with an unoiled 1934 Underwood Standard
typewriter on it, as big as a player piano and as loud as wooden clogs
on a carpetless floor.
In the typewriter was an anticipatory sheet of paper. In a wood box on
one side was my collected literary output, all in one stack. There were
copies of Dime Detective, Detective Tales, and Black Mask, each of which
had paid me thirty or forty dollars per story. On the other side was
another wooden box, waiting to be filled with manuscript. In it was a
single page of a book that refused to begin.
UNTITLED NOVEL.
With my name under that. And the date, July 1, 1949.
Which was three months ago.
I shivered, stripped down, toweled myself off, got into a bathrobe, and
came back to stand staring at my desk.
I touched the typewriter, wondering if it was a lost friend or a man or
a mean mistress.
Somewhere back a few weeks it had made noises vaguely resembling the
Muse. Now, more often than not, I sat at the damned machine as if
someone had cut my hands off at the wrists. Three or four times a day I
sat here and was victimized by literary heaves. Nothing came. Or if it
did, it wound up on the floor in hairballs I swept up every night. I was
going through that long desert known as Dry Spell, Arizona.
It had a lot to do with Peg so far away among all those catacomb mummies
in Mexico, and my being lonely, and no sun in Venice for the three
months, only mist and then fog and then rain and then fog and mist
again. I wound myself up in cold cotton batting each midnight, and
rolled out all fungus at dawn. My pillow was moist every morning, but I
didn't know what I had dreamed to salt it that way.
I looked out the window at that telephone, which I listened for all day
every day, which never rang offering to bank my splendid novel if I
could finish it last year.
I saw my fingers moving on the typewriter keys, fumbling. I thought they
looked like the hands of the dead stranger in the cage, dangled out in
the water moving like sea anemones, or like the hands, unseen, of the
man behind me tonight on the train.
Both men gestured.
Slowly, slowly, I sat down.
Something thumped within my chest like someone bumping into the bars of
an abandoned cage.
Someone breathed on my neck. . . .
I had to make both of them go away. I had to do something to quiet them
so I could sleep.
A sound came out of my throat as if I were about to be sick. But I
didn't throw up.
Instead, my fingers began to type, x-ing out the UNTITLED NOVEL until it
was gone.
Then I went down a space and saw these words begin to jolt out on the
paper:
DEATH and then IS A and then LONELY and then, at last, BUSINESS.
I grimaced wildly at the title, gasped, and didn't stop typing for an
hour, until I got the storm-lightning train rolled away in the rain and
let the lion cage fill with black sea water which poured forth and set
the dead man free. . . .
Down and through my arms, along my hands, and out my cold fingertips
onto the page.
In a flood, the darkness came.
I laughed, glad for its arrival.
And fell into bed.
As I tried to sleep, I began sneezing and sneezing and lay miserably
using up a box of Kleenex, feeling the cold would never end.
During the night the fog thickened, and way out in the bay somewhere
sunk and lost, a foghorn blew and blew again. It sounded like a great
sea beast long dead and heading for its own grave away from shore,
mourning along the way, with no one to care or follow.
During the night a wind moved in my apartment window and stirred the
typed pages of my novel on the desk. I heard the paper whisper like the
waters in the canal, like the breath on my neck, and at last I slept.
I awoke late to a blaze of sun. I sneezed my way to the door and flung
it wide to step out into a blow of daylight so fierce it made me want to
live forever, and so ashamed of the thought I wanted, like Ahab, to
strike the sun. Instead I dressed quickly. My clothes from last night
were still damp. I put on tennis shorts and a jacket, then turned the
pockets of my damp coat out to find the clot of papier-mâché that had
fallen from the dead man's suit only a few hours ago.
I touched the pieces with my fingernail, exhaling. I knew what they
were. But I wasn't ready to face up to it yet.
I am not a runner. But I ran . . .
Away from the canal, the cage, the voice talking darkness on the train,
away from my room and the fresh pages waiting to be read which had
started to say it all, but I did not want to read them yet. I just ran
blindly south on the beach.
Into Lost World country.
I slowed at last to stare at the forenoon feedings of strange mechanical
beasts.
Oil wells. Oil pumps.
These great pterodactyls, I said to friends, had arrived by air, early
in the century, gliding in late nights to build their nests. Startled,
the shore people woke to hear the pumping sounds of vast hungers. People
sat up in bed wakened by the creak, rustle, stir of skeletal shapes, the
heave of earthbound, featherless wings rising, falling like primeval
breaths at three a.m. Their smell, like time, blew along the shore, from
an age before caves or the men who hid in caves, the smell of jungles
falling to be buried in earth and ripening to oil.
I ran through this forest of brontosauri, imagining triceratops, and the
picket-fence stegosaurus, treading black syrups, sinking in tar. Their
laments echoed from the shore, where the surf tossed back their ancient
thunders.
I ran past the little white cottages that came later to nest among the
monsters, and the canals that had been dug and filled to mirror the
bright skies of 1910 when the white gondolas sailed on clean tides and
bridges strung with firefly lightbulbs promised future promenades that
arrived like overnight ballet troupes and ran away never to return after
the war. And the dark beasts just went on sucking the sand while the
gondolas sank, taking the last of some party's laughter with them.
Some people stayed on, of course, hidden in shacks or locked in some few
Mediterranean villas thrown in for architectural irony.
Running, I came to a full halt. I would have to turn back in a moment
and go find that papier-mâché mulch and then go seek the name of its
lost and dead owner.
But for now, one of the Mediterranean palaces, as blazing white as a
full moon come to stay upon the sands, stood before me.
"Constance Rattigan," I whispered. "Can you come out and play?"
It was, in fact, a fiery white Arabian Moorish fortress facing the sea
and daring the tides to come in and pull it down. It had minarets and
turrets and blue and white tiles tilted precariously on the sand-shelves
no more than one hundred feet from where the curious waves bowed to do
obeisance, where the gulls circled down for a chance look, and where I
stood now taking root.
"Constance Rattigan."
But no one came out.
Alone and special in this thunder-lizard territory, this palace guarded
that special cinema queen.
A light burned in one tower window all night and all day. I had never
seen it not on. Was she there now?
Yes!
For the quickest shadow had crossed the window, as if someone had come
to stare down at me and gone away, like a moth,
I stood remembering.
Hers had been a swift year in the Twenties, with a quick drop down the
mine shaft into the film vaults. Her director, old newsprint said, had
found her in bed with the studio hairdresser, and cut Constance
Rattigan's leg muscles with a knife so she would no longer be able to
walk the way he loved. Then he had fled to swim straight west toward
China. Constance Rattigan was never seen again. If she could walk no one
knew.
God, I heard myself whisper.
I sensed that she had ventured forth in my world late nights and knew
people I knew. There were breaths of near meetings between us.
Go, I thought, bang the brass lion knocker on her shore-front door.
No. I shook my head. I was afraid that only a black-and-white film
ectoplasm might answer.
You do not really want to meet your special love, you only want to dream
that some night she'll step out and walk, with her footprints vanishing
on the sand as the wind follows, to your apartment where she'll tap on
your window and enter to unspool her spirit-light in long creeks of film
on your ceiling.
Constance, dear Rattigan, I thought, run out! Jump in that big white
Duesenberg parked bright and fiery in the sand, rev the motor, wave, and
motor me away south to Coronado, down the sunlit coast!
No one revved a motor, no one waved, no one took me south to sun, away
from that foghorn that buried itself at sea.
So I backed off, surprised to find salt water up over my tennis shoes,
turned to walk back toward cold rain in cages, the greatest writer in
the world, but no one knew, just me.
I had the moist confetti, the papier-mâché mulch, in my jacket pocket,
when I stepped into the one place where I knew that I had to go.
It was where the old men gathered.
It was a small, dim shop facing the railway tracks where candy,
cigarettes, and magazines were sold and tickets for the big red trolley
cars that rushed from L.A. to the sea.
The tobacco-shed-smelling place was run by two nicotine-stained brothers
who were always sniveling and bickering at each other like old maids. On
a bench to one side, ignoring the arguments like crowds at a boring
tennis match, a nest of old men stayed by the hour and the day, lying
upward about their ages. One said he was eighty-two. Another bragged
that he was ninety. A third said ninety-four. It changed from week to
week, as each misremembered last month's lie.
And if you listened, as the big iron trains rolled by, you could hear
the rust flake off the old men's bones and snow through their
bloodstreams to shimmer for a moment in their dying gaze as they settled
for long hours between sentences and tried to recall the subject they
had started on at noon and might finish off at midnight, when the two
brothers, bickering, shut up shop and went away sniveling to their
bachelor beds.
Where the old men lived, nobody knew. Every night, after the brothers
grouched off into the dark, the old men dispersed like tumbleweeds,
blown every which way in the salt wind.
I stepped into the eternal dusk of the place and stood staring at the
bench where the old men had sat since the beginning of time.
There was an empty place between the old men. Where there had always
been four, now there were only three, and I could tell from their faces
that something was wrong.
I looked at their feet, which were surrounded by not only scatterings of
cigar ash, but a gentle snowfall of strange little paper-punchouts, the
confetti from hundreds of trolley line tickets in various L and X and M
shapes.
I took my hand out of my pocket and compared the now almost dried soggy
mess with the snow on the floor. I bent and picked some of it up and let
it sift from my fingers, an alphabet down the air.
I looked at the empty place on the bench.
"Where's that old gent...?” I stopped.
For the old men were staring at me as if I had fired a gun at their
silence. Besides, their look said, I wasn't dressed right for a funeral.
One of the oldest lit his pipe and at last, puffing it, muttered, "He'll
be along. Always does."
But the other two stirred uncomfortably, their faces shadowed.
"Where," I dared to say, "does he live?"
The old man stopped puffing. "Who wants to know?"
"Me," I said. "You know me. I've come in here for years."
The old men glanced at each other, nervously.
"It's urgent," I said.
The old man stirred a final time.
"Canaries," murmured the oldest man.
"What?"
"Canary lady." His pipe had gone out. He lit it again, his eyes
troubled. "But don't bother him. He's all right. He's not sick. He'll be
along."
He was protesting too much, which made the other old men writhe slowly,
secretly, on the bench.
"His name...?” I asked.
That was a mistake. Not to know his name! My God, everyone knew that!
The old men glared at me.
I flushed and backed off.
"Canary lady," I said, and ran out the door to be almost killed by an
arriving Venice Short Line train thirty feet from the shop door.
"Jackass!" cried the motorman, leaning out and waving his fist.
"Canary lady!" I yelled, stupidly, shaking my fist to show I was alive.
And stumbled off to find her.
I knew her address from the sign in her window.
canaries for sale.
Venice was and is full of lost places where people put up for sale the
last worn bits of their souls, hoping no one will buy.
There is hardly an old house with unwashed curtains which does not sport
a sign in the window.
1927 NASH. REASONABLE. REAR. Or
BRASS BED. HARDLY USED. CHEAP. UPSTAIRS.
Walking, one thinks, which side of the bed was used, and how long on
both sides, and how long never again, twenty, thirty years ago?
Or VIOLINS, GUITARS, MANDOLINS.
And in the window ancient instruments strung not with wire or cat-gut
but spider webs, and inside an old man crouched over a workbench shaping
wood, his head always turned away from the light, his hands moving;
someone left over from the year when the gondolas were stranded in
backyards to become flower planters.
How long since he had sold a violin or guitar?
Knock at the door, the window. The old man goes on cutting and
sandpapering, his face, his shoulders shaking. Is he laughing because
you tap and he pretends not to hear?
You pass a window with a final sign.
ROOM WITH A VIEW.
The room looks over the sea. But for ten years no one has ever been up
there. The sea might as well not exist.
I turned a final corner and what I was searching for was there.
It hung in the sunbrowned window, its fragile letters drawn in weathered
lead pencil, as faint as lemon juice that had burned itself out,
self-erased, oh God, some fifty years ago!
canaries for sale.
Yes, someone half a century ago had licked a pencil tip, lettered the
cardboard and hung it to age, fixed with flypaper adhesive tape, and
gone upstairs to tea in rooms where dust lacquered the banister in gums,
choked the lightbulbs so they burned with an Oriental light; where
pillows were balls of lint and shadows hung in closets from empty racks.
canaries for sale.
I did not knock. Years before, out of mindless curiosity, I had tried,
and, feeling foolish, gone away.
I turned the ancient doorknob. The door glided in. The downstairs was
empty. There was no furniture in any of the rooms. I called up through
the dusty sunlight.
"Anyone home?"
I thought I heard an attic-whisper:
"... no one."
Flies lay dead in the windows. A few moths that had died the summer of
1929 dusted their wings on the front screens.
Somewhere far above, where ancient Rapunzel-without-hair was lost in her
tower, a single feather fell and touched the air:
"... yes?"
A mouse sighed in the dark rafters:
"... come in."
I pushed the inner door wider. It gave with a great, grinding shriek. I
had a feeling that it had been left unoiled so that anyone entering
unannounced would be given away by rusty hinges.
A moth tapped at a dead lightbulb in the upper hall.
"... up here. . . ."
I stepped up toward twilight at noon, past mirrors that were turned to
the wall. No glass could see me coming. No glass would see me go. . . .
"... yes?" A whisper.
I hesitated by the door at the top of the stairs. Perhaps I expected to
look in and find a giant canary, stretched out on a carpet of dust,
songless, capable only of heart murmurs for talk.
I stepped in.
I heard a gasp.
In the middle of an empty room stood a bed on which, eyes shut, mouth
faintly breathing, lay an old woman.
Archaeopteryx, I thought.
I did. I really did.
I had seen such bones in a museum, the fragile reptilian wings of that
lost and extinct bird, the shape of it touched on sandstone in etchings
that might have been made by some Egyptian priest.
This bed, and its contents, was like the silt of a river that runs
shallow. Traced now in its quiet flow was a jackstraw litter of chaff
and thin skeleton.
She lay flat and strewn out so delicately I could not believe it was a
living creature, but only a fossil undisturbed by eternity's tread.
"Yes?" The tiny yellowed head just above the coverlet opened its eyes.
Tiny shards of light blinked at me.
"Canaries?" I heard myself say. "The sign in your window? The birds?"
"Oh," the old woman sighed. "... Dear."
She had forgotten. Perhaps she hadn't been downstairs in years. And I
was the first, perhaps, to come upstairs in a thousand days.
"Oh," she whispered, "that was long ago. Canaries. Yes. I had some
lovely ones."
"1920," again in the whisper. "1930, 1931…" Her voice faded. The years
stopped there.
Just the other morn. Just the other noon.
"They used to sing, my lands, how they sang. But no one ever came to
buy. Why? I never sold one."
I glanced around. There was a birdcage in the far north corner of the
room, and two more half-hidden in a closet.
"Sorry," she murmured. "I must have forgotten to take that sign out of
my window. . . ."
I moved toward the cages. My hunch was right.
At the bottom of the first cage I saw papyrus from the Los Angeles
Times, December 25, 1926.
HIROHITO ASCENDS THRONE
The young monarch, twenty-seven, this afternoon . . .
I moved to the next cage and blinked. Memories of high school days
flooded me with their fears.
ADDIS ABABA BOMBED
Mussolini claims triumph. Haile Selassie protests. . . .
I shut my eyes and turned from that lost year. That long ago the
feathers had stopped rustling and the warblers had ceased. I stood by
the bed and the withered discard there. I heard myself say:
"You ever listen Sunday mornings to the 'Rocky Mountain Canary-Seed
Hour'…?"
"With an organist that played and a studio full of canaries that sang
along!" the old woman cried with a delight that rejuvenated her flesh
and reared her head. Her eyes flickered like broken glass. " 'When It's
Springtime in the Rockies'!"
" 'Sweet Sue.' 'My Blue Heaven,' " I said.
"Oh, weren't the birds find?"
"Fine." I had been nine then and tried to figure how in hell the birds
could follow the music so well. "I once told my mom the birdcages must
have been lined with dime-store song-sheets."
"You sound like a sensitive child." The old woman's head sank,
exhausted, and she shut her eyes. "They don't make them that way any
more."
They never did, I thought.
"But," she whispered, "you didn't really come see me about the
canaries...?”
"No," I admitted. "It's about that old man who rents from you...”
"He's dead."
Before I could speak, she went on, calmly, "I haven't heard him in the
downstairs kitchen since early yesterday. Last night, the silence told
me. When you opened the door down there just now, I knew it was someone
come to tell me all that's bad."
"I'm sorry."
"Don't be. I never saw him save at Christmas. The lady next door takes
care of me, comes and rearranges me twice a day, and puts out the food.
So he's gone, is he? Did you know him well? Will there be a funeral?
There's fifty cents there on the bureau. Buy him a little bouquet."
There was no money on the bureau. There was no bureau. I pretended that
there was and pocketed some nonexistent money.
"You just come back in six months," she whispered. "I'll be well again.
And the canaries will be on sale, and . . . you keep looking at the
door! Must you go?"
"Yes'm," I said, guiltily. "May I suggest, your front door's unlocked."
"Why, what in the world would anyone want with an old thing like me?"
She lifted her head a final time.
Her eyes flashed. Her face ached with something beating behind the flesh
to pull free.
"No one'll ever come into this house, up those stairs," she cried.
Her voice faded like a radio station beyond the hills. She was slowly
tuning herself out as her eyelids lowered.
My God, I thought, she wants someone to come up and do her a dreadful
favor!
Not me! I thought.
Her eyes sprang wide. Had I said it aloud?
"No," she said, looking deep into my face. "You're not him."
"Who?"
"The one who stands outside my door. Every night." She sighed. "But he
never comes in. Why doesn't he?"
She stopped like a clock. She still breathed, but she was waiting for me
to go away.
I glanced over my shoulder.
The wind moved dust in the doorway like a mist, like someone waiting.
The thing, the man, whatever, who came every night and stood in the
hall.
I was in the way.
"Goodbye," I said.
Silence.
I should have stayed, had tea, dinner, breakfast with her. But you can't
protect all of the people in all of the places all of the time, can you?
I waited at the door.
Goodbye.
Did she moan this in her old sleep? I only knew that her breath pushed
me away.
Going downstairs I realized I still didn't know the name of the old man
who had drowned in a lion cage with a handful of train ticket confetti
uncelebrated in each pocket.
I found his room. But that didn't help.
His name wouldn't be there, any more than he was.
Things are good at their beginnings. But how rarely in the history of
men and small towns or big cities is the ending good.
Then, things fall apart. Things turn to fat. Things sprawl. The time
gets out of joint. The milk sours. By night the wires on the high poles
tell evil tales in the dripping mist. The water in the canals goes blind
with scum. Flint, struck, gives no spark. Women, touched, give no
warmth.
Summer is suddenly over.
Winter snows in your hidden bones.
Then it is time for the wall.
The wall of a little room, that is, where the shudders of the big red
trains go by like nightmares turning you on your cold steel bed in the
trembled basement of the Not So Royal Lost Canary Apartments, where the
numbers have fallen off the front portico, and the street sign at the
corner has been twisted north to east so that people, if they ever came
to find you, would turn away forever on the wrong boulevard.
But meanwhile there's that wall near your bed to be read with your
watered eyes or reached out to and never touched, it is too far away and
too deep and too empty.
I knew that once I found the old man's room, I would find that wall.
And I did.
The door, like all the doors in the house, was unlocked, waiting for
wind or fog or some pale stranger to step in.
I stepped. I hesitated. Maybe I expected to find the old man's X-ray
imprint spread out there on his empty cot. His place, like the canary
lady's upstairs, looked like late in the day of a garage sale, for a
nickel or a dime, everything had been stolen away.
There wasn't even a toothbrush on the floor, or soap, or a washrag. The
old man must have bathed in the sea once a day, brushed his teeth with
seaweed each noon, washed his only shirt in the salt tide and lain
beside it on the dunes while it dried, if and when the sun came out.
I moved forward like a deep sea diver. When you know someone is dead,
his abandoned air holds back every motion you make, even your breathing.
I gasped.
I had guessed wrong.
For there his name was, on the wall. I almost fell, leaning down to
squint.
Over and over, his name was repeated, scrabbled on the plaster on the
far side of his cot. Over and over, as if fearful of senility or
oblivion, terrified at waking some dawn to find himself nameless, over
and over he had scratched with a nicotine-stained fingernail.
William. And then Willie. And then Will. And beneath the three, Bill.
And then, again, again, again.
Smith. Smith. Smith. Smith.
And under that, William Smith.
And, Smith, W.
His multiplication table swam in and out of focus as I stared, for it
was all the nights I ever dreaded to see somewhere up ahead in the dark
ages of my future. Me, in 1999, alone, and my fingernail making
mice-sound graffiti on plaster. . . .
"My God," I whispered. "Wait!"
The cot squealed like a cat touched in its sleep. I put my full weight
down and probed with my fingerprints over the plaster. There were more
words there. A message, a hint, a clue?
I remembered some boyhood magic where you had pals write quotes on pads
and then tear off the quotes. But you took the pads out of the room and
rubbed a soft pencil across the hidden indentations left on the blank
pages and brought forth the words.
Now, I did just that. I found and rubbed the flat lead of my pencil
gently across the wall surface. The nail scratches illusioned themselves
forth, here a mouth, there an eye; shapes, forms, bits of an old man's
half-dreams:
Four a.m. and no sleep.
And below that, a ghostly plea:
Please, God, sleep!
And a dawn despair:
Christ.
But then, at last, something that snapped my knees as I crouched lower.
For here were these words:
He's standing in the hall again.
But that was me, I thought, outside the old woman's room five minutes
ago, upstairs. That was me, outside this empty room, a moment ago. And .
. .
Last night. In the dark rain, on the train. And the great railcar
bucking the curves and groaning its wooden slats and shivering its
tarnished brass as someone unseen swayed in the aisle behind me and
mourned the funeral train's passage.
He's standing in the hall again.
He stood in the aisle on the train.
No, no. Too much!
It was no crime, was it, to stand in a train aisle moaning, or stand
here in the hall, simply looking at a door and letting an old man know
of your being there just with your silence?
Yes, but what if one night whoever it was came into the room?
And brought his lonely business with him?
I looked at the graffiti, as faint and faded as the canaries-for-sale
sign in the window outside. I backed off, pulling away from that
terrible sentence of loneliness and despair.
Outside in the hall, I stood feeling the air, trying to guess if another
man had stood here again and again in the last month, with the bones
showing behind his face.
I wanted to whirl and shout upstairs to rattle the empty birdcages, "If
that man comes back, sweet Jesus! Call me!"
How? I saw an empty telephone stand nearby and a stack of Yellow Pages
from 1933 under it.
Yell from your window, then!
But who would hear the sound of her voice like an old key turned in a
rusted lock?
I'll come and stand guard, I thought. Why?
Because the dead sea-bottom mummy, that old autumn woman lying in
funeral bandages up there, was praying for a cold wind to drift up the
stairs.
Lock all the doors! I thought.
But when I tried to shut the front door, it wouldn't close.
And I could hear the cold wind, still whispering in.
I ran a ways and then slowed down and stopped, heading toward the police
station.
Because the dead canaries had begun to rustle their dry wings just
behind my ears.
They wanted out. Only I could save them.
And because I sensed, around me, the quiet waters rising in the Nile
silt which would flow to erase ancient Nikotris, the Pharaoh's
two-thousand-year-old daughter.
Only I could stop the dark Nile from sanding her away downstream.
I ran to my Underwood Standard typewriter.
I typed and saved the birds, I typed and saved the old dry bones.
Feeling guilty but triumphant, triumphant but guilty, I rolled them out
of the platen and laid them out flat in the bottom of my
birdcage-sandstone river-bottom novel box where they sang only when you
read the words and whispered only when you turned the page.
Then, bright with salvation, I went away.
I headed for the police station filled with grand fancies, wild ideas,
incredible clues, possible puzzles, evident solutions.
Arriving, I felt I was the finest acrobat performing on the highest
trapeze suspended from the greatest balloon.
Little did I realize that Detective Lieutenant Elmo Crumley was armed
with long needles and an air rifle.
He was coming out the front door of the station as I arrived. Something
about my face must have warned him I was about to explode my notions,
fancies, concepts, and clues all over him. He made a premature gesture
of wiping his face, almost ducked back inside, and came warily down the
walk as if approaching a landmine.
"What are you doing here?"
"Aren't citizens supposed to show up if they can solve a murder?"
"Where do you see murders?" Crumley eyed the landscape, and sure enough
there were none. "Next subject?"
"You don't want to hear what I have to say?"
"I've heard it all before." Crumley brushed by me and headed for his car
parked at the curb. "Every time anyone drops dead of a heart attack or
trips over his shoelaces in Venice, there's someone there the next day
to tell me, sixteen to the dozen, how to solve the stopped heart or
retie the shoelaces. You've got the heart-attack shoelace look about
you, and I didn't sleep last night."
He kept going and I ran after, for he was doing the Harry Truman
120-steps-to-the-minute march.
He heard me coming and called over his shoulder, "Tell you what, young
Papa Hemingway...”
"You know what I do for a living?"
"Everyone in Venice knows. Every time you got a story in Dime Detective
or Flynn's Detective, the whole town hears you yelling down at the
liquor store newsrack, pointing at the magazines."
"Oh," I said, the last of the hot air going out of my balloon. Grounded,
I stood across the car from Crumley, biting my lower lip.
Crumley saw this and got a look of paternal guilt.
"Jesus H. Christ," he sighed.
"What?"
"You know the one thing that gripes my gut about amateur detectives?"
said Crumley.
"I'm not an amateur detective, I'm a professional writer with big
antennae that work!"
"So you're a grasshopper who knows how to type," said Crumley, and
waited for my wince to die. "But if you'd been around Venice and my
office and the morgue as many years as I have, you'd know that every
vagrant who wanders by or any drunk who stumbles in is full of theories,
evidence, revelations enough to fill a Bible and sink a Baptist
Sunday-outing picnic boat. If we listened to every maundering preacher
who fell through the jail doors half the world would be under suspicion,
one third under arrest, and the rest fried or hanged. That being so, why
should I listen to some young scribe who hasn't even begun to make his
name in literary history,” again my wince, again he waited, "who just
because he finds a lion cage full of accidental drowning thinks he has
stumbled on Crime and Punishment and feels like Raskolnikov's son. End
of speech. Respond."
"You know Raskolnikov?" I said, in amaze.
"Almost before you were born. But that doesn't buy horseflakes. Plead
your case."
"I'm a writer, I know more about feelings than you do."
"Balls. I'm a detective, I know more about facts than you do. You afraid
a fact will confuse you?"
"Tell me this, kiddo. Anything ever happen to you in your life?"
"Anything?"
"Yeah, I mean anything. Big, in between, small. Anything. Like sickness,
rape, death, war, revolution, murder."
"My mother and father died...”
"Peacefully?"
"Yes. But I had an uncle shot in a holdup once...”
"You see him shot?"
"No, but...”
"Well, that don't count, unless you see. I mean, you ever find anything
like men in lion cages ever before?"
"No," I said at last.
"Well, there you have it. You're still in shock. You don't know what
life is. I was born and raised in the morgue. This is the first real
touch of marble slab you ever had. So why don't you quiet down and go
away."
He heard his own voice getting much too loud, shook his head, and said,
"No, why don't I quiet down and go away."
Which he did. He opened the car door, jumped in, and before I could
reinflate my balloon, was gone.
Cursing,  I  slammed into  a  telephone booth,  dropped a dime in the
slot, and called across five miles of Los Angeles. When someone picked
up at the other end I heard a radio playing "La Raspa," a door slammed,
a toilet flushed, but I could feel the sunlight that I needed, waiting
there.
The lady, living in a tenement on the corner of Temple and Figueroa,
nervous at the phone she held in her hand, at last cleared her throat
and said:
"Que?"
"Mrs. Gutierrez!" I shouted. I stopped, and started over. "Mrs.
Gutierrez, this is the Crazy."
"Oh!" she gasped, and then laughed. "Si, si! You want to talk to
Fannie?"
"No, no, just a few yells. Will you yell down, please, Mrs. Gutierrez?"
"I yell."
I heard her move. I heard the entire ramshackle, rickety tenement lean.
Someday, a blackbird would land on the roof and the whole thing would
go. I heard a small Chihuahua tap-dance on the linoleum after her, built
like a bull bumblebee and barking.
I heard the tenement outer porch door open as Mrs. Gutierrez stepped out
onto the third floor and leaned to call down through the sunshine at the
second floor.
"Aai, Fannie! Aai! It's the Crazy."
I called into my end, "Tell her I need to come visit!"
Mrs. Gutierrez waited. I could hear the second-floor porch creak, as if
a vast captain had rolled out onto its plankings to survey the world.
"Aai, Fannie, the Crazy needs to visit!"
A long silence. A voice sprang sweetly through the air above the
tenement yard. I could not make out the words.
"Tell her I need Tosca!"
"Tosca!" Mrs. Gutierrez yelled down into the yard.
A long silence.
The whole tenement leaned again, the other way, like the earth turning
in its noon slumbers.
The strains of the first act of Tosca moved up around Mrs. Gutierrez.
She spoke.
"Fannie says...”
"I hear the music, Mrs. Gutierrez. That means 'Yes'!"
I hung up. At the same instant, a hundred thousand tons of salt water
fell on the shore, a few yards away, with exquisite timing. I nodded at
God's precision.
Making sure I had twenty cents in my pocket, I ran for the next train.
She was immense.
Her real name was Cora Smith, but she called herself Fannie Florianna,
and no one ever called her otherwise. And I had known her, years ago,
when I lived in the tenement, and stayed in touch with her after I moved
out to the sea.
Fannie was so huge that she never slept lying down. Day and night she
sat in a large-sized captain's chair fixed to the deck of her tenement
apartment, with bruise marks and dents in the linoleum which her great
weight had riveted there. She moved as little as possible, her breath
churning in her lungs and throat as she sailed toward the door, and
squeezed out to cross the hall to the narrow water-closet confines where
she feared she might be ignominiously trapped one day. "My God," she
often said, "wouldn't it be awful if we had to get the fire department
to pry me out of there." And then back to her chair and her radio and
her phonograph and, only a beckon away, a refrigerator filled with ice
cream and butter and mayonnaise and all the wrong foods in the wrong
amounts. She was always eating and always listening. Next to the
refrigerator were bookshelves with no books, only thousands of
recordings of Caruso and Galli-Curci and Swarthout and the rest. When
the last songs were sung and the last record hissed to a stop at
midnight, Fannie sank into herself, like an elephant shot with darkness.
Her great bones settled in her vast flesh. Her round face was a moon
watching over the vast territorial imperatives of her body. Propped up
with pillows, her breath escaped and sucked back, escaped again, fearful
of the avalanche that might happen if somehow she lay back too far, and
her weight smothered her, her flesh engulfed and crushed her lungs, and
put out her voice and light forever. She never spoke of it, but once
when someone asked why there was no bed in her room, her eyes burned
with a fearful light, and beds were never mentioned again. Fat, as
Murderer, was always with her. She slept in her mountain, afraid, and
woke in the morning glad for one more night gone, having made it
through.
A piano box waited in the alley below the tenement.
"Mine," said Fannie. "The day I die, bring the piano box up, tuck me in,
hoist me down. Mine. Oh, and while you're at it, there's a dear soul,
hand me that mayonnaise jar and that big spoon."
I stood at the front door of the tenement, listening. Her voice flowed
down through the halls. It started out as pure as a stream of fresh
mountain water and cascaded through the second to the first and then
along the hall. I could almost drink her singing, it was that clear.
Fannie.
As I climbed up the first-floor steps she trilled a few lines from La
Traviata. As I moved on the second flight, pausing, eyes shut, to
listen, Madame Butterfly sang welcome to the bright ship in the harbor
and the lieutenant in his whites.
It was the voice of a slender Japanese maiden on a hill on a spring
afternoon. There was a picture of that maid, aged seventeen, on a table
near the window leading out onto the second-floor tenement porch. The
girl weighed 120 pounds at most, but that was a long time ago. It was
her voice that pulled me up through the old stairwell, a promise of
brightness to come.
I knew that when I got to the door, the singing would stop.
"Fannie," I'd say. "I heard someone singing up here just now."
"Did you?"
"Something from Butterfly."
"How strange. I wonder who it could have been?"
We had played that game for years, talked music, discussed symphony /
ballet / opera, listened to it on radios, played it on her old Edison
crank-up phono, but never, never once in three thousand days, had Fannie
ever sung when I was in the room with her.
But today was different.
As I reached the second floor her singing stopped. But she must have
been thinking, planning. Maybe she had glanced out and seen the way I
walked along the street. Maybe she read my skeleton through my flesh.
Maybe my voice, calling far across town on the phone (impossible) had
brought the sadness of the night and the rain with it. Anyway, a mighty
intuition heaved itself aware in Fannie Florianna's summer bulk. She was
ready with surprises.
I stood at her door, listening.
Creaks as of an immense ship blundering through tides. A great
conscience stirred there.
A soft hissing: the phonograph!
I tapped on the door.
"Fannie," I called. "The Crazy is here."
She opened the door to a thunderclap of music. Great lady, she had put
the shaved wooden needle on the hissing record, then surged to the door,
held the knob, waiting. At the whisk of the baton down, she had flung
the door wide. Puccini flooded out, gathered round, pulled me in. Fannie
Florianna helped.
It was the first side of Tosca. Fannie planted me in a rickety chair,
lifted my empty paw, put a glass of good wine in it. "I don't drink,
Fannie."
"Nonsense. Look at your face. Drink!" She surged around like those
wondrous hippos turned light as milkweed in Fantasia, and sank like a
terribly strange bed upon her helpless chair.
By the end of the record I was crying.
"There, there," whispered Fannie, refilling my glass. "There, there."
"I always cry at Puccini, Fannie."
"Yes, dear man, but not so hard."
"Not so hard, true." I drank half of the second glass. It was a 1938 St.
Emilion from a good vineyard, brought and left by one of Fannie's rich
friends who came clear across town for good talk, long laughs, better
times for both, no matter whose income was higher. I had seen some of
Toscanini's relatives going up the stairs one night, and waited. I had
seen Lawrence Tibbett coming down, once, and we had nodded, passing.
They always brought the best bottles with their talk, and they always
left smiling. The center of the world can be anywhere. Here it was on
the second floor of a tenement on the wrong side of L.A.
I wiped tears on my jacket cuff.
"Tell me," said the great fat lady.
"I found a dead man, Fannie. And no one will listen to me about it!"
"My God." Her round face got rounder as her mouth opened, her eyes went
wide, then softened to commiseration. "Poor boy. Who?"
"It was one of those nice old men who sit in the ticket office down at
the Venice Short Line stop, been sitting there since Billy Sunday
thumped the Bible and William Jennings Bryan made his Cross of Gold
speech. I've seen them there since I was a kid. Four old men. You felt
they'd be there forever, glued to the wooden benches. I don't think I
ever saw one of them up and around. They were there all day, all week,
all year, smoking pipes or cigars, and talking politics thirteen to the
dozen and deciding what to do with the country. When I was fifteen one
of them looked at me and said, 'You going to grow up and change the
world only for the best, boy?' 'Yes, sir!' I said. 'I think you'll do
it,' he said. 'Won't he, gents?' 'Yes,' they all said, and smiled at me.
The old man who asked me that, he's the one I found in the lion cage
last night."
"In the cage?"
"Under water, in the canal."
"This calls for one more side of Tosca."
Fannie was an avalanche getting up, a tide flowing to the machine, a
mighty force cranking the windup arm, and God's whisper putting the
needle down on a new surface.
As the music rose, she came back into her chair like a ghost ship, regal
and pale, quiet and concerned.
"I know one reason why you're taking this so hard," she said. "Peg. She
still in Mexico, studying?"
"Been gone three months. Might as well be three years," I said. "Christ,
I'm lonely."
"And vulnerable," said Fannie. "Shouldn't you call her?"
"Christ, Fannie, I can't afford. And I don't want to reverse the
charges. I'll just have to hope she'll phone me in the next day or so."
"Poor boy. Sick with love."
"Sick with death. The awful thing is, Fannie, I didn't even know that
old man's name! And isn't that a shame?"
The second side of Tosca really did it. I sat there, head down, with the
tears running off the tip of my nose into the wine.
"You've ruined your St. Emilion," said Fannie gently, when the record
ended.
"Now I'm mad," I said.
"Why?" Fannie, standing, like a great pomegranate mother, by the
phonograph, sharpened a new needle and found a happier record. "Why?"
"Someone killed him, Fannie. Someone stuffed him in that cage. There was
no other way for him to have gotten in."
"Oh, dear," she murmured.
"When I was twelve, one of my uncles back east was shot in a holdup late
at night, in his car. At his funeral, my brother and I vowed we'd find
the murderer and do him in. But he's still in the world somewhere. And
that was a long time back in another town. This time, it's here. Whoever
drowned the old man lives within a few blocks of me in Venice. And when
I find him...”
"You'll turn him over to the police." Fannie leaned forward in one
massive but tender motion. "You'll feel better after a good sleep."
Then she read my face.
"No," she said at my funeral, "you won't feel better. Well, go on. Be
the fool all men are. God, what lives we women lead, watching the fools
kill each other and the killers kill the killers, and us over on the
sidelines yelling stop and nobody listening. Can't you hear me, love?"
She put another record on and let the needle down like a loving kiss to
the grooves, and came surging over to touch my cheek with her great pink
chrysanthemum fingers.
"Oh, please, do be careful. I don't like Venice. Not enough
streetlights. And those damned oil wells pumping all night long, no
letup, with a case of the moans."
"Venice won't get me, Fannie, or whatever it is wandering around
Venice,"
Standing in halls, waiting, I thought, outside old men's and old women's
doors.
Fannie became a giant glacier standing over me.
She must have seen my face again, where everything was given away,
nothing hidden. Instinctively, she glanced at her own door, as if a
shadow had passed outside. Her intuition stunned me.
"Whatever you do," her voice was lost deep down in hundreds of pounds of
suddenly haunted flesh, "don't bring it here."
"Death isn't a thing you can bring with you, Fannie."
"Oh, yes it is. Scrape your feet before coming in downstairs. Do you
have money to get your suit dry-cleaned? I'll give you some. Shine your
shoes. Brush your teeth. Don't ever look back. Eyes can kill. If you
look at someone, and they see you want to be killed, they tag along.
Come here, dear boy, but wash up first and look straight ahead."
"Horsefeathers, Fannie, and hogwash. That won't keep death away and you
know it. Anyway, I wouldn't bring anything here to you but me; lots of
years, Fannie, and love."
That melted the snow in the Himalayas.
She turned in a slow carousel motion. Suddenly we both heard the music
that had long since started on the hissing record.
Carmen.
Fannie Florianna sank her fingers into her bosom and seized forth a
black-lace fan, flitted it to full blossom, flirted it before her
suddenly flamenco eyes, shut her lashes demurely, and let her lost voice
spring forth reborn, fresh as cool mountain water, young as I had felt
only last week.
She sang. And as she sang, she moved.
It was like watching the heavy curtain lift daintily high at the
Metropolitan to be draped around the Rock of Gibraltar and whirled at
the gesturings of a maniac conductor who knew how to electrify elephant
ballets and call spirit-spout white whales from the deeps.
By the end of the first song, I was crying again.
This time, with laughter.
Only later did I think to myself, my God. For the first time. In her
room. She sang.
For me!
Downstairs, it was afternoon.
I stood in the sunlit street, swaying, savoring the aftertaste of the
wine, looking up at the second floor of the tenement.
The strains sounded of the song of farewell; the leave-taking of
Butterfly by her young lieutenant, all in white, sailing away.
Fannie loomed on her porch, looking down at me, her little rosebud mouth
smiling sadly, the young girl trapped in her round harvest-moon face,
letting the music behind her speak our friendship and my leave-taking
for now.
Seeing her there made me think of Constance Rattigan locked away in her
Moorish fort by the sea. I wanted to call up and ask about the
similarity.
But Fannie waved. I could only wave back.
I was ready for Venice in clear weather now.
Little balding man who doesn't look like a detective,  Elmo Crumley, I
thought, here I come!
But all I did was loiter in front of the Venice Police Station feeling
like a gutless wonder.
I couldn't decide whether Crumley was Beauty or the Beast inside there.
Such indecision made me ache out on the sidewalk until someone who
looked like Crumley glanced out of an upstairs jail window.
I fled.
The thought of him opening his mouth like a blowtorch to scorch the
peach fuzz off my cheeks made my heart fall over like a prune.
Christ, I thought, when will I face up to him at last to unload all the
dark wonders that are collecting like tombstone dust in my manuscript
box? When?
Soon.
During the night, it happened.
A small rainstorm arrived out front of my apartment about two in the
morning.
Stupid! I thought, in bed, listening. A small rainstorm? How small?
Three feet wide, six feet tall, all just in one spot? Rain drenching my
doormat, falling nowhere else, and then, quickly, gone!
Hell!
I leaped to yank the door wide.
There wasn't a cloud in the sky. The stars were bright, with no mist, no
fog. There was no way for rain to get there.
Yet there was a pool of water by my door.
And a set of footprints arriving, pointed toward me, and another set,
barefoot, going away.
I must have stood there for a full ten seconds until I exploded. "Now,
hold on!"
Someone had stood there, wet, for half a minute, almost ready to knock,
wondering if I was awake, and then walked off to the sea.
No. I blinked. Not to the sea. The sea was on my right, to the west.
These naked footprints went to my left, east.
I followed them.
I ran as if I could catch up with the miniature storm.
Until I reached the canal.
Where the footprints stopped at the rim.
Jesus!
I stared down at the oily waters.
I could see where someone had climbed out and walked along the midnight
street to my place, and then run back, the strides were bigger, to…
Dive in?
God, who would swim in those filthy waters?
Someone who didn't care, never worried about disease? Someone who loved
night arrivals and dark departures for the hell, the fun, or the death
of it?
I edged along the canal bank, adjusting my eyes, watchful to see if
anything broke the black surface.
The tide went away and came back, surging through a lock that had rusted
open. A herd of small seals drifted by, but it was only kelp going
nowhere.
"You still there?" I whispered. "What did you come for? Why to my
place?"
I sucked air and held it.
For in a hollowed-out concrete cache, under a small cement bunker, on
the far side of a rickety bridge . . .
I thought I saw a greasy fringe of hair rise, and then an oiled brow.
Eyes stared back at me. It could have been a sea-otter or a dog or a
black porpoise somehow strayed and lost in the canal.
The head stayed for a long moment, half out of water.
And I remembered a thing I had read as a boy leafing African novels.
About crocodiles that infested the subterranean caves under the rims of
Congo riverbanks. The beasts sank down and never came up. Submerged,
they slid to hide up inside the secret bank itself, waiting for someone
foolish enough to swim by. Then the reptiles squirmed out of their
underwater dens to feed.
Was I staring at a similar beast? Someone who loved night tides, who hid
in caches under the banks to rise and step softly to leave rain where he
walked?
I watched the dark head in the water. It watched me, with gleaming eyes.
No. That can't be a man!
I shivered. I jumped forward, as one jumps toward a horror to make it
vanish, to scare spiders, rats, snakes away. Not bravery but fear made
me stomp.
The dark head sank. The water rippled.
The head did not rise again.
Shuddering, I walked back along the trail of dark rain that had come to
visit my doorstep.
The small pool of water was still there on my sill.
I bent and plucked up a small mound of seaweed from the middle of the
pool.
Only then did I discover I had run to and from the canal dressed only in
my jockey shorts.
I gasped, glanced swiftly around. The street was empty. I leaped in to
slam the door.
Tomorrow, I thought, I'll go shake my fists at Elmo Crumley.
In my right fist, a handful of trolley ticket dust.
In my left, a clump of moist seaweed.
But not at the police station!
Jails, like hospitals, sank me to my knees in a faint.
Crumley's home was somewhere.
Shaking my fists. I'd find it.
For about 150 days a year in Venice, the sun doesn't show through the
mist until noon.
For some sixty days a year the sun doesn't come out of the fog until
it's ready to go down in the west, around four or five o'clock.
For some forty days it doesn't come out at all.
The rest of the time, if you're lucky, the sun rises, as it does for the
rest of Los Angeles and California, at five-thirty or six in the morning
and stays all day.
It's the forty- or sixty-day cycles that drip in the soul and make the
riflemen clean their guns. Old ladies buy rat poison on the twelfth day
of no sun. But on the thirteenth day, when they are about to arsenic
their morning tea, the sun rises wondering what everyone is so upset
about, and the old ladies feed the rats down by the canal, and lean back
to their brandy.
During the forty-day cycles, the foghorn lost somewhere out in the bay
sounds over and over again, and never stops, until you feel the people
in the local graveyard beginning to stir. Or, late at night, when the
foghorn gets going, some variety of amphibious beast rises in your id
and swims toward land. It is swimming somewhere yearning, maybe only for
sun. All the smart animals have gone south. You are left stranded on a
cold dune with an empty typewriter, an abandoned bank account, and a
half-warm bed. You expect the submersible beast to rise some night while
you sleep. To get rid of him you get up at three a.m. and write a story
about him, but don't send it out to any magazines for years because you
are afraid. Not Death, but Rejection in Venice is what Thomas Mann
should have written about.
All this being true, or imagined, the wise man lives as far inland as
possible. The Venice police jurisdiction ends as does the fog at about
Lincoln Avenue.
There, at the very rim of official and bad weather territory, was a
garden I had seen only once or twice.
If there was a house in the garden it was not visible. It was so
surrounded by bushes, trees, tropical shrubs, palm fronds, bulrushes,
and papyrus that you had to cut your way in with a reaper. There was no
sidewalk, only a beaten path. A bungalow was in there, all right,
sinking into a chin-high field of uncut grass, but so far away from the
street it looked like an elephant foundering in a tar pit, soon to be
gone forever. There was no mailbox out front. The mailman must have just
tossed the mail in and beat it before something sprang out of the jungle
to get him.
From this green place came the smell of oranges and apricots in season.
And what wasn't orange or apricot was cactus or epiphyllum or
night-blooming jasmine. No lawnmower ever sounded here. No scythe ever
whispered. No fog ever came. On the boundary of Venice's damp eternal
twilight, the bungalow survived amid lemons that glowed like Christmas
tree lights all winter long.
And on occasion, walking by, you thought you heard okapi rushing and
thumping a Serengeti Plain in there, or great sunset clouds of flamingos
startled up and wheeling in pure fire.
And in that place, wise about the weather, and dedicated to the
preservation of his eternally sunburned soul, lived a man some
forty-four years old, with a balding head and a raspy voice, whose
business, when he moved toward the sea and breathed the fog, was bruised
customs, broken laws, and the occasional death that could be murder.
Elmo Crumley.
And I found him and his house because a series of people had listened to
my queries, nodded, and pointed directions.
Everyone agreed that every late afternoon, the short detective ambled
into that green jungle territory and disappeared amid the sounds of
hippos rising and flamingos in descent.
What should I do? I thought. Stand on the edge of his wild country and
shout his name?
But Crumley shouted first.
"Jesus Christ, is that you?"
He was coming out of his jungle compound and trekking along the
weedpath, just as I arrived at his front gate.
"It's me."
As the detective trailblazed his own uncut path, I thought I heard the
sounds I had always imagined as I passed: Thompson's gazelles on the
leap, crossword-puzzle zebras panicked just beyond me, plus a smell of
golden pee on the wind,  lions.
"Seems to me," groused Crumley, "we played this scene yesterday. You
come to apologize? You got stuff to say that's louder and funnier?"
"If you'd stop moving and listen," I said.
"Your voice carries, I'll say that. Lady I know, three blocks from where
you found the body, said because of your yell that night, her cats still
haven't come home. Okay, I'm standing here. And?"
With every one of his words, my fists had jammed deeper into my sports
jacket pockets. Somehow, I couldn't pull them out. Head ducked, eyes
averted, I tried to get my breath.
Crumley glanced at his wristwatch.
"There was a man behind me on the train that night," I cried, suddenly.
"He was the one stuffed the old gentleman in the lion cage."
"Keep your voice down. How do you know?"
My fists worked in my pockets, squeezing. "I could feel his hands
stretched out behind me. I could feel his fingers working, pleading. He
wanted me to turn and see him! Don't all killers want to be found out?"
"That's what dime-store psychologists say. Why didn't you look at him?"
"You don't make eye contact with drunks. They come sit and breathe on
you."
"Right." Crumley allowed himself a touch of curiosity. He took out a
tobacco pouch and paper and started rolling a cigarette, deliberately
not looking at me. "And?"
"You should've heard his voice. You'd believe if you'd heard. My God, it
was like Hamlet's father's ghost, from the bottom of the grave, crying
out, remember me! But more than that, see me, know me, arrest me!"
Crumley lit his cigarette and peered at me through the smoke.
"His voice aged me ten years in a few seconds," I said. "I've never been
so sure of my feelings in my life!"
"Everybody in the world has feelings." Crumley examined his cigarette as
if he couldn't decide whether he liked it or not. "Everyone's grandma
writes Wheaties jingles and hums them until you want to kick the
barley-malt out of the old crone. Songwriters, poets, amateur
detectives, every damn fool thinks he's all three. You know what you
remind me of, son? That mob of idiots that swarmed after Alexander Pope
waving their poems, novels, and essays, asking for advice, until Pope
ran mad and wrote his 'Essay on Criticism.' "
"You know Alexander Pope?"
Crumley gave an aggrieved sigh, tossed down his cigarette, stepped on
it.
"You think all detectives are gumshoes with glue between their ears?
Yeah, Pope, for Christ's sake. I read him under the sheets late nights
so my folks wouldn't think I was queer. Now, get out of the way."
"You mean all this is for nothing," I cried. "You're not going to try to
save the old man?"
I blushed, hearing what I had said.
"I meant...”
"I know what you meant," said Crumley, patiently.
He looked off along the street, as if he could see all the way to my
apartment and the desk and the typewriter standing there.
"You've latched on to a good thing, or you think you have. So you run
fevers. You want to get on that big red streetcar and ride back some
night and catch that drunk and haul him in, but if you do, he won't be
there, or if he is, not the same guy, or you won't know him. So right
now, you've got bloody fingernails from beating your typewriter, and the
stuffs coming good, as Hemingway says, and your intuition is growing
long antennae that are ever so sensitive. That, and pigs' knuckles, buys
me no sauerkraut!"
He started off around the front of his car in a replay of yesterday's
disaster.
"Oh, no you don't!" I yelled. "Not again. You know what you are?
Jealous!"
Crumley's head almost came off his shoulders. He whirled.
"I'm what?"
I almost saw his fingers reach for a gun that wasn't there.
"And, and, and...” I floundered. "You, you're never going to make it!"
My insolence staggered him. His head swiveled to stare at me over the
top of his car.
"Make what?" he said.
"Whatever it is you want to do, you…won't…do…it."
I jolted to a full stop, astounded. I couldn't remember ever having
yelled like this at anyone. In school, I had been the prize custard.
Every time some teacher slammed her jaws, my crust fell. But now…
"Unless you learn," I said, lamely, feeling my face fill up with hot
color, "to, ah, listen to your stomach and not your head."
"Norman Rockwell's Philosophical Advice for Wayward Sleuths." Crumley
leaned against his car as if it were the only thing in the world that
held him up. A laugh burst from his mouth, which he capped with his
palm, and he said, muffled, "Continue."
"You don't want to hear."
"Kid, I haven't had a laugh in days."
My mouth gummed itself shut. I closed my eyes.
"Go on," said Crumley, with a gentler tone.
"It's just," I said, slowly, "I learned years ago that the harder I
thought, the worse my work got. Everyone thinks you have to go around
thinking all the time. No, I go around feeling and put it down and feel
again and write that down and, at the end of the day, think about it.
Thinking comes later."
There was a curious light in Crumley's face. He tilted his head now this
way to look at me, and then tilted it the other way, like a monkey in
the zoo staring out through the bars and wondering what the hell that
beast is there outside.
Then, without a word, or another laugh or smile, he simply slid into the
front seat of his car, calmly turned on the ignition, softly pressed the
gas, and slowly, slowly drove away.
About twenty yards down the line, he braked the car, thought for a
moment, backed up, and leaned over to look at me and yelled:
"Jesus H. Christ! Proof! God damn it. Proof."
Which made me yank my right hand out of my jacket pocket so fast it
almost tore the cloth.
I held my fist out at last and opened my trembling fingers.
"There!" I said. "You know what that is? No. Do I know what it is? Yes.
Do I know who the old man is? Yes. Do you know his name? No!"
Crumley put his head down on his crossed arms on the steering wheel. He
sighed. "Okay, let's have it."
"These," I said, staring at the junk in my palm, "are little A's and
small B's and tiny C's. Alphabets, letters, punched out of trolley paper
transfers. Because you drive a car, you haven't seen any of this stuff
for years. Because all I do, since I got off my roller-skates, is walk
or take trains, I'm up to my armpits in these punchouts!"
Crumley lifted his head, slowly, not wanting to seem curious or eager.
I said, "This one old man, down at the trolley station, was always
cramming his pockets with these. He'd throw this confetti on folks on
New Year's Eve, or sometimes in July and yell Happy Fourth! When I saw
you turn that poor old guy's pockets inside out I knew it had to be him.
Now what do you say?"
There was a long silence.
"Shit." Crumley seemed to be praying to himself, his eyes shut, as mine
had been only a minute ago. "God help me. Get in."
"What?"
"Get in, God damn it. You're going to prove what you just said. You
think I'm an idiot?"
"Yes. I mean, no." I yanked the door open, struggling with my left fist
in my left pocket. "I got this other stuff, seaweed, left by my door
last night and...”
"Shut up and handle the map."
The car leaped forward.
I jumped in just in time to enjoy whiplash.
Elmo Crumley and I stepped into the tobacco smells of an eternally attic
day.
Crumley stared at the empty space between the old men who leaned like
dry wicker chairs against each other.
Crumley moved forward to hold out his hand and show them the dry-caked
alphabet confetti.
The old men had had two days now to think about the empty seat between
them.
"Son-of-a-bitch," one of them whispered.
"If a cop," murmured one of them, blinking at the mulch in his palm,
"shows me something like that, it's gotta come from Willy's pockets. You
want me to come identify him?"
The other two old men leaned away from this one who spoke, as if he had
said something unclean.
Crumley nodded.
The old man shoved his cane under his trembling hands and hoisted
himself up. Crumley tried to help, but the fiery look the old man shot
him moved him away.
"Stand aside!"
The old man battered the hardwood floor with his cane, as if punishing
it for the bad news, and was out the door.
We followed him out into that mist and fog and rain where God's light
had just failed in Venice, southern California.
We walked into the morgue with a man eighty-two years old, but when we
came out he was one hundred and ten, and could no longer use his cane.
The fire was gone from his eyes, so he didn't even beat us off as we
tried to help him out to the car and he was mourning over and over, "My
God, who gave him that awful haircut? When did that happen?" He babbled
because he needed to talk nonsense. "Did you do that to him?" he cried
to no one. "Who did that? Who?"
I know, I thought, but didn't tell, as we got him out of the car and
back to sit in his own place on that cold bench where the other old men
waited, pretending not to notice our return, their eyes on the ceiling
or the floor, waiting until we were gone so they could decide whether to
stay away from the stranger their old friend had become or move closer
to keep him warm.
Crumley and I were very quiet as we drove back to the as-good-as-empty
canaries-for-sale house.
I stood outside the door while Crumley went in to look at the blank
walls of the old man's room and look at the names, the names, the names,
William, Willy, Will, Bill. Smith. Smith. Smith, fingernail-scratched
there in the plaster, making himself immortal.
When he came out, Crumley stood blinking back into the terribly empty
room.
"Christ," he murmured.
"Did you read the words on the wall?"
"All of them." Crumley looked around and was dismayed to find himself
outside the door staring in. " 'He's standing in the hall.' Who stood
here?" Crumley turned to measure me. "Was it you?"
"You know it wasn't," I said, edging back.
"I could arrest you for breaking and entering, I suppose."
"And you won't do that," I said, nervously. "The door, all the doors,
have been open for years. Anyone could come in. Someone did."
Crumley glanced back into the silent room.
"How do I know you didn't scratch those words on that wall with your own
damned fingernail, just to get my hair up and make me believe your
cockamamie theory?"
"The writing on the wall is wobbly; an old man's scribble."
"You could have thought of that, and imitated an old man's scrawl."
"Could have done, but didn't do. My God, what do you need to convince
you?"
"More than gooseflesh on my neck, I'll tell you that."
"Then," I said, my hands back in my pockets again, making fists, the
seaweed still hidden but waiting, "the rest is upstairs. Go up. Look.
Come down. Tell me what you see."
Crumley tilted his head to give me one of those monkey looks, then
sighed and went up, like an old shoe salesman carrying an anvil in each
hand.
At the top of the stairs he stood like Lord Carnarvon outside
Tutankhamen's waiting tomb, for a long moment. Then he went in. I
thought I heard the ghosts of old birds rustling and peering. I thought
I heard a mummy whisper, rising from river dusts. But that was the old
Muse in me, anxious for startlements.
What I heard was Crumley pacing the milkweed silt on the old woman's
floor, which muffled his tread. A birdcage gave a metallic bell sound;
he had touched it. Then what I heard was him bending over to lend an ear
to a wind of time that moved from a dry and aching mouth.
And what I heard finally was the sound of the name on the wall whispered
once, twice, three times, as if the old canary woman were reading the
Egyptian hieroglyphs, symbol by symbol.
When Crumley came back down he was carrying the anvils in his stomach,
and his face was tired.
"I'm getting out of this business," he said.
I waited.
"Hirohito ascends throne." He quoted the old newsprint he had just seen
at the bottom of the cage.
"Addis Ababa?" I said.
"Was it really that long ago?"
"Now you've seen it all," I said. "What's your conclusion?"
"What conclusion should I have?"
"Didn't you read it in her face? Didn't you see?"
"What?"
"She's next."
"What?"
"It's all there, in her eyes. She knows about the man who stands in the
hall. He's been up to her room, also, but hasn't gone in. She's simply
waiting, and praying for him. I'm cold all over, and can't get warm."
"Just because you were right about the trolley ticket punchout junk, and
found his place and I.D.'d the man, doesn't make you Tarot Card Champ of
the Week. You're cold all over? I’m cold all over. Your hunch and my
chill buys no dog food for a dead dog."
"If you don't post a guard here, she'll be dead in two days."
"If we posted guards over everybody who's going to be dead in two days,
we'd have no more police. You want me to go tell the captain what to do
with his men? He'd throw me downstairs and throw my badge after me.
Look, she's nobody. I hate to say that. But that's the way the law runs.
If she were somebody, maybe we'd post...”
"I'll do it myself, then."
"Think what you just said. You got to eat sometime, or sleep. You can't
be here and you know it. The first time you run for a hotdog is when he,
him, who, whomever, if he exists, will come in, make her sneeze, and
she's gone. There was never any man here. It was only an old hairball
blowing by in the night. The old guy heard it first. Mrs. Canary hears
it now."
Crumley stared up the long, dark stairs toward the place of no birdsong,
no springtime in the Rockies, no bad organist playing for his tiny
yellow friends in some lost year.
"Give me time to think, kid," he said.
"And let you be an accessory to murder?"
"There you go again!" Crumley yanked the door so it screamed on its
hinges. "How come I spend half my time almost liking you and the rest
being mad as hell?"
"Do I do that to you?" I said.
But he was gone.
Crumley did not call for twenty-four hours.
Grinding my teeth into a fine powder, I primed my Underwood and
steamrollered Crumley into the platen.
"Speak!" I typed.
"How come," Crumley responded, typing from somewhere inside my amazing
machine, "I spend half my time almost liking you and the rest being mad
as hell?"
Then the machine typed, "I'll telephone you on the day the old canary
lady dies."
It's obvious that years back I had pasted two gummed labels on my
Underwood. One read: OFFICIAL OUIJA BOARD. The other, in large letters:
DON'T THINK.
I didn't. I just let the old Ouija board bang and clatter.
"How soon do we work together on this problem?"
"You," responded Crumley in my fingertips, "are the problem!"
"Will you become a character in my novel?"
"I already am."
"Then help me."
"Fat chance."
"Damn!"
I tore the page out of the machine.
Just then, my private phone rang.
It seemed it took me ten miles of running to get there, thinking,
Peg!
All the women in my life have been librarians, teachers, writers, or
booksellers. Peg was at least three of those, but she was far away now,
and it terrified me.
She had been all summer in Mexico, finishing studies in Spanish
literature, learning the language, traveling on trains with mean peons
or busses with happy pigs, writing me love-scorched letters from
Tamazunchale or bored ones from Acapulco where the sun was too bright
and the gigolos not bright enough; not for her anyway, friend to Henry
James and consultant to Voltaire and Benjamin Franklin. She carried a
lunch-bucket full of books everywhere. I often thought she ate the
brothers Goncourt like high tea sandwiches in the late afternoons.
Peg.
Once a week she called from somewhere lost in the church-towns or big
cities, just come up out of the mummy catacombs at Guanajuato or gasping
after a climb down Teotihuacan, and we listened to each other's
heartbeats for three short minutes and said the same dumb things to each
other over and over and over; the sort of litany that sounds fine no
matter how long or often you say it.
Each week, when the call came, the sun blazed over the phone booth.
Each week, when the talk stopped, the sun died and the fog arose. I
wanted to run pull the covers over my head. Instead, I punched my
typewriter into bad poems, or wrote a tale about a Martian wife who,
lovesick, dreams that an earthman drops from the sky to take her away,
and gets shot for his trouble.
Some weeks, as poor as I was, we pulled the old telephone operator,
calling from Mexico City, would ask for me.
"Who?" I would say, "What was that again? Operator,” would hear Peg
sigh, far away. The more I talked nonsense, the longer I was on the
line.
"Just a moment, operator, let me get that again. The operator repeated
my name. "Wait, let me see if he's here. Who's calling? And Peg's voice,
swiftly, would respond from two thousand miles off. "Tell him it's Peg!
Peg."
And I would pretend to go away and return. "He's not here. Call back in
an hour." "An hour...” echoed Peg. And click, buzz, hum, she was gone.
Helped into the booth and yanked the phone off the hook.
"Yes?" I yelled.
But it wasn't Peg.
Silence.
"Who is this?" I said.
Silence. But someone was there, not two thousand miles away, but very
near. And the reception was so clear, I could hear the air move in the
nostrils and mouth of the quiet one at the other end.
"Well?" I said. Silence. And the sound that waiting makes on a telephone
line. Whoever it was had his mouth open, close to the receiver.
Whisper. Whisper.
Jesus God, I thought, this can't be a heavy-breather calling me in a
phone booth. People don't call phone booths! No one knows this is my
private office.
Silence. Breath. Silence. Breath.
I swear that cool air whispered from the receiver and froze my ear.
"No, thanks," I said.
And hung up.
I was halfway across the street, jogging with my eyes shut, when I heard
the phone ring again.
I stood in the middle of the street, staring back at the phone, afraid
to go touch it, afraid of the breathing.
But the longer I stood there in danger of being run down, the more the
phone sounded like a funeral phone calling from a burial ground with bad
telegram news. I had to go pick up the receiver.
"She's still alive," said a voice.
"Peg?" I yelled.
"Take it easy," said Elmo Crumley.
I fell against the side of the booth, fighting for breath, relieved but
angry.
"Did you call a moment ago?" I gasped. "How'd you know this number?"
"Everyone in the whole goddamn town's heard that phone ring and seen you
jumping for it."
"Who's alive?"
"The canary lady. Checked her late last night...”
"That was last night."
"That's not why I'm calling, damn it. Get over to my place late this
afternoon. I might just rip your skin off."
"Why?"
"Three o'clock in the morning, what were you doing standing outside my
house?"
"Me!"
"You better have a good alibi, by God. I don't like being spooked. I'll
be home around five. If you talk fast you get maybe a beer. If you bat
an eye, I kick ass."
"Crumley!" I yelled.
"Be there." And he hung up.
I walked slowly back toward my front door.
The phone rang again.
Peg!
Or the man with cold ice in his breath?
Or Crumley being mean?
I banged the door open, jumped in, slammed it, and then, with
excruciating patience, rolled a fresh white sheet of Elmo Crumley into
my Underwood and forced him to say only nice things to me.
Ten thousand tons of fog poured over Venice and touched at my windows
and came in under the cracks in the door.
Every time it is a damp drear November in my soul I know it is high time
to go from the sea again, and let someone cut my hair.
There is a thing in haircutting that assuages the blood and calms the
heart and makes the nerves serene.
Beyond that, I heard the old man stumbling out of the morgue in the back
of my mind, wailing, "My God, who gave him that awful haircut?"
Cal, of course, had done that awful job. So I had several reasons to go
visit. Cal, the worst barber in Venice, maybe the world, but cheap,
called across the tidal waves of fog, waiting with his dull scissors,
brandishing his Bumblebee Electric clippers that shocked and stunned
poor writers and innocent customers who wandered in.
Cal, I thought. Snip away the darkness.
Short in front. So I can see.
Short on the sides. So I can hear.
Short in back. So I can feel things creeping up on me.
Short!
But I didn't make it to Cal's, just then.
As I stepped out of my apartment into the fog, a parade of great dark
elephants went by on Windward Avenue. Which is to say a pavane of black
trucks with huge cranes and immense pile-pullers on the back. They were
in full thunder, and heading for the pier to knock it down, or begin to
knock it down. The rumors had been afloat for months. And now the day
was here. Or tomorrow morning at the latest.
I had more of the day to wait to go see Crumley.
And Cal was not exactly the greatest lure in the world.
The elephants lumbered and groaned their machineries and shook the
pavement, on their way to devour the fun house and the horses on the
carousel.
Feeling like an old Russian writer, madly in love with killing winter
and blizzards on the move, what could I do but follow?
By the time I got to the pier, half the trucks had lumbered down on the
sand to move out toward the tides and catch the junk that would be
tossed over the railings. The others had headed out toward China on the
rotting planks, sawdusting the wooden mulch on the way.
I followed, sneezing and using Kleenex. I should be home lying with my
cold, but the thought of going to bed with so many fog and mist and rain
thoughts slogged me on.
I stood amazed at my own blindness, halfway down the length of the pier,
wondering at all the people here I had seen but never known. Half of the
games were nailed shut with freshcut pine planks. A few stayed open,
waiting for the bad weather to come in and toss hoops or knock milk
bottles down. Outside half a dozen stalls, the young men who looked old
or the old men who looked older stood watching those trucks growling out
on the sea end of the pier, getting ready to tooth and nail sixty years
of past time.
I looked around, realizing I had rarely seen behind the dropped flat
doors or the rolled-down and battened canvasses.
I had the feeling again of being followed and spun about.
A big plume of fog came along the pier, ignored me, and passed on.
So much for premonition.
Here, halfway to the sea, there was a small dark shack that I had passed
for at least ten years without seeing the window-shades up.
Today, for the first time, the shades were raised.
I looked in.
My God, I thought. There's a whole library there.
I walked swiftly over, wondering how many similar libraries were hidden
away on the pier or lost in the old alleys of Venice.
I stood by the window, remembering nights when I had seen a light behind
the shade and a shadow-hand turning pages in an invisible book, and
heard a voice whispering the words, declaiming poetries, philosophizing
on a dark universe. It had always sounded like a writer with second
thoughts or an actor slipping downhill into a ghost repertory, Lear with
two extra sets of mean daughters and only half the wits.
But now, at noon this day, the shades were up. Inside, a small light
still burned in a room empty of occupants but filled with a desk, a
chair, and an old-fashioned but huge leather couch. Around the couch, on
all sides, towering to the ceiling, were cliffs and towers and parapets
of books. There must have been a thousand of them, crammed and shoved up
to the ceiling.
I stepped back and looked at the signs I had seen but not seen around
and above the shack door.
TAROT CARDS. But the print was faded.
The next sign down read PALMISTRY.
The third one, in block letters, was PHRENOLOGY.
And beneath, HANDWRITING ANALYSIS.
And to one side, HYPNOTISM.
I sidled closer to the door, for there was a very small business card
thumb-tacked just above the doorknob.
I read the name of the shack's owner:
A. L. SHRANK.
And underneath the name, in pencil not quite so faint as canaries for
sale, these words:
Practicing Psychologist.
A sextuple-threat man.
I put my ear to the door and listened.
In there, between precipice shelves of dusty books, did I hear Sigmund
Freud whispering a penis is only a penis, but a good cigar is a smoke?
Hamlet dying and taking everyone along? Virginia Wolf, like drowned
Ophelia, stretched out to dry on that couch, telling her sad tale? Tarot
cards being shuffled? Heads being felt like cantaloupes? Pens
scratching?
"Let's peek," I said.
Again, I stared through the window, but all I saw was the empty couch
with the outline of many bodies in its middle. It was the only bed.
Nights, A. L. Shrank slept there. Days, did strangers lie there, holding
on to their insides as if they were broken glass? I could not believe.
But the books were the things that fascinated me. They not only brimmed
the shelves but filled the bathtub which I could glimpse through a
half-open door to one side. There was no kitchen. If there had been, the
icebox would have been filled, no doubt, with copies of Peary at the
North Pole or Byrd Alone in Antarctica. A. L. Shrank, it was obvious,
bathed in the sea, like many others here, and had his banquets at
Herman's Hot-dogs, down the way.
But it was not so much the presence of nine hundred or a thousand books,
as it was their titles, their subjects, their incredible dark and doomed
and awful names.
On the high, always midnight shelves stood Thomas Hardy in all his gloom
next to The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, which leaned on dread
Nietzsche and hopeless Schopenhauer cheek by jowl with The Anatomy of
Melancholy, Edgar Allan Poe, Mary Shelley, Freud, the tragedies of
Shakespeare (no comedies visible), the Marquis de Sade, Thomas De
Quincey, Hitler's Mein Kampf, Spengler's Decline of the West . . . and
on and on. . . .
Eugene O'Neill was there. Oscar Wilde, but only his sad prison essay,
none of his lilac fluff or gentian laughs. Genghis Khan and Mussolini
leaned on each other. Books with titles like Suicide As an Answer or The
Dark Night of Hamlet or Lemmings to the Sea were on the high shelf in
snows. On the floor lay World War Two and Krakatoa, the Explosion Heard
Round the World, along with India the Hungry and The Red Sun Rises.
If you run your eye and mind along books like that, and run your stare
along again, disbelieving, there is only one thing you can do. Like a
bad film version of Mourning Becomes Electra, where one suicide follows
another and murder tops murder, and incest incites incest, and blackmail
supersedes poisoned apples and people fall down stairs or step on
strychnine tacks, you finally snort, toss back your head, and . . .
Laugh!
"What's so funny?" said someone behind me.
I turned.
"I said, what's so funny?"
He stood with his thin pale face about six inches from the tip of my
nose.
The man who slept on that analysis couch.
The man who owned all those end-of-the-world books.
A. L. SHRANK.
"Well?" he said.
"Your library!" I stammered.
A. L. Shrank glared, waiting.
Luckily I sneezed, which erased my laugh and let me cover my confusion
with a Kleenex.
"Forgive me, forgive," I said. "I own exactly fourteen books. It's not
often you see the New York Public Library imported to Venice pier."
The flames went out in A. L. Shrank's tiny, bright-yellow fox eyes. His
wire-thin shoulders sank. His tiny fists opened up. My praise caused him
to glance through his own window like a stranger and gape.
"Why," he murmured, amazed, "yes, they're all mine."
I stood looking down at a man no taller than five-one or five-two, maybe
less without his shoes. I had a terrible urge to check to see if he wore
three-inch heels, but kept my eyes level with the top of his head. He
was not even aware of my inspection, so proud was he of the
proliferation of literary beasts that infested his dark shelves.
"I have five thousand nine hundred and ten books," he announced.
"You sure it's not five thousand nine hundred and eleven?"
He very carefully looked only in at his library and said, in a cold
voice, "Why are you laughing?"
"The titles...”
"The titles?" He leaned closer to the window to search the shelves for
some bright traitor among all those assassin books.
"Well," I said, lamely, "aren't there any summers, good weather, fair
winds, in your library? Don't you own any glad books, happy finds like
Leacock's Sunshine Sketches of a Little Town? The Sun Is My Undoing? In
the Good Old Summertime? June Laughter?"
"No!" Shrank stood on tiptoe to say this, then caught himself and sank
down. "No...”
"How about Peacock's Headlong Hall, or Huck Finn, Three Men in a Boat,
How Green Was My Father? Pickwick Papers? Robert Benchley? James
Thurber? S. J. Perelman...”
I machine-gunned the titles. Shrank listened and almost cringed back at
my recitation of joy. He let me run down.
"How about the Savonarola Joke Book or The Funny Sayings of Jack the
Ripper…" I stopped.
A. L. Shrank was all shadow and ice, turning away.
"Sorry," I said, and I was. "What I'd really like to do some day is come
by to browse. That is, if you'll let me."
A. L. Shrank weighed this, decided I was repentant, and moved to touch
his shop-front door. It whined softly open. He turned to examine me with
his tiny, bright amber eyes, his thin fingers twitching at his sides.
"Why not now?" he said.
"I can't. Later, Mr. …"
"Shrank. A. L. Shrank. Consulting psychologist. No, not Shrink, as you
might be thinking, as in psychiatrist. Just plain Shrank, meadow doctor
to lost creatures."
He was imitating my banter. His thin smile was a weak-tea duplicate of
my own. I felt it would vanish if I, in turn, shut my mouth. I glanced
above him.
"How come you've left that old tarot card sign in place? And what about
phrenology and hypnotism...”
"You forgot to mention my handwriting analysis sign. And the one
mentioning numerology is just inside the door. Be my guest."
I moved, but stopped.
"Come along," said A. L. Shrank. "Come on," he said, really smiling now,
the smile of a fish, however, not of a dog. "Step in."
At each gentle command, I inched forward, my eyes touching with all too
obvious irony on the hypnotism sign above the tiny man's head. His eyes
did not blink.
"Come," said A. L. Shrank, nodding at his library without looking at it.
I found the invitation irresistible, in spite of the car crashes,
dirigible burnings, mine explosions, and mental delapidations I knew
each book contained.
"Well," I said.
At which moment the entire pier shook. Far out at the end, in the fog, a
great creature had struck the pier. It was like a whale brunting a ship,
or the Queen Mary plowing into the ancient pilings. The big iron brutes
out there, hidden, were beginning to tear the planks apart.
The vibrations knocked the planks and came up through my body and
Shrank's body, with jolts of mortality and doom. Our bones shook in our
blood. We both jerked our heads to try to stare through the fog at the
devastation somewhere beyond. The mighty blows jarred me a modicum away
from the door. The titanic buffeting trembled and shivered and inched A.
L. Shrank on his sill like a lost toy. A paleness bloomed within the
paleness of his face. He looked like a man panicked by an earthquake or
a tidal wave rushing at the pier. Again and again the great machines
hammered and pounded in the fog a hundred yards away, and invisible
cracks seemed to appear in A. L. Shrank's milk-glass brow and cheeks.
The war had begun! Soon the dark tanks would lumber along the pier,
destroying as they came, a flood of carnival émigrés running before them
toward land, A. L. Shrank soon to be among them as his house of dark
tarot cards fell.
It was my chance to escape, but I failed.
Shrank's gaze had returned to me, as if I could save him from that
invasion just beyond. In a moment he might seize my elbow for support.
The pier shook. I shut my eyes.
I thought I heard my secret office telephone ring. I almost cried out,
my phone! it's for me!
But I was saved from that by a tide of men and women, and a few
children, hurrying the other way, not toward land but rushing toward the
sea end of the pier, a large man in a dark cloak and a floppy G. K.
Chesterton hat leading the way.
"Last ride, last day, last time!" he yelled. "Last chance! Come on!"
"Shapeshade," whispered A. L. Shrank.
And that's who it was. Shapeshade, the sole owner and proprietor of the
old Venice Cinema at the foot of the pier, which would be ground
underfoot and turned to celluloid mulch within the week,
"This way!" called Shapeshade's voice from the mist.
I glanced at A. L. Shrank.
He shrugged and nodded, giving permission.
I ran off into the fog.
The long chattering clack and grind, the ascending slow clang, rattle,
and roar, like some robot centipede of immense size scaling the side of
a nightmare, pausing at the top for the merest breath, then cascading in
a serpentine of squeal, rush, and thunderous roar, in scream, in human
shriek down the abysmal span, there to attack, more swiftly this time,
another hill, another ascending scale rising yet higher and higher to
fall off into hysteria.
The rollercoaster.
I stood looking up at it through the mist.
In an hour, so they said, it would be dead.
It had been part of my life as long as I could remember. From here most
nights you could hear people laughing and screaming as they soared up to
the heights of so-called existence and plunged down toward an imaginary
doom.
So this was to be a final ride late in the afternoon, just before the
dynamite experts taped explosives to the dinosaur's legs and brought him
to his knees.
"Jump in!" a boy yelled. "It's free!"
"Even free I never thought it was anything but torture," I said.
"Hey, look who's here in the front seat," someone called. "And behind!"
Mr. Shapeshade was there, cramming his vast black hat down over his
ears, laughing. Back of him was Annie Oakley the rifle lady.
Back of her sat the man who had run the fun house; alongside him was the
old lady who spun the pink cotton candy machine and sold illusion that
melted in your mouth and left you hungry long before Chinese food.
Back of them were the Knock a Milk Bottle and the Toss a Hoop team,
everyone looking like they were posing for a passport photo to eternity.
Only Mr. Shapeshade, as coxswain, was jubilant.
"As Captain Ahab said, don't be yellow!" he called.
That made me feel like a sheep.
I let the rollercoaster ticket-tearer help me into the coward's back
row.
"This your first trip?" He laughed.
"And my last."
"Everyone set to scream?"
"Why not?" cried Shapeshade.
Let me out, I thought. We'll all die!
"Here goes," the ticketman yelled, "nothing!"
It was heaven going up and hell all the way down.
I had this terrible feeling they blew the legs out from under the
rollercoaster as we descended.
When we hit bottom I glanced over. A. L. Shrank stood on the pier,
staring up at us lunatics who had willingly boarded the Titanic. A. L.
Shrank backed off in the fog.
But we were climbing again. Everyone screamed. I screamed. Christ, I
thought, we sound as if we mean it!
When it was over, the celebrants wandered off in the fog, wiping their
eyes, holding on to each other.
Mr. Shapeshade stood beside me as the dynamite men ran in to wrap their
explosives around the girders and struts of the great ride.
"You going to stay and watch?" said Mr. Shapeshade, gently.
"I don't think I could stand it," I said. "I saw a film once where they
shot an elephant right on screen. The way it fell down and over,
collapsed, hurt me terribly. It was like watching someone bomb St.
Peter's dome. I wanted to kill the hunters. No, thanks."
A flagman, anyway, was waving us off.
Shapeshade and I walked back through the fog. He took my elbow, like a
good middle-European uncle advising his favorite nephew.
"Tonight. No explosions. No destructions. Only joy. Fun. Great old
times. My theater. Maybe tonight is our last cinema night. Maybe
tomorrow. Free. Gratis. Nice boy, be there."
He hugged me and plowed off through the fog like a great dark tugboat.
On my way past A. L. Shrank's I saw that his door was still wide open.
But I didn't step in.
I wanted to run, call collect on my gas station telephone, but I feared
that two thousand miles of silence would whisper back at me of deaths in
sunlit streets, red meats hung in carneceria windows, and a loneliness
so vast it was like an open wound.
My hair grayed. It grew an inch.
Cal! I thought. Dear, dreadful barber, here I come.
Cal's barber shop in Venice was situated right across the street from
the city hall and next door to a bail bond shop where flies hung like
dead trapeze artists from flypaper coils that had been left in the
windows for ten years, and where men and women from the jail across the
way went in like shadows and came out like uninhabited clothes. And next
door to that was a little ma-and-pa grocery, but they were gone and
their son sat on his pants in the window all day and sold maybe a can of
soup and took horse-race telephone bets.
The barber shop, though it had a few flies in the window that had been
dead no more than ten days, at least got a wash-down once a month from
Cal, who ran the place with well-oiled shears and unoiled elbows and
spearmint gossip in his all-pink mouth. He acted like he was running a
bee farm and afraid it would get out of hand as he wrestled the big,
silver, bumbling insect around your ears until it suddenly froze, bit,
and held on to your hair until Cal cursed and yanked back as if he were
pulling teeth.
Which is why, along with economics, I had my hair cut only twice a year
by Cal.
Twice yearly, also, because of all the barbers in Cal in the world, Cal
talked sprayed, gummed, cudgeled, advised, and droned more than most,
which boggles the mind. Name a subject he knew it all, top, side, and
bottom, and m the middle of explaining dumb Einstein's theory would
stop, shut one eye, cock his head and ask the Great Question with No
Safe Answer.
"Hev did I ever tell you about me and old Scott Joplin? Why, old Scott
and me, by God and by Jesus, listen. That day in 1915 when he taught me
how to play the 'Maple Leaf Rag'.  Let me tell you."
There was a picture of Scott Joplin on the wall, signed in ink a few
centuries ago and fading like the canary lady's message. In that photo
you could see a very young Cal, seated on a piano stool, and bent over
him, Joplin, his big black hands covering those of the happy boy.
There was that joyous kid, forever on the wall, captured on film hunched
over to seize the piano keys, ready to leap on life, the world, the
universe, eat it all. The look on that boy's face was such that it
cracked my heart every tune I saw it. So I didn't look at it often. It
hurt enough to see Cal looking at it, gathering his spit to ask the
age-old Great Question, and, with no begs or requests, dash for the
piano to maple leaf that rag.
Cal.
Cal looked like a cowpuncher who now rode barber chairs. Think of Texas
cowhands, lean, weatherbeaten permanently dyed by sun, sleeping in their
Stetsons, glued on for life, taking showers in the damn hats. That was
Cal, circling the enemy, the customer, weapon in hand, eating the hair,
chopping the sideburns, listening to the shears, admiring the Bumblebee
Electric's harmonics, talking, talking, as I imagined him cowhand-naked
dancing around my chair, Stetson jampack-nested above his ears,
crave-itching to leap to that piano and rake its smile.
Sometimes I'd pretend I didn't see him throwing those mad stares,
shuttling his love glances at the waiting black and white, white and
black keys. But finally I'd heave a great masochistic sigh and cry,
"Okay, Cal. Git."
Cal got.
Galvanized, he shot across the room, in a cowboy shamble, two of him,
one in the mirror faster and brighter than the real one, yanking the
piano lid up to show all that yellow dentistry just aching to have its
music pulled.
"Listen to this, son. You ever hear anything, ever, ever in life, ever
hear anything like this?"
"No, Cal," I said, waiting in the chair with my head half-ruined. "No,"
I said, honestly, "I never did."
"My God," cried the old man coming out of the morgue a final time inside
my head, "who gave him that awful haircut?"
I saw the guilty party standing in the window of his barber shop, gazing
out at the fog, looking like one of those people in empty rooms or cafes
or on street corners in paintings by Hopper.
Cal.
I had to force myself to pull open the front door and step in, gingerly,
looking down.
There were curlicues of brown, black, and gray hair all over the place.
"Hey," I said, with false joviality. "Looks like you had a great day!"
"You know," said Cal, looking out the window, "that hair has been there
five, six weeks. Ain't nobody in their right mind coming in that door
save tramps, which isn't you, or fools, which isn't you, or bald men,
which isn't you, asking directions to the madhouse, and poor people,
which is you, so go sit down in the chair and prepare to be
electrocuted, the electric clippers have been on the fritz for two
months and I ain't had the cash to get the goddamn things fixed. Sit."
Obedient to my executioner, I bounded forward and sat and stared at the
hair-strews on the floor, symbols of a silent past that must have meant
something, but said nothing. Even looked at sidewise, I could figure no
strange shapes or imminent forecasts.
At last Cal turned and waded across that forlorn porcelain and forelock
sea to let his hands pick up, all by themselves, the comb and scissors.
He hesitated behind me, like the axeman sad to have to chop some young
king's head.
He asked how long I wanted it, or how ruined I wanted it, take your
choice, but I was busy staring across the glaring white Arctic emptiness
of the shop at…
Cal's piano.
For the first time in fifteen years it was covered. Its gray-yellow
Oriental smile was invisible under a white mortuary bedsheet.
"Cal." My eyes were on the sheet. I had forgotten, for a moment, the old
Venice ticket office man lying cold with a terrible haircut. "Cal," I
said, "how come you're not maple leafing the old rag?"
Cal let his scissors snip-snip and then snip-snip around my neck.
"Cal?" I said.
"Something wrong?" I said.
"When does the dying stop?" said Cal, a long way off.
And now the bumblebee buzzed and stung my ears and made the old chill
ripple down my spine, and then Cal got busy hacking away with his dull
scissors as if he were harvesting a wild wheat crop, cursing under his
breath. I smelled a faint whiskey odor, but kept my eyes straight ahead.
"Cal?" I said.
"Shoot. No, shit is what I mean."
He threw the scissors, comb, and dead silver bumblebee on the shelf and
shambled across the ocean of old hair to yank the sheet off the piano,
which grinned like a big mindless shape as he sat down and laid his two
hands like limp paintbrushes on the keys, ready to paint God knows what.
What came out was like broken teeth in a mashed jaw.
"Damn. Hell. Crud. I used to do it, used to play the living guts outa
that thing Scott taught me, old Scott… Scott."
His voice died.
He had glanced up at the wall above the piano. He glanced away when he
saw me looking, but it was too late.
For the first time in twenty years, that picture of Scott Joplin was
gone.
I lurched forward in the chair, my mouth dropped wide.
At which time Cal forced himself to hurl the sheet back over the smile
and return, a mourner at his own wake, to stand behind my chair and pick
up the torture instruments again.
"Scott Joplin ninety-seven, Cal the barber zero," he said, describing a
lost game.
He ran his trembling fingers over my head.
"Jesus, look what I done to you. My God, that's a lousy cut, and I'm not
even halfway in. I ought to pay you for all the years you let me make
you run around looking like an Airedale with mange. On top of which, let
me tell you what I did to a customer three days ago. It's terrible.
Maybe I made the poor son-of-a-bitch look so bad someone killed him to
put him out of his misery!"
I lurched forward again, but Cal put me gently back.
"I should give Novocain, but I don't. About this old guy. Listen!"
"I'm listening, Cal," I said, for that was why I was here.
"Sat right where you are sitting now," said Cal. "Sat right there, just
like you're sitting, looked in the mirror, and said, shoot the works.
That's what he said. Cal, shoot the works. Biggest night of my life, he
said. Myron's Ballroom, downtown L.A. Haven't been there in years.
Called, said I'd won the grand prize, he said. For what? I said. Most
important old resident of Venice, they said. Why's that a cause for
celebration? Shut up and primp up, they said. So here I am, Cal. Short
all around but don't billiard ball me. And some of that Tiger Tonic,
shake it on me. I cut until hell wouldn't have it. Old man must've saved
up two years of high, snow mountain hair. Drenched him with tonic until
the fleas fled. Sent him out happy, leaving his last two bucks behind, I
wouldn't wonder. Sitting right where you are.
"And now he's dead," Cal added.
"Dead!" I almost shouted.
"Somebody found him in a lion cage submerged under the canal waters.
Dead."
"Somebody," I said. But didn't add, me!
"I figure the old man never had any champagne before or it was a long
time back, got loaded, fell in. Cal, he said, the works. It just goes to
show you, right? Could be me or you in that canal, just as likely, and
now, hot damn and old breakfasts, he's alone forever. Don't it make you
think? Hey, now, son. You don't look too well. I talk too much, right?"
"Did he say who was going to pick him up and how and when and why?" I
said.
"Nothing fancy, far as I could tell. Someone coming on the big Venice
Short Line train, pick him up, take him right down to Myron's Ballroom
door. You ever get on the train Saturday nights around one? Old ladies
and old gents piling out of Myron's in their mothball furs and green
tuxedos, smelling of Ben Hur perfume and nickel panatelas, glad they
didn't break a leg on the dance floor, bald heads sweating, mascara
running, and the fox furs starting to spoil? I went once, and looked
around and got out. I figured the streetcar might stop at Rose Lawn
Cemetery, on the way to the sea, and half those folks get out. No,
thanks. I talk too much, don't I? Just tell me if I do…
"Anyways," he went on at last, "he's dead and gone, and the awful thing
is he'll be lying in the grave the next one thousand years remembering
who in hell gave him his last awful haircut, and the answer is me.
"So it's been one of them weeks. People with bad haircuts disappear,
wind up drowned, and at long last I know damn well my hands are no good
for nothing, and…"
"You don't know who it was picked the old man up and took him to that
dance?"
"Who knows? Who cares? Old man said whoever it was told him to meet him
down front of the Venice Cinema at seven, see part of a show, have a
dinner at Modesti's, the last cafe on the pier still open, boy howdy,
and head downtown to the ballroom. For a fast waltz with a
ninety-nine-year-old Rose Queen, what a night, hey? Then home to bed,
forever! But why would you want to know all this, son? You…"
The telephone rang.
Cal looked at it, his face draining of color.
The telephone rang three times.
"Aren't you going to answer it, Cal?" I said.
Cal looked at it the same way I looked at my gas station office phone,
and two thousand miles of silence and heavy breathing along the way. He
shook his head.
"Why would I answer a phone when there's nothing but bad news on it?" he
said.
"Some days, you feel that way," I said.
I pulled the apron from around my neck, slowly, and got up.
Automatically, Cal's hand went palm out for my cash. When he saw his
hand there, he cursed and dropped his hand, turned and banged the cash
register.
Up jumped NO SALE.
I looked at myself in the mirror and almost barked like a seal at what I
saw.
"It's a great haircut, Cal," I said.
"Git outa here."
On the way out, I put my hand up to touch where the picture of Scott
Joplin used to hang, playing great stuff with fingers like two bunches
of big black bananas.
If Cal saw this, he didn't say.
I slipped on some old hair, going out.
I walked until I found sunshine and Crumley's buried-in-deep-grass
bungalow.
I stood outside.
Crumley must have felt me there. He yanked the door open and said, "You
doing that again?"
"I never did. I'm no good at being out scaring people at three o'clock
in the morning," I said.
He looked down at his left hand and shoved it at me.
There was a small clot of oily green seaweed on his palm, his clench
marks in it.
I held out my hand, like someone trumping an ace, and opened my fingers.
My identical clump of seaweed, drier, and brittle, lay in my palm.
Crumley's eyes moved from both our hands up to my eyes, my brow, my
cheeks, my chin. He exhaled.
"Apricot pie, Halloween pumpkins, backyard tomatoes, late summer
peaches, Santa Claus's California son, you look like all of them. With a
face like that how can I yell guilty?"
He dropped his hands and stood aside.
"You do like beer, don't you?"
"Not much," I said.
"Would you rather I fix you a chocolate malt?"
"Could you?"
"No, goddamn it. You'll drink beer and like it. Get it in here." He
wandered off, shaking his head, and I came in and shut the door, feeling
like a high school student come back to visit his tenth-grade teacher.
Crumley was standing in his parlor window blinking out at the dry dirt
path I had wandered up a moment ago.
"Three o'clock, by God," he muttered. "Three. Right out there. I heard
someone weeping, how you figure that? Crying? Gave me the goosebumps.
Sounded like a banshee woman. Hell. Let me look at your face again."
I showed him my face.
"Jesus," he said, "do you always blush that easily?"
"I can't help it."
"Christ, you could massacre half a Hindu village and still look like
Peter Rabbit. What are you stuffed with?"
"Chocolate bars. And I keep six kinds of ice cream in my icebox, when I
can afford it."
"I bet you buy it instead of bread."
I wanted to say no, but he would have caught the lie.
"Take a load off your feet and what kind of beer do you hate most? I got
Budweiser which is awful, Budweiser which is dreadful, and Bud which is
the worst. Take your pick. No, don't. Allow me." He ambled off to the
kitchen and came back with two cans. "There's still a little sun. Let's
get out of here."
He led the way into his backyard.
I couldn't believe Crumley's garden.
"Why not?" He steered me out the back door of his bungalow, into a green
and luscious illumination of thousands of plants, ivies, papyrus, birds
of paradise, succulents, cacti. Crumley beamed. "Got six dozen different
species of epiphyllum over there, that's Iowa corn against the fence,
that's a plum tree, that's apricot, that's orange. Want to know why?"
"Everyone in the world needs two, three jobs," I said, without
hesitation. "One job isn't enough, just as one life isn't enough. I want
to have a dozen of both."
"Bull's-eye. Doctors should dig ditches. Ditch-diggers ought to run
kindergartens one day a week. Philosophers should wash dishes in a
greasy spoon two nights out of ten. Mathematicians should blow whistles
at high school gyms. Poets should drive trucks for a change of menu and
police detectives…"
"Should own and operate the Garden of Eden," I said, quietly.
"Jesus." Crumley laughed and shook his head, and looked at the green
seaweed he ground in his palm. "You're a pain-in-the-ass know-it-all.
You think you got me figured? Surprise!" He bent and twisted a garden
valve. "Hark, as they used to say. Hist!"
A soft rain sprang up in brilliant blooms that touched all around Eden
with whispers that said, Soft. Quiet. Serenity. Stay. Live forever.
I felt all my bones diminish in my flesh. Something like a dark skin
fell from my back.
Crumley tilted his head to one side to study my face. "Well?"
I shrugged. "You see so much rot every week, you need this."
"Trouble is, the guys over at the station won't try anything like this.
Sad, huh? To just be a cop and nothing else, forever? Christ, I'd kill
myself. You know what, I wish I could bring all the rot I see every week
here and use it for fertilizer. Boy, what roses I'd grow!"
"Or Venus flytraps," I said.
He mused on that and nodded. "That earns you a beer."
He led the way into his kitchen and I stood looking out at the
rainforest, taking deep breaths of the cool air, but not able to smell
it because of my cold.
"I've passed your place for years," I said. "And wondered who could
possibly live back in such a great homemade forest. Now that I've met
you, I know it had to be you."
Crumley had to stop himself from falling on the floor and writhing with
joy at the compliment. He controlled himself and opened two really
terrible beers, one of which I managed to sip.
"Can't you make a better face than that?" he asked. "You really like
malts better?"
"Yeah." I took a bigger sip and it gave me courage to ask, "One thing.
What am I doing here? You asked me over because of that stuff you found
out front of your house, that seaweed? Now here I am surveying your
jungle and drinking your bad beer. No longer a suspect?"
"Oh, for Christ's sake." Crumley swigged his own drink, and blinked at
me. "If I thought you were any kind of mad lion-tamer cage-filler-upper,
you'd have been in the toilet two days ago. You think I don't know all
about you?"
"There's not much to know," I said, sheepishly.
"Like hell there isn't. Listen." Crumley took another swig, shut his
eyes, and read the details off the back of his eyelids.
"One block from your apartment's a liquor store, and an ice cream
parlor, and next to that a Chinese grocery. They all think you're mad.
The Nut, they call you. The Fool, on occasion. You talk loud and lots.
They hear. Every time you sell a story to Weird Tales or Astonishing
Stories, it's all over the pier because you open your window and yell.
Christ. But the bottom line is, kid, they like you. You got no future,
sure, they all agree, because who in hell is really going to go and land
on the moon, when? Between now and the year 2000, will anyone give a
damn about Mars? Only you, Flash Gordon. Only crazy nut you, Buck
Rogers."
I was blushing furiously, head down, half-angry and somewhat embarrassed
but somehow pleased at all this attention. I had been called Flash and
Buck often, but somehow when Crumley did it, it went right by without
wounding.
Crumley opened his eyes, saw my blush, and said, "Now, cut that out."
"Why would you have known all this about me, a long time before the old
man was," I stopped and changed it, "before he died?"
"I'm curious about everything."
"Most people aren't. I discovered that when I was fourteen. Everybody
else gave up toys that year. I told my folks, no toys, no Christmas. So
they kept on giving me toys every year. The other boys got shirts and
ties. I took astronomy. Out of four thousand students in my high school
there were only fifteen other boys and fourteen girls who looked at the
sky with me. The rest were out running around the track and watching
their feet. So, it follows that…"
I turned instinctively, for something had stirred in me. I found myself
wandering across the kitchen.
"I got a hunch," I said. "Could I…?"
"What?" said Crumley.
"You got a workroom here?"
"Sure. Why?" Crumley frowned with faint alarm.
That only made me push a bit harder. "Mind if I see?"
"Well...”
I moved in the direction toward which Crumley's eyes had darted.
The room was right off the kitchen. It had once been a bedroom but now
it was empty except for a desk, a chair, and a typewriter on the desk.
"I knew it," I said.
I went to stand behind the chair and look at the machine which was not
an old beat-up Underwood Standard, but a fairly new Corona with a fresh
ribbon in it, and a stack of yellow sheets waiting to one side.
"That explains why you look at me the way you do," I said. "Lord, yes,
always tilting your head this way and that, scowling, narrowing your
eyes!"
"Trying to X-ray that big head of yours, see if there's a brain in
there, and how it does what it does," said Crumley, tilting his head now
to the left, now to the right.
"Nobody knows how the brain works, not writers, no one. All I do is
throw up every morning, clean up at noon."
"Bullshit," said Crumley, gently.
"Truth."
I looked at the desk, which had three drawers on either side of the
cubby.
I put my hand out and down toward the bottom drawer on the left.
Crumley shook his head.
I shifted and reached over to touch the bottom drawer on the right.
Crumley nodded.
I pulled the drawer open, slowly.
Crumley exhaled.
There was a manuscript there in an open-top box. It looked to be about
150 to 200 pages, beginning on page one, with no title page.
"How long's this been down here in the bottom drawer?" I asked.
"Pardon."
"It's all right," said Crumley. "Five years."
"You're going to finish it now," I said.
"Like hell I am. Why?"
"Because I told you so. And I know."
"Shut the drawer," said Crumley.
"Not just yet." I pulled out the chair, sat, and rolled a sheet of
yellow paper into the machine.
I typed five words on one line and then shifted down and wrote three
more words.
Crumley squinted over my shoulder and read them aloud, quietly.
"Death Is a Lonely Business." He took a breath and finished it. "By Elmo
Crumley." He had to repeat it. "By Elmo Crumley, by God."
"There." I placed my new title page down on top of his waiting
manuscript and slid the drawer shut. "That's a gift. I'll find another
title for my book. Now, you'll have to finish it.”
I rolled another sheet of paper into the machine and asked, "What was
the number of the last page on the bottom of your manuscript?"
"One hundred sixty-two," said Crumley.
I typed 163 and left the paper in the machine.
"There," I said. "It's waiting. Tomorrow morning you get out of bed,
walk to the machine, no phone calls, no newspaper reading, don't even go
to the bathroom, sit down, type, and Elmo Crumley is immortal,"
"B.S.," said Crumley, but ever so quietly.
"God promises. But you got to work."
I got up and Crumley and I stood looking at his Corona as if it were the
only child he would ever have.
"You giving me orders, kid?" said Crumley.
"No. Your brain is, if you'd just listen."
Crumley backed off, walked into the kitchen, got some more beer. I
waited by his desk until I heard the back screen door bang.
I found Crumley in his garden letting the whirlaround water-tosser cover
his face with cooling raindrops, for the day was warm now and the sun
out full here on the rim of fog country.
"What is it," said Crumley, "forty stories you sold so far?"
"At thirty bucks apiece, yeah. The Rich Author."
"You are rich. I stood down at the magazine rack at Abe's Liquor
yesterday and read that one you wrote about the man who finds he has a
skeleton inside him and it scares hell out of him. Christ, it was a
beaut. Where in hell do you get ideas like that?"
"I got a skeleton inside me," I said.
"Most people never notice." Crumley handed me a beer and watched me make
yet another face. "The old man…"
"William Smith?"
"Yeah, William Smith, the autopsy report came in this morning. There was
no water in his lungs."
"That means he didn't drown. That means he was killed up on the canal
bank and shoved down into the cage after he was dead. That proves…"
"Don't jump ahead of the train, you'll get run down. And don't say I
told you so, or I'll take that beer back."
I offered him the beer, gladly. He nudged my hand aside.
"What have you done about the haircut?" I said.
"What haircut?"
"Mr. Smith had a really lousy haircut the afternoon before he died. His
friend moaned about it at the morgue, remember? I knew only one really
lousy barber could have done it."
I told Crumley about Cal, the prizes promised William Smith, Myron's
Ballroom, Modesti's, the big red train.
Crumley listened patiently, and said, "Flimsy."
"It's all we got," I said. "You want me to check the Venice Cinema to
see if they saw him out front the night he disappeared?"
"No," said Crumley.
"You want me to check Modesti's, the train, Myron's Ballroom?"
"No," said Crumley.
"What do you want me to do, then?"
"Stay out of it."
"Why?"
"Because," said Crumley, and stopped. He glanced at the back door of his
house. "Anything happens to you, my goddamn novel never gets finished.
Somebody's got to read the damn thing, and I don't know anybody else."
"You forget," I said. "Whoever stood outside your house last night
stands outside mine already. I can't let him do that, can I? I can't go
on being spooked by that guy who gave me the title I just typed on your
machine. Can I?"
Crumley looked at my face and I could see his thinking was, apricot pie,
banana cake, and strawberry ice cream.
"Just be careful," he said, at last. "The old man may have slipped and
knocked his head and was dead when he hit the water, which is why there
was no water in his lungs."
"And then he swam over and put himself in the cage. Sure."
Crumley squinted at me, trying to guess my weight.
Silently, he went away into the jungle and was gone about a minute. I
waited.
Then, far away, I heard an elephant trombone the wind. I turned slowly,
into a drench of garden rain, listening. A lion, closer, opened his vast
beehive valves and exhaled a killer swarm. A herd of antelopes and
gazelles dusted by like a summer wind of sound, touching the dry earth,
moving my heart to their run.
Crumley was suddenly on the path, smiling wildly, like a boy half-proud,
half-ashamed of a madness unknown to all the world until now, this hour.
He snorted and gestured two fresh beers up at six lilyhorn sound systems
suspended like great dark flowers in the trees. From these, the
antelopes, gazelles, and zebras circled our lives and protected us from
the nameless beasts out beyond the bungalow fences. The elephant blew
his nose once more and knocked my soul flat.
"African recordings," said Crumley, unnecessarily.
"Swell," I said. "Hey, what's that?"
Ten thousand African flamingos airlifted from a bright freshwater lagoon
back five thousand days ago when I was a high school kid and Martin and
Osa Johnson were flying in from the wildebeest African trails to walk
among us plain folks in California and tell great tales.
And then I remembered.
The day I was supposed to run full speed to hear Martin Johnson speak,
he had been killed in a plane crash just outside L.A.
But right now, in Elmo Crumley's jungle compound Eden retreat, there
were Martin Johnson's birds.
My heart went with them.
I looked at the sky and said, "What are you going to do, Crumley?"
"Nothing," he said. "The old canary lady is going to live forever. You
can bet on it."
"I'm broke," I said.
When the drowned people showed up later that day, it really spoiled the
picnics all up and down the beach. People were indignant, packed their
hampers, went home. Dogs that ran eagerly down to look at the strangers
lying on the shore were called back by angry women or irritable men.
Children were herded away and sent off with a reprimand, not to
associate with such peculiar strangers ever again.
Drowning, after all, was a forbidden subject. Like sex, it was never
discussed. It followed then that when a drowned person dared touch
shore, he or she was persona non grata. Children might dash down to hold
dark ceremonies in their minds, but the ladies who remained after the
families had cringed off and gone away raised their parasols and turned
their backs, as if someone with unruly breath had called from the surf.
Nothing in Emily Post could help the situation. Very simply the lost
surfers had come without invite, permission, or warning and like
unwanted relatives had to be hustled off to mysterious ice-houses
inland, at a double dogtrot.
But no sooner was one surf-stranger gone than you heard the sandpiping
children's voices crying, "Look, Mommy, oh, look!"
"Git away! Get!"
And you heard the rush of feet running away from the still-warm
landmines on the shore.
Walking back from Crumley's I heard about the unwelcome visitors, the
drowned ones,
I had hated to leave the sun which seemed to shine forever in Crumley's
orchard.
Reaching the sea was like touching another country. The fog came as if
glad for all the bad shoreline news. The drownings had had nothing to do
with police, night traumas, or dark surprises in canals that sucked
their teeth all night. It was simply riptides.
The shore was empty now. But I had an even emptier feeling when I lifted
my gaze to the old Venice pier.
"Bad rice!" I heard someone whisper. Me.
An old Chinese imprecation, shouted at the edges of crops to guarantee a
good harvest against the devastation of the envious gods.
"Bad rice…"
For someone had at last stepped on the big snake.
Someone had stomped it down.
The rollercoaster was gone forever from the far end of the pier.
What was left of it now lay in the late day, like a great strewn
jackstraws game. But only a big steam shovel was playing that game now,
snorting, bending down to snap up the bones and find them good.
"When does the dying stop?" I had heard Cal say a few hours back.
With the empty pier-end ahead, its skeleton being flensed, and a tidal
wave of fog storming toward shore, I felt a fusillade of cold darts in
my back. I was being followed. I spun.
But it wasn't me being pursued by nothing.
Across the street, I saw A. L. Shrank. He ran along, hands deep in
overcoat pockets, head sunk in his dark collar, glancing back, like a
rat before hounds.
God, I thought, now I know who he reminds me of.
Poe!
The famous photographs, the somber portraits of Edgar Allan with his
vast milk-glass lampglow brow and brooding night-fire eyes and the
doomed and lost mouth buried under the dark moustache, his tie askew on
his untidy collar, over his always convulsing and swallowing throat.
Edgar Allan Poe.
Poe ran. Shrank ran, glancing back at a swift fog with no shape.
Christ, I thought, it's after all of us.
By the time I reached the Venice Cinema, the fog, impatient, had already
gone in.
Mr. Shapeshade's old Venice Cinema was special because it was the last
of a series of night riverboats, afloat on the edge of the tide,
anywhere in the world.
The front part of the cinema was on the concrete walk that leads from
Venice down toward Ocean Park and Santa Monica.
The back half of it stuck out on the pier so that its rear end was over
the water.
I stood in front of the movie house at this late hour of the day,
glanced up at the marquee, and gasped.
There were no films listed. Only one huge two-foot-high word.
GOODBYE.
It was like being stabbed in the stomach.
I stepped forward to the ticket booth.
Shapeshade was there smiling at me with manic good will as he waved.
"Goodbye?" I said, mournfully.
"Sure!" Shapeshade laughed. "Ta-ta, toodle-oo. Farewell. And it's free!
Go in! Any friend of Douglas Fairbanks, Thomas Meighan, Milton Sills,
and Charles Ray is a friend of mine."
I melted at the names from my childhood; people I had seen flickering on
ancient screens when I was two, three, four on my mother's knee in a
cool movie house in northern Illinois before the bad rice came and we
steamed west in an old beat-up Kissel, ahead of the Okies, my dad
looking for a twelve-buck-a-week job.
"I can't go in, Mr. Shapeshade."
"Look at the boy who won't!" Shapeshade threw his hands to the heavens
and rolled his eyeballs like Stromboli, irritated by Pinocchio and
itching to cut his strings. "Why not?"
"When I come out of movies in daylight, I get depressed. Nothing's
right."
"So where's the sun?" cried Shapeshade. "By the time you exit, it's
night!"
"Anyway, I wanted to ask you about three nights ago," I said. "Did you
by any chance see that old ticket office man, Bill, Willy, William
Smith, waiting out front here that night?"
"I yelled at him, yes. What happened to your head? I said. Did a grizzly
bear claw your wig off? I said. His hair was a laugh riot. So who took a
lawnmower to him? Demon Cal?"
"Yeah. Did you see someone meet William Smith and take him away?"
"I got busy. All of a sudden, six people came for tickets, six! When I
looked around, Mr. Smith, Willie, was gone. Why?"
My shoulders sank. My frustration must have shown in my face. Shapeshade
quickened with sympathy and enunciated his Sen-Sen breath through the
ticket booth's glass speak-hole.
"Guess who's inside on the big 1922 moth-hole-sieved silver screen?
Fairbanks! The Black Pirate. Gish! Broken Blossoms. Lon Chancy! Phantom
of the Opera. Who was greater?"
"Lord, Mr. Shapeshade, those are all silent."
"So? Where were you in 1928 you didn't notice? The more talkie the less
movie! Statues, they played. Mouths moved and your feet went to sleep.
So, these last nights, silence, hmm?
Quiet, yes? Silence and gestures forty feet across and scowls and leers
twenty feet high. Quiet phantoms. Mum's-the-word pirates. Gargoyles and
hunchbacks who talked in winds and rains and let the organ speak for
them, eh? Plenty of seats. Go."
He thumped his brass ticket key.
The machine stuck a nice fresh orange ticket out at me.
"Yes." I took the ticket and looked into the face of this old man who
hadn't been out in sun for forty years, who loved films madly, and would
rather read Silver Screen than the Encyclopaedia Britannica. His eyes
were gently mad with his love of old faces on yesterday's posters.
"Is Shapeshade your real name?" I said, at last.
"It means a house like this where shades are shaped and all shapes are
shadows. You got a better name?"
"No, sir, Mr. Shapeshade." And I hadn't.
"What…" I started to ask.
But Shapeshade guessed with relish. "What happens to me tomorrow when
they knock my movie house down! Say, not to worry! I got protection! So
have my films, all three hundred of them up in the booth now, but soon,
down the beach one mile south, the basement there where I go run films
and laugh."
"Constance Rattigan!" I cried. "I've often seen that funny light
flickering in her basement window or up in her front parlor, late
nights. Was that you?"
"Who else?" beamed Shapeshade. "For years now, when I finish here I just
foxtrot along the shore with twenty pounds of film under each arm.
Sleeps all day, Constance does, watches films and eats popcorn with me
all night, that's Rattigan, and we sit and hold hands like two crazy
kids, and rob the film vaults, and cry sometimes so much we can't see to
rewind the spools."
I looked out at the beach beyond the cinema front and could not help but
see Mr. Shapeshade jogging the surf in the dark, toting popcorn and Mary
Pickford, Holloway Suckers and Tom Mix, on his way to that ancient queen
to be her subservient lover of multifold darks and lights that
sprocketed the dream screen with just as many sunrises as sunsets.
And then Shapeshade watching just before dawn as Constance Rattigan, so
the rumors said, ran naked to leap into the cold salt waves and rise
with healthfood seaweeds in her straight white teeth and regally
braiding her hair, while Shape-shade limped home in the rising sun,
drunk on remembrance, mumming and humming the drones of the mighty
Wurlitzer in his marrow, soul, heart, and happy mouth.
"Listen." He leaned forward like Ernest Thesiger in the dim halls of The
Old Dark House or as Dr. Praetorius looming in Bride of Frankenstein.
"Inside, go up behind the screen, have you ever? No. Climb up on stage
in the night behind the screen. What an experience! Like being in
Caligari's lopsided chambers. You'll thank me forever."
I shook his hand and stared.
"My gosh," I cried, "that hand of yours. Isn't that the paw that slid
out of the dark behind the library bookshelves in The Cat and the Canary
to grab and vanish the lawyer before he could read the will?"
Shapeshade stared down at his hand cradled in mine, and beamed.
"Aren't you a nice boy?" he said.
"I try, Mr. Shapeshade," I said. "I try."
Inside, I blundered down the aisle until I felt my way to the brass rail
and half-flopped up the proscenium steps onto an always-midnight stage
to duck behind the screen and look at the great ghosts.
And ghosts they were, the tall, pale, and black-eyed shadow phantoms of
time, twisted like white taffy from the slanted angle at which I saw
them, gesturing and mouthing in the silence, waiting for the organ
music, which had not yet begun.
And there in swift clip after chop after clip was Fairbanks with an
askew face and Gish wax-melting down the screen, and Fattie Arbuckle
thinned from this sideview and knocking his starved head against the top
of the frame and slithering off into the dark while I stood feeling the
tide move under the floor, the pier, the theater which foundered in
swarming waters, now tilting and creaking and shivering, with the smell
of salt coming up through the boards and more pictures, white as cream,
dark as ink, blinking across the screen as the theater lifted like a
bellows and sank down exhaling like a bellows, and me sunk with it.
Just then, the organ exploded.
It was like that moment a few hours ago when the great unseen steamliner
had plunged to strike the pier.
The theater careened, heaved up, and fell as if on a roller-coastal
tide.
The organ shouted and brayed and ricocheted a Bach prelude so that dust
flew off the ancient chandeliers, the curtains stirred restlessly like
funeral gowns, and myself behind the screen reaching out to hold on to
something but terrified that something might touch back.
Above me, the pale images ached and gibbered their mouths and the
Phantom strode down the stairs at the Paris Opera in his white-skull
mask and plumed hat, even as Shape-shade, a moment before, must have
strode down the dark aisle to rattle and chime the brass rings holding
the short curtain around the organ, and seat himself like Destiny and
Doom to spider the keys and shut his eyes and gape his mouth to let Bach
out.
Afraid to look behind, I stared out past the thirty-foot phantoms at an
audience unseen, riveted in place, shuddering with music, drawn by
terrible images, lifted and then jolted down by the night tide under the
theater deck.
Among all those pale faces, fixing their eyes upon the flickering past,
was he there? The mourner on the train, the pacer along the canal rim,
the leaver of three-in-the-morning rains, was that his face over here,
or that one over there? Colorless moons trembling in the dark, a cluster
of souls in front, another back halfway, fifty, sixty people, dreadful
suspects on yet another fog excursion rushing to collide with nightmare
and sink with no sound, only the great suck of the sea going back for
reinforcements.
Among all these night travelers, which was he, I wondered, and what
could I shout to panic him up the aisles, with me in wild pursuit?
The giant skull smiled from the screen, the lovers fled to the Opera
roof, the Phantom pursued to unfurl his cape and overhear their fearful
love-talk and grin; the organ shrieked, the theater bucked and heaved
with heavy waters celebrating sea burials should the planks gape and
drop us down through.
My eyes raced from dimly upturned face to face, and up, up, to the
little window of the projectionist's booth, where a section of brow and
a maniac eye peered down at the delicious dooms painted on the screen in
geysers of light and dark.
Poe's raven eye.
Or rather, Shrank!
Tarot card reader, psychologist, phrenologist, numerologist, and . . .
Film projectionist.
Someone had to run the film while Shapeshade clawed the organ in
paroxysms of delight. Most nights, the old man ran from ticket booth to
projection room to organ, bouncing off each like a manic boy disguised
as rambling man.
But now…?
Who else for a late night menu of hunchbacks, striding skeletons, and
hairy paws snatching moon-pearls from a sleeping woman's neck?
Shrank.
The organ music peaked. The phantom vanished. A new clip, from Jekyll
and Hyde, 1920, jittered across the screen.
I leaped down off the stage and ran up the aisle, among all the fiends
and murderers.
The Poe eye in the projectionist's window was gone.
By the time I reached the projection booth, it was empty. The film
unspooled itself in the firefly machine. Jekyll, on his way to becoming
Hyde, slid down the lightbeams to strike a hairball on the screen.
The music stopped.
Downstairs, on the way out, I found an exhausted but happy Shapeshade
back in the ticket booth, selling seats to the fog.
I thrust my hands in to grab his and squeeze.
"No bad rice for you, huh?"
"What!" cried Shapeshade, complimented but not knowing why.
"You'll live forever," I said.
"What do you know that God doesn't?" asked Shapeshade. "Come back later.
One in the morning, Veidt in Caligari. Two, Chancy in Laugh Clown Laugh.
Three, The Gorilla. Four, The Bat. Who could ask for more?"
"Not me, Mr. Shapeshade."
I moved off into the mist.
"You're not depressed?" he yelled after.
"I don't think so."
"If you got to think about it, you're not!"
Full night had arrived.
I saw that Modesti's Cafe had closed early, or forever, I didn't know
which. I couldn't ask questions there about William Smith and
celebratory haircuts and dinners.
The pier was dark. Only a single light shone in A. L. Shrank's tarot
card shack window. I blinked. Scared, the damn light went out.
“Bad rice?" said Crumley, on the phone. But his voice was bright,
hearing that it was me. "What kind of talk is that?"
"Crumley," I said, swallowing hard, "I got another name to add to our
list."
"What list?"
"Along with the canary lady...”
"That's not our list, it's yours...”
"Shrank," I said.
"What!"
"A. L. Shrank, the Venice pier psychologist...”
"…Tarot card reader, weirdo librarian, amateur numerologist, Fifth
Horseman of the Apocalypse?"
"You know him?"
"Kid, I know everyone up, down, above, in, and under the pier, every
weight lifter kicking sand, every dead bum on the night beach
resurrected by the smell of seventy-nine-cent muscatel comes the dawn.
A. L. Shrank, that measly dwarf? No way."
"Don't hang up! I can see it in his face. He's asking for it. He's next.
I wrote a story last year, in Dime Detective, about two trains in a
station, going opposite ways, stopped at a siding for a minute. One man
looks across at another man, they trade stares, and the one man realizes
he should never have looked across, because the man on the other train
is a murderer. The murderer looks back and smiles. That's all. Smiles.
And my hero realizes that he himself is doomed. He looks away, trying to
save himself. But the other man, the killer, keeps staring. And when my
hero looks up again, the train window across the way is empty. He
realizes that the killer has gone to get off the train. A minute later,
the killer appears on my hero's train, in his car, walks down the aisle,
and sits in a seat right behind my hero. Panic, huh? Panic."
"Great idea, but it don't happen that way," said Crumley.
"More often than you think. A friend of mine drove a Rolls-Royce across
country last year. On the way, he was almost run off the road six times,
through Oklahoma and Kansas and Missouri and Illinois, by men who
resented that expensive car. If they had succeeded, it would have been
murder and no one the wiser."
"That's different. An expensive car is an expensive car. They didn't
care who was in it. Kill. But what you're saying is...”
"There are murderers and murderees in this world. The old man in the
trolley waiting room was a murderee, so is the canary lady. It's in
their eyes: take me, it said, favor me, spoil me away forever.
"Shrank," I finished. "I'd bet my life on it."
"Don't," said Crumley, suddenly quieter. "You're a good kid, but God
you're wet behind the ears."
"Shrank," I said. "Now that the pier's collapsing, he's got to collapse,
too. If someone doesn't kill him, he'll tie Decline of the West and
Anatomy of Melancholy around his neck and jump off what's left of the
far end of the pier. Shrank."
As if agreeing with me, a lion roared, hungry for blood, off in
Crumley's African territory.
"Just when you and I were beginning to get along so well," said Crumley.
And hung up.
All over Venice, window-shades were going up for the first time in
weeks, months, or years.
It was as if the ocean town were coming awake just before going to sleep
forever.
A windowshade right across from my apartment, in a little
white-flake-painted bungalow, had lifted during the day, and . . .
As I entered my apartment that night, I glanced over and was fascinated.
The eyes were staring at me.
Not just one pair, but a dozen, not a dozen but a hundred or more.
The eyes were glass and lay in shining paths or were displayed on small
pedestals.
The eyes were blue and brown and green and hazel and yellow.
I walked across my narrow street and stood looking down and in at the
fabulous aggie-marble display.
"What a game that would make in the schoolyard dirt," I said, just to
me.
The eyes said nothing. They rested on their stands or strewn in little
clusters on a white velvet cloth, fixing their gaze through and beyond
me, at some cold future just over my shoulder and down my spine.
Who had made the glass eyes and who had put them in the window and who
waited inside to sell them and pop them into people's sockets, I could
not say.
Whoever it was was another of Venice's unseen manufacturers and
salesmen. I had, on occasion, far back in the cavern reaches of this
bungalow, seen a piercing blue-white flame and someone's hands working
at teardrops of melting glass. But the old man (everyone is old in
Venice, California) had his face hidden behind a thick metal-and-glass
fire-torch mask. All you could see, far off, was a new stare coming to
life, a blind eye being brought to focus in flame, to be laid out like a
bright bonbon in the window next day.
Whether anyone ever came to buy this special jewelry, that also I did
not know. I had never seen anyone blundering into the place or striding
out with a fresher gaze. The windowshade had only been raised once or
twice a month during the last year.
Looking down, I thought, strange eyes, do you see the lost canaries? and
where did they go?
And added, watch my place, yes? During the night, stay alert. The
weather may change. Rain may come. Shadows may touch my doorbell. Much
note, please, and long remember.
The shiny agate-marble-mib long-years-ago schoolyard companions did not
so much as blink.
At which point, a hand like a magician's slid from the shadows behind
the display and pulled the lid down over the eyes.
It was as if the glass blower resented my staring at his stares.
Or perhaps he feared I might sneeze out one eye and come in for a
refill.
A customer! That might spoil his perfect record. Ten years of blowing
glass and not a single sale.
As a sideline, I wondered, does he sell bathing suits from 1910?
Back in my apartment, I glanced out.
The shade had gone back up again, now that I was not the Inquisition
standing outside.
The eyes were bright and waiting.
What, I wondered, will they see tonight?
“With nothing trembles…" Instantly, I awoke.
"What," I said to the empty ceiling.
Had Lady Macbeth said that?
With nothing trembles.
To be afraid of nothing for no reason.
And having to live with that nothing until dawn.
I listened.
Was that the fog bruising my door? Was that the mist testing my keyhole?
And was that the special miniature rainstorm prowling my doormat,
leaving seaweed?
I was afraid to go look.
I opened my eyes. I looked at the hall which led to my two-by-four
kitchen and my two-by-two Singer's Midgets bathroom.
I had hung an old torn white bathrobe there last night.
But now the robe wasn't a robe. With my glasses off and lying on the
floor by my cot, my vision being what it was, almost legally blind, the
robe had . . . changed.
It was the Beast.
When I was five years old, living east in Illinois, and had to go up
some dark stairs in the middle of the night to go to the bathroom, the
Beast was always at the top of the stairs, unless the small stairwell
light was lit. Sometimes my mother would forget to turn it on. I would
try terribly hard to make it to the top without looking up. But always I
was afraid, and I had to look up. And the Beast was always there, with
the sound of the dark locomotives rushing by far out in night country,
funeral trains taking dear cousins or uncles away. And stood at the
bottom of the stairs and . . .
Screamed.
Now the Beast was hanging here on the edge of my door leading into
darkness, the hall, the kitchen, the bathroom.
Beast, I thought, go away.
Beast, I said to the shape. I know you're not there. You're nothing.
You're my old bathrobe.
The trouble was, I couldn't see it clearly.
If I could just reach my glasses, I thought, get them on, jump up.
Lying there, I was eight and then seven and then five and then four
years old, getting smaller, smaller and smaller as the Beast on the door
got bigger and darker and longer.
I was afraid to so much as blink. Afraid that that motion would make the
Beast float softly down to ...
"Ah!" someone yelled.
Because the phone, across the street, rang.
Shut up! I thought. You'll make the Beast move.
The phone rang. Four in the morning. Four! Christ. Who…?
Peg? Trapped in a Mexican catacomb? Lost?
The phone rang.
Crumley? With an autopsy report I would hate to hear?
The phone rang.
Or a voice of cold rain and running night and raw alcohol raving in the
storm and mourning terrible events, as the great train shrieked on a
curve?
The phone stopped.
With my eyes clenched, my teeth gritted, the covers over my head, turned
away against the sweaty pillow. I thought I heard a drifting whisper. I
froze.
I kept my breath, I stopped my heart.
For, just now, at that very instant . . .
Hadn't I felt something touch and, weigh itself . . .
On the end of my bed?
A. L. Shrank was not the next victim.
Nor did the canary lady suddenly fly around her room once and expire.
Someone else vanished.
And, not long after dawn, the bright glass eyes across the street from
my tired apartment saw the arrival of the evidence.
A truck pulled up outside.
Sleepless and exhausted, I heard it, stirred.
Someone knocked on my coffin door.
I managed to levitate and balloon-drift over to crack the door and peer
gum-eyed into the face of a great beefy ox. The face named me, I
assented to the name, the ox told me to sign here, I signed something
that looked like a D.O.A. slip and watched the delivery man hoof back to
his half-truck and wrestle a familiar, bundled object off the back and
wheel it along the walk.
"My God," I said. "What is it? Who...?”
But the big rolling bundle struck the doorjamb and gave off a musical
chord. I slumped, knowing the answer.
"Where do you want it?" said the ox, glancing around Groucho Marx's
overcrowded stateroom. "This as good as any?"
He heaved the wrapped object to one side against the wall, looked around
with contempt at my Goodwill sofa, my rugless floor, and my typewriter,
and cattle-trotted back out to his truck, leaving the door wide.
Over the way, I saw the ten dozen bright blue, brown, hazel glass eyes
watching, even as I ripped away the covering to stare at ...
The Smile.
"My God!" I cried. "That's the piano that I heard playing...”
The "Maple Leaf Rag."
Wham. The truck door slammed. The truck roared away.
I collapsed on my already collapsed sofa, totally disbelieving that big,
vacant, ivory smile.
Crumley, I said in my mind. I felt the lousy haircut too high in back,
too short on the sides. My fingers were numb.
Yeah, kid? said Crumley.
I changed my mind. I thought, Crumley, it's not going to be Shrank or
the old bird lady who vanishes.
Gosh, said Crumley, who?
Cal, the barber.
Silence. A sigh. Then . . .
Click. Buzz.
Which is why, gazing at this relic from Scott Joplin years, I did not
race forth to telephone my police detective friend.
All the glass eyes across the street examined my haircut and watched me
shut my door.
God, I thought, I can't even play "Chopsticks."
The barber shop was open and empty. The ants, the bees, the termites,
and the relatives had been there before noon.
I stood in the front door looking at the total evisceration. It was as
if someone had shoved a gigantic vacuum cleaner through the front door
and sucked everything out.
The piano, of course, had come to me. I wondered who had gotten, or
would want, the barber chair, the liniments, the ointments, the lotions
that used to color the mirrored wall with their tints and tinctures. I
wondered who got all the hair.
There was a man in the middle of the barber shop, the landlord, I seemed
to recall, a man in his fifties moving a pushbroom over no hair, just
gliding over the empty tiles for no obvious reason. He looked up and saw
me.
"Cal's gone," he said.
"So I see," I said.
"Bastard ran off owing me four months' rent."
"Business was that bad, was it?"
"It wasn't the business so much as the haircuts. Even for two bucks they
were the lousiest, won awards, in the whole state."
I felt the top of my head and the nape of my neck and nodded.
"Bastard ran off owing me five months' rent. I heard from the groceryman
next door Cal was here at seven this morning. Goodwill came at eight for
the barber chair. Salvation Army got all the rest. Who knows who got the
piano. I'd like to find and sell that, get some of my money." The
landlord looked at me.
I said nothing. The piano was the piano. For whatever reasons, Cal had
sent it to me.
"Where you think he's gone?" I said.
"Got relatives in Oklahoma, Kansas, Missouri, I hear. Someone was just
in said he heard Cal say two days ago he was going to drive until the
land gave out and then pitch right into the Atlantic."
"Cal wouldn't do that."
"No, he more likely will sink somewhere in the Cherokee Strip country
and good riddance. Jesus, that was bad haircutting."
I wandered in over the clean white tiles through no-hair territory, not
knowing what I was looking for.
"Who are you?" said the landlord, half-raising his broom into artillery
position.
"The writer," I said. "You know me. The Crazy."
"Hell, I didn't recognize you. Did Cal do that to you?"
He stared at my hairline. I felt blood rush along my scalp. "Only
yesterday," I said.
"He could be shot for that."
I wandered across and around behind a thin wooden partition that hid the
backside of the barber shop, the trash barrels, and the restroom.
I stared down into the trash barrel and saw what I was looking for
there.
The photograph of Cal and Scott Joplin, covered with a month's supply of
hair, which was not much.
I reached down and picked up the photo.
In the next five or six seconds my whole body turned to ice.
Because Scott Joplin was gone.
Cal was still there, forever young, smiling, his thin fingers spidering
the piano keys.
But the man who stood over him, grinning.
It wasn't Joplin.
It was another man, black, younger, more sinful looking.
I peered very close.
There were marks of old dry glue where Scott's head had once been.
Jesus God have mercy on Cal, I thought. None of us ever thought to look
close. And, of course, the picture was always under glass and hung
rather high on the wall, not easy to reach or take down.
Sometime, a long while ago, Cal had found a picture of Scott Joplin,
razor cut around it, and pasted it over this other guy's face, head on
head. He must have forged the signature as well. And all these years we
had looked at it and sighed and clucked and said, "Hey, Cal, great!
Aren't you special? Looky there!"
And all those years Cal had looked at it and known what a fraud it was
and he was and cut hair so you looked as if you'd been blown dry by a
Kansas twister and combed by a maniac wheat harvester run amok.
I turned the photograph over and reached down into the barrel, trying to
find Scott Joplin's decapitated and missing part.
I knew I would not find it.
Someone had taken it.
And whoever had peeled it off the photo had telephoned and sent a
message to Cal. You are known! You are naked! You are revealed! I
remembered Cal's phone ringing. And Cal, afraid, refusing to answer.
And coming into his barber shop, what? Two days, three days ago,
casually checking the photograph, Cal had been kicked in the gut. With
Joplin's head gone, Cal was gone.
All he could do was Goodwill the barber chair, Salvation Army the
tonics, piano me his piano.
I stopped searching. I folded the photograph of Cal without Joplin and
went out to watch the landlord broom the hairless tiles.
"Cal," I said.
The landlord paused his broom.
"Cal didn't," I said. "I mean, Cal wouldn't, I mean, Cal's still alive?"
"Crud," said the landlord. "Alive about four hundred miles east of here
by now, still owing seven months' rent."
Thank God, I thought. I won't have to tell Crumley about this one. Not
now, anyway. Going away isn't murder, or being murdered.
No?
Going east? Isn't Cal a dead man, driving a car?
I went out the door.
"Boy," said the landlord. "You look bad coming and going."
Not as bad as some people, I thought.
Where do I go now? I wondered, now that the smile is there, filling up
my bed-sitting-room and me only able to play an Underwood Standard?
The gas station telephone rang at two-thirty that afternoon. Exhausted
by no sleep the night before, I had gone back to bed.
I lay listening.
The phone wouldn't stop.
It rang for two minutes and then three. The more it rang, the colder I
got. By the time I lunged out of bed and floundered into my bathing
trunks and trudged across the street, I was shuddering like someone in a
snowstorm.
When I lifted the receiver, I could feel Crumley a long way off at the
far end, and without his speaking I could guess his news.
"It's happened, hasn't it?" I said.
"How did you know?" Crumley sounded as if he had been up all night, too.
"What made you go by there?" I asked.
"While I was shaving an hour ago, I had a hunch, Jesus, like the ones
you talk about. I'm still here, waiting for the coroner. You coming by
to say I told you so?"
"No, but I'll be there."
I hung up.
Back in my apartment, Nothing still hung on the hall door leading to the
bathroom. I yanked it off the door, hurled it to the floor, and stepped
on it. It seemed only right, since it had gone off during the night to
visit the canary lady and come back without telling me, just before
dawn.
Christ, I thought, standing numbly on the bathrobe, all the cages are
empty now!
Crumley stood on one side of the Lower Nile, the dry riverbed. I stood
on the other. One police car and the morgue van were waiting downstairs.
"You're not going to like this," said Crumley.
He paused, waiting for me to nod him to pull back the sheet. I said,
"Did you call me in the middle of the night?"
Crumley shook his head.
"How long has she been dead?"
"We figure about eleven hours."
I ran my thoughts back. Four in the morning. When the phone had rung
across the street in the night. When Nothing had called to tell me
something. If I had run to answer, a cold wind would have blown out of
the receiver to tell me this.
I nodded. Crumley pulled back the sheet.
The canaries-for-sale lady was there and not there. Part of her had fled
in the dark. What was left was terrible to see.
Her eyes were fixed on some dreadful Nothing, the thing on the top of my
hall door, the invisible weight at the end of my bed. The mouth that had
once whispered open, saying, come up, come in, welcome, was now gaped in
shock, in protest. It wanted something to go away, get out, not stay!
Holding the sheet in his fingers, Crumley glanced at me.
"I guess I owe you an apology."
"For what?"
It was hard to talk, for she was staring up between us at some terror on
the ceiling.
"For guessing right, that was you. For doubting, that was me."
"It wasn't hard to guess. That's my brother, dead. That's my grandfather
and my aunts dead. And my mother and father. All deaths are the same,
aren't they?"
"Yeah." Crumley let the sheet drift down, a snowfall over the Nile
Valley on an autumn day. "But this is just a simple death, kid. Not a
murder. That look on her face you can find on all kinds of people when
they feel their heart coming out of their chest with an attack."
I wanted to shout arguments. I bit my tongue. Something seen from the
corner of my eye made me turn away and move over to the empty birdcages.
It took a few moments for me to see what I was looking at:
"Jesus," I whispered. "Hirohito. Addis Ababa. They're gone."
I turned to stare at Crumley and point.
"Someone's taken the old newspaper headlines out of the cages. Whoever
came up here not only scared her to death, but took the papers. My God,
he's a souvenir collector. I bet he's got a pocketful of train ticket
punchout confetti and Scott Joplin's peeled-off head, too."
"Scott Joplin's what?"
He didn't want to, but at last Crumley came to look at the bottoms of
the cages.
"Find those newspapers and you'll find him," I said.
"Easy as pie." Crumley sighed.
He led me down past the turned-to-the-wall mirrors that had not seen
anyone come up during the night and did not see him go. In the
downstairs stairwell area was the dusty window with the sign in it. For
no reason I could figure, I reached out and pulled the sign away from
its flaking Scotch-taped frame. Crumley was watching me.
"Can I have this?" I asked.
"It'll hurt you, every time you look at it," said Crumley. "Oh, hell.
Keep it."
I folded it and tucked it in my pocket.
Upstairs, the birdcages sang no songs. The coroner stepped in, full of
mid-afternoon beer and whistling.
It had begun to rain. It rained all across Venice as Crumley's car drove
us away from her house, away from my house, away from phones that rang
at the wrong hours, away from the gray sea and the empty shore and the
remembrance of drowned swimmers. The car windshield was like a great
eye, weeping and drying itself, weeping again, as the wiper shuttled and
stopped, shuttled and stopped and squeaked to shuttle again. I stared
straight ahead.
Inside his jungle bungalow, Crumley looked in my face, guessed at a
brandy instead of a beer, gave me that, and nodded at the telephone in
his bedroom.
"You got any money to call Mexico City?"
I shook my head.
"Now you have," said Crumley. "Call. Talk to your girl. Shut the door
and talk."
I grabbed his hand and almost broke every bone in it, gasping. Then I
called Mexico.
"Peg!"
"Who is this?"
"It's me, me!"
"My God, you sound so strange, so far away."
"I am far away."
"You're alive, thank God."
"Sure."
"I had this terrible feeling last night. I couldn't sleep."
"What time, Peg, what time?"
"Four o'clock, why?"
"Jesus."
"Why?"
"Nothing. I couldn't sleep either. How's Mexico City?"
"Full of death."
"God, I thought it was all here."
"What?"
"Nothing. Lord, it's good to hear your voice."
"Say something."
I said something.
"Say it again!"
"Why are you shouting, Peg?"
"I don't know. Yes, I do. When are you going to ask me to marry you,
damn it!"
"Peg," I said, in dismay.
"Well, when?"
"On thirty dollars a week, forty when I'm lucky, some weeks nothing,
some months not a damn thing?"
"I'll take a vow of poverty."
"Sure."
"I will. I'll be home in ten days and take both vows."
"Ten days, ten years."
"Why do women always have to ask men for their hands?"
"Because we're cowards and more afraid than you."
"I'll protect you."
"Some conversation this." I thought of the door last night and the thing
hanging on the door and the thing on the end of my bed. "You'd better
hurry."
"Do you remember my face?" she said suddenly.
"What?"
"You do remember it, don't you, because, God, just an hour ago this
terrible, horrible thing happened, I couldn't remember yours, or the
color of your eyes, and I realized what a dumb fool I was not to bring
your picture along, and it was all gone. That scares me, to think I
could forget. You'll never forget me, will you?"
I didn't tell her I had forgotten the color of her eyes just the day
before and how that had shaken me for an hour and that it was a kind of
death but me not being able to figure who had died first, Peg or me.
"Does my voice help?"
"Yes."
"Am I there with you? Do you see my eyes?"
"Yes."
"For God's sake, first thing you do when you hang up, mail me a picture.
I don't want to be afraid any more...”
"All I have is a lousy twenty-five-cent photo machine picture I...”
"Send it!"
"I should never have come down here and left you alone up there,
unprotected."
"You make me sound like your kid."
"What else are you?"
"I don't know. Can love protect people, Peg?"
"It must. If it doesn't protect you, I'll never forgive God. Let's keep
talking. As long as we talk, love's there and you're okay."
"I'm okay already. You've made me well. I was sick today, Peg. Nothing
serious. Something I ate. But I'm right now."
"I'm moving in with you when I get home, no matter what you say. If we
get married, fine. You'll just have to get used to my working while you
finish the Great American Epic, and to hell with it, shut up. Someday,
later on, you support me!"
"Are you ordering me around?"
"Sure, because I hate to hang up and I just want this to go on all day
and I know it's costing you a mint. Say some more, the things I want to
hear."
I said some more.
And she was gone, the telephone line humming and me left with a piece of
wire cable two thousand miles long and a billion shadow whispers
lingering there, heading toward me. I cut them off before they could
reach my ear and slide inside my head.
I opened the door and stepped out to find Crumley waiting by the icebox,
reaching in for sustenance.
"You look surprised?" He laughed. "Forget you were in my house, you were
so busy yakking?"
"Forgot," I said.
And took anything he handed me, out of the fridge, my nose running, my
cold making me miserable.
"Grab some Kleenex, kid," said Crumley. "Take the whole box."
"And while you're at it," he added, "give me the rest of your list."
"Our list," I said.
He narrowed his eyes, wiped his balding head with a nervous hand, and
nodded.
"Those who will die next, in order of execution."
He shut his eyes, heavily burdened.
"Our list," he said.
I did not immediately tell him about Cal.
“And while you're at it,” Crumley sipped another beer, “Write down the
name of the murderer."
"It would have to be someone who knows everyone in Venice, California,"
I said.
"That could be me," said Crumley.
"Don't say that."
"Why?"
"Because," I said, "it scares me."
I made the list.
I made two lists.
And then suddenly discovered myself making three.
The first list was short and full of possible murderers, none of which I
believed.
The second was Choose Your Victim, and went on at some length, on who
would vanish in short order.
And in the middle of it I realized it had been some while since I
trapped all the wandering people of Venice. So I did a page on Cal the
barber before he fled out of my mind, and another on Shrank running down
the street, and another on all those people on the rollercoaster with me
plummeting into hell, and yet another on the big night steamboat theater
crossing the Styx to ram the Isle of the Dead and (unthinkable!) sink
Mr. Shapeshade!
I did a final sermon on Miss Birdsong, and a page about the glass eyes,
and took all these pages and put them in my Talking Box. That was the
box I kept by my typewriter where my ideas lay and spoke to me early
mornings to tell me where they wanted to go and what they wanted to do.
I lay half-asleep, listening, and then got up and went to help them,
with my typewriter, to go where they most needed to go to do some
special wild thing; so my stories got written. Sometimes it was a dog
that needed to dig a graveyard. Sometimes it was a time machine that had
to go backward. Sometimes it was a man with green wings who had to fly
at night lest he be seen. Sometimes it was me, missing Peg in my
tombstone bed.
I took one of the lists back to Crumley.
"How come you didn't use my typewriter?" said Crumley.
"Yours isn't used to me yet, and would only get in the way. Mine is way
ahead of me, and I run to catch up. Read that."
Crumley read my list of possible victims.
"Christ," he murmured, "you got half the Venice Chamber of Commerce, the
Lion's Club, the flea circus, and the Pier Carnival Owners of America on
here."
He folded it and put it in his pocket.
"Why don't you throw in some friends from where you once lived in
downtown L.A.?"
An ice-frog jumped in my chest.
I thought of the tenement and the dark halls and nice Mrs. Gutierrez and
lovely Fannie.
The frog jumped again.
"Don't say that," I said.
"Where's the other list, of murderers? You got the Chamber of Commerce
on that, too?"
I shook my head.
"Afraid to show it to me because I'm in the lineup with the rest of
them?" asked Crumley.
I took that list out of my pocket, glanced at it, and tore it up.
"Where's your wastebasket?" I said.
Even as I had been talking, the fog had arrived across the street from
Crumley's. It hesitated, as if searching for me, and then, to verify my
paranoid suspicions, sneaked across and blanketed his garden, dousing
the Christmas lights in his oranges and lemons and drowning the flowers
so they shut their mouths.
"How dare it come here?" I said.
"Everything does," said Crumley.
“Que?  Is this the Crazy?"
"Si, Mrs. Gutierrez!"
"Do I call the office?"
"Si, Mrs. Gutierrez."
"Fannie is calling outside on her porch!"
"I hear her, Mrs. Gutierrez...”
Far away in the sun inland where there was no fog or mist or rain, and
no surf to bring strange visitors in, was the tenement, and Fannie's
soprano calling like the Sirens.
"Tell him," I heard her sing, "I have a new recording of Mozart's The
Magic Flute!"
"She says...”
"Her voice carries, Mrs. Gutierrez. Tell her, thank God, that's a happy
one."
"She wants you to come see, she misses you and hopes you forgive her,
she says."
For what? I tried to remember.
"She says...”
Fannie's voice floated on the warm clear air.
"Tell him to come but don't bring anyone with!"
That knocked the air out of me. The ghosts of old ice creams rose in my
blood. When had I ever done that? I wondered. Who did she think I might
bring along, uninvited?
And then I remembered.
The bathrobe hanging on the door late nights. Leave it there. Canaries
for sale. Don't fetch the empty cages. The lion cage. Don't roll it
through the streets. Lon Chancy. Don't peel him off the silver screen
and hide him in your pocket. Don't.
My God, Fannie, I thought, is the fog rolling inland toward you? Will
the mist reach your tenement? Will the rain touch on your door?
I shouted so loudly over the phone, Fannie could have heard it,
downstairs.
"Tell her, Mrs. Gutierrez, I come alone. Alone. But tell her only maybe
I come. I have no money, not even for train fare. Maybe I come
tomorrow...”
"Fannie say, if you come, she give you money."
"Swell, but meantime, my pockets, empty."
Just then I saw the postman cross the street and stick an envelope in my
mailbox.
"Hold on," I yelled, and ran.
The letter was from New York with a check for thirty dollars in it for a
story I had just sold to Bizarre Tales, about a man who feared the wind
that had followed him around the world from the Himalayas and now shook
his house late at night, hungry for his soul.
I ran back to the telephone and shouted, "If I make it to the bank,
tonight I will come!"
Fannie got the translation and sang three notes from the "Bell Song"
from Lakme before her translator hung up.
I ran for the bank.
Graveyard fog, I thought, don't get on the train ahead of me, headed for
Fannie.
If the pier was a great Titanic on its way to meet an iceberg in the
night, with people busy rearranging the deck chairs, and someone singing
"Nearer My God to Thee" as he rammed the plunger on the TNT detonator .
. .
Then the tenement at the corner of Temple and Figueroa was still afloat
down the middle of the barrio, with curtains, people, and underwear
hanging out of most windows, laundry being churned to death in
back-porch machines, and the smell of tacos and delicatessen corned beef
in the halls.
All to itself it was a small Ellis Island, adrift with people from some
sixteen countries. On Saturday nights there were enchilada festivals on
the top floor and conga lines dancing through the halls, but most of the
week the doors were shut and people turned in early because they all
worked, downtown in the dress lofts or the dime stores or in what was
left of the defense industry in the valley or in Olvera Street selling
junk jewelry.
Nobody was in charge of the tenement. The landlady, Mrs. O'Brien, came
to visit as rarely as possible; fearful of purse snatchers, terrified
for her seventy-two-year-old virtue. If anyone was in charge of the
tenement it was Fannie Florianna, who from her second-floor opera
balcony could singsong orders so sweetly that even the boys in the
poolhall across the street stopped preening like pigeons and roosters
and came, cues in hand, to wave up and cry "Ole!"
There were three Chinese on the first floor along with the usual
Chicanos, and on the second floor one Japanese gentleman and six young
men from Mexico City who owned one white ice cream suit, each got to
wear it one night a week. There were also some Portuguese men, a night
watchman from Haiti, two salesmen from the Philippines, and more
Chicanos. Mrs. Gutierrez, with the only phone in the tenement, was
there, yes, on the third floor.
The second was mostly Fannie and her 380 pounds, along with two old maid
sisters from Spain, a jewelry salesman from Egypt, and two ladies from
Monterey who, it was rumored, sold their favors at no great price, to
any lost and lustful pool player who happened to stumble upstairs,
uncaring, late Friday nights. Every rat to his warren, as Fannie said.
I was glad to stand outside the tenement at dusk, glad to hear all the
live radios playing from all the windows, glad to smell all the cooking
smells and hear the laughter.
Glad to go in and meet all the people.
Some people's lives can be summed so swiftly it's no more than a door
slammed or someone coughing out on a dark street late at night.
You glance from the window; the street's empty. Whoever coughed is gone.
There are some people who live to be thirty-five or forty, but because
no one ever notices, their lives are candle-brief, invisible-small.
In and around the tenement were various such invisible or half-visible
people who lived but did not exactly live in the tenement.
There was Sam and there was Jimmy and there was Pietro Massinello and
there was the very special blind man, Henry, as dark as the halls he
wandered through with his Negro pride.
All or most of them would vanish in a few days, and each in a different
way. Since their vanishing occurred with such regularity and variety, no
one took notice. Even I almost missed the significance of their last
farewells.
Sam.
Sam was a wetback wandered up from Mexico to wash dishes, beg quarters,
buy cheap wine, and lie doggo for days, then up like the night-prowling
dead to wash more dishes, cadge more quarters, and sink into vino, toted
in a brown-bag valise. His Spanish was bad and his English worse because
it was always filtered through muscatel. Nobody knew what he said,
nobody cared. He slept in the basement, out of harm's way.
So much for Sam.
Jimmy you couldn't understand either, not as a result of wine but
because someone had stolen his bite. His teeth, delivered gratis by the
city's health department, had vanished one night when he was careless
enough to dime himself into a Main Street flophouse. The teeth had been
stolen from a water glass by his pillow. When he woke his great white
grin was gone forever. Jimmy, gape-mouthed but convivial on gin, came
back to the tenement, pointing at his pink gums and laughing. And what
with the loss of his dentures and his immigrant Czech accent, he was,
like Sam, unintelligible. He slept in empty tenement bathtubs at three
in the morning, and did odd jobs around the place each day, laughing a
lot at nothing in particular.
So much for Jimmy.
Pietro Massinello was a circus of one, allowed, like the others, to move
his feast of dogs, cats, geese, and parakeets from the roof, where they
lived in summer, to a basement lumber room in December, where they
survived in a medley of barks, cackles, riots, and slumbers through the
years. You could see him running along Los Angeles streets with his herd
of adoring beasts in his wake, the dogs frisking, a bird on each
shoulder, a duck pursuing, as he toted a portable windup phonograph
which he set down at street corners to play Tales from the Vienna Woods
and dance his dogs for whatever people threw him. He was a tiny man with
bells on his hat, black mascara around his wide innocent mad eyes, and
chimes sewn on his cuffs and lapels. He did not speak to people, he
sang.
The sign outside his lean-to basement lumber room read MANGER, and love
filled the place, the love of beautifully treated and petted and spoiled
animals for their incredible master.
So much for Pietro Massinello.
Henry, the blind colored man, was even more special. Special because he
not only spoke clean and clear, but walked without canes through our
lives and survived when the others had gone, without trumpets, off in
the night.
He was waiting for me when I came in the downstairs entrance to the
tenement.
He was waiting for me in the dark, hid back against the wall, his face
so black it was unseen.
It was his eyes, blind but white rimmed, which startled me.
I jumped and gasped.
"Henry. Is that you?"
"Scare you, did I?" Henry smiled, then remembered why he was there. "I
been waiting on you," he said, lowering his voice, looking around as if
he could actually see the shadows.
"Something wrong, Henry?"
"Yes. No. I don't know. Things is changing. The old place ain't the
same. People is nervous. Even me."
I saw his right hand fumble down in the dark to touch and twitch a
peppermint-striped cane. I had never seen him carry a cane before. My
eye ran down to the tip, which was rounded with what looked to be a good
weight of lead. It was not a blind man's guide. It was a weapon.
"Henry," I whispered.
And we stood for a moment while I looked him over and saw what had
always been there.
Blind Henry.
He had everything memorized. In his pride he had counted and could
recall every pace in this block and the next and the next, and how many
steps across at this intersection or that. And he could name the streets
he strode past, with sovereign certainty, by the butcher or shoeshine or
drugstore or poolhall smokes and smells. And even when the shops were
shut, he would "see" the kosher pickle scents or the boxed tobaccos, or
the locked-away African ivory aromas of the billiard balls in their
nests, or the aphrodisiac whiff from the gas station when some tank
flooded, and Henry walking, staring straight ahead, no dark glasses, no
cane, his mouth counting the beats, to turn in at Al's Beer and walk
steadily and unswervingly through the crowded tables toward an empty
piano stool, there to sit and reach up for the beer that was
automatically popped in place by Al before his arrival, to play exactly
three tunes, including the "Maple Leaf" sadly better than Cal the
barber, drink the one beer, and stride out into a night he owned with
his paces and counts, heading home, calling out to unseen voices, naming
names, proud of his shuttered genius, only his nose steering the way and
his legs firm and muscled from ten miles of strides per day.
If you tried to help him across the street, which I made the mistake of
doing once, he yanked his elbow away and stared at you so angrily that
your face burned.
"Don't touch," he whispered. "Don't confuse. You put me off now. Where
was I?" He threw some abacus beads in his dark head. He counted cornrows
on his skull. "Yeah. Now. Thirty-five across, thirty-seven over." And on
he went alone, leaving you on the curb, his own parade, thirty-five
steps across Temple this way, and thirty-seven the other, across
Figueroa. An invisible cane tapped cadence for him. He marched, by God,
he truly marched.
And it was Henry with No Last Name, Henry the Blind who heard the wind
and knew the cracks in the sidewalk and snuffed the dust of the night
tenement, who gave the first warnings of things waiting on the stairs or
too much midnight leaning heavy on the roof, or a wrong perspiration in
the halls.
And here he was now, flattened back against the cracked plaster of the
tenement entryway, with full night outside and in the halls. His eyes
wobbled and shut, his nostrils flared, he seemed to bend a bit at the
knees as if someone had struck him on the head. His cane twitched in his
dark fingers. He listened, listened so hard that I turned to stare down
the long cavernous hall to the far end of the tenement where the back
door stood wide and more night waited.
"What's wrong, Henry?" I said again.
"Promise you won't tell Florianna? Fannie takes on fits, you tell her
too much wrong stuff. Promise?"
"I won't give her fits, Henry."
"Where you been last few days?"
"I had my own troubles, Henry, and I was broke. I could have hitchhiked
in, but, well."
"Lots goes on in just forty-eight hours. Pietro, him and his dogs and
birds and geese, you know his cats?"
"What about Pietro?"
"Someone turned him in, called the police. Nuisance, they said. Police
come, take all his pets away, take him away. He was able to give some of
them to folks. I got his cat up in my room. Mrs. Gutierrez got a new
dog. When they led him out, Pietro, he was crying. I never heard a man
cry so hard before. It was terrible."
"Who turned him in, Henry?" I was upset myself. I saw the dogs adoring
Pietro, I saw the cats and the geese that lovingly followed and the
canaries on his bell-chiming hat and him dancing on street corners
through half of my life.
"Who turned him in?"
"Trouble is, no one knows. Cops just come and said, 'Here!' and all the
pets gone forever and Pietro in jail, a nuisance, or maybe he kicked up
a fuss out front there, hit somebody, striking a cop. Nobody knows. But
somebody did. That ain't all...”
"What else?" I said, leaning against the wall.
"Sam."
"What about him?"
"He's in the hospital. Booze. Someone gave him two quarts of the hard
stuff; damn fool drank it all. What they call it? Acute alcoholism? If
he lives tomorrow, it's God's will. No one knows who gave him the booze.
Then there's Jimmy, that's the worst!"
"God," I whispered. "Let me sit down." I sat on the edge of the steps
leading up to the second floor. 'No News or What Killed the Dog."
"Huh?"
"An old seventy-eight rpm record when I was a kid. "No News or What
Killed the Dog." Dog ate burned horseflakes from the burned-down barn.
How did the barn burn down? Sparks from the house blew over and burned
down the barn. Sparks from the house? From inside the house, the candles
around the coffin. Candles around the coffin? Someone's uncle died. On
and on. It all ends with the dog in the barn eating the burned
horseflakes and dying. Or, "No News or What Killed the Dog." Your
stories are getting to me, Henry. Sorry."
"Sorry is right. Jimmy, now. You know how he sleeps from floor to floor
nights, and once a week he just up and strips down and takes a bath in
the third-floor tub? Or the first-floor washroom? Sure! Well last night
he got in the full tub, drunk, turned over, and drowned."
"Drowned!"
"Drowned. Ain't that silly. Ain't that a terrible thing to put on your
obit-tombstone, save he won't have a tombstone. Potter's field. Found in
a bathtub of dirty water. Turned over, so drunk he slept himself into
the grave. And him with new false teeth just this week. And the teeth
gone, how you figure that, when they found him in the tub! Drowned."
"Oh my Christ," I said, stifling a laugh and a sob in one.
"Yes, name Christ, God help us all." Henry's voice trembled. "Now, you
see what I don't want you to tell Fannie? We'll let her know, one at a
time, spread it out over weeks. Pietro Massinello in jail, his dogs lost
forever, his cats driven away, his geese cooked. Sam in the hospital.
Jimmy drowned.
And me? Looky this handkerchief, all wet from my eyes, balled in my
fist. I don't feel so good."
"Nobody's feeling very good, right now."
"Now." Henry put his hand out, unerringly toward my voice and took hold
of my shoulder gently.
"Go on up, and be cheerful. With Fannie."
I tapped on Fannie's door. "Thank God," I heard her cry.
A steamboat came upriver, flung wide the door, and churned back
downstream over the linoleum.
When Fannie had crashed into her chair she looked into my face and
asked, "What's wrong?"
"Wrong? Oh." I turned to blink at the doorknob in my hand. "Do you leave
your door unlocked all the time?"
"Why not? Who would want to come in and storm the Bastille?" But she did
not laugh. She was watchful. Like Henry, she had a powerful nose. And I
was perspiring.
I shut the door and sank into a chair.
"Who died?" said Fannie.
"What do you mean, who died?" I stammered.
"You look like you just came back from a Chinese funeral and were hungry
all over again." She tried to smile and blinky-blink her eyes.
"Oh." I thought quickly. "Henry just scared me in the hall, is all. You
know Henry. You come along a hall and can't see him for the night."
"You're a terrible liar," said Fannie. "Where have you been? I am
exhausted, waiting for you to come visit. Are you ever tired, just worn
out, with waiting? I've waited, dear young man, fearful for you. Have
you been sad?"
"Very sad, Fannie."
"There. I knew it. It was that dreadful old man in the lion cage, wasn't
it? How dare he make you sad?"
"He couldn't help it, Fannie." I sighed. "I imagine he would much rather
have been down at the Pacific Electric ticket office counting the
punch-confetti on his vest."
"Well, Fannie will cheer you up. Would you put the needle on the record
there, my dear? Yes, that's it. Mozart to dance and sing to. We must
invite Pietro Massinello up, mustn't we, some day soon. The Magic Flute
is just his cup of tea, and let him bring his pets."
"Yes, Fannie," I said.
I put the needle on a record which hissed with promise.
"Poor boy," said Fannie. "You do look sad."
There was a faint scratching on the door.
"That's Henry," said Fannie. "He never knocks."
I went to the door but before I could open it, Henry's voice behind it
said, "Only me."
I opened the door and Henry sniffed. "Spearmint gum. That's how I know
you. You ever chew anything else?"
"Not even tobacco."
"Your cab's here," said Henry.
"My what?"
"Since when can you afford a taxi?" asked Fannie, her cheeks pink, her
eyes bright. We had had a glorious two hours with Mozart and the very
air was luminous around the big lady. "So?"
"Yeah, since when can I afford...” I said, but stopped, for Henry,
outside the door, was shaking his head once: no. His finger went to his
lips with caution.
"It's your friend," he said. "Taxi driver knows you, from Venice. Okay?"
"Okay," I said, frowning. "If you say so."
"Oh, and here. This is for Fannie. Pietro said give it over. He's so
crammed full downstairs, no room for this."
He handed over a plump purring calico cat.
I took and carried the sweet burden back to Fannie, who began to purr
herself when she held the beast.
"Oh, my dear!" she cried, happy with Mozart and calico. "What a dream
cat, what a dream!"
Henry nodded to her, nodded to me, and went away down the hall.
I went to give Fannie a big hug.
"Listen, oh listen to his motor," she cried, holding the pillow cat up
for a kiss.
"Lock your door, Fannie," I said.
"What?" she said. "What?"
Coming back downstairs, I found Henry still waiting in the dark,
half-hidden against the wall.
"Henry, for God's sake, what're you doing?"
"Listening," he said.
"For what?"
"This house, this place. Shh. Careful. Now."
His cane came up and pointed like an antenna along the hall.
"There. You hear?"
Far away a wind stirred. Far away a breeze wandered the dark. The beams
settled. Someone breathed. A door creaked.
"I don't hear anything."
"That's 'cause you trying. Don't try. Just be. Just listen. Now."
I listened and my spine chilled.
"Someone in this house," whispered Henry. "Don't belong here. I got this
sense. I'm no fool. Someone up there, wandering around, up to no good."
"Can't be, Henry."
"Is," he whispered. "A blind man tells you. Stranger underfoot. Henry
has the word. You don't hear me, you fall downstairs or...”
Drown in a bathtub, I thought. But what I said was, "You going to stay
here all night?"
"Someone's got to stand guard."
A blind man? I thought.
He read my mind. He nodded. "Old Henry, sure. Now run along. It's a big
fancy-smelling Duesenberg out front. No taxi. I lied. Who would be
picking you up this late, know anyone with a fancy car?"
"No one."
"Get on out. I'll mind Fannie for us. But who'll mind Jimmy now, not
even Jim. Not even Sam...”
I started out from one night into another.
"Oh, one last thing."
I paused. Henry said:
"What was the bad news you brought tonight and didn't tell? Not to me.
Not to Fannie."
I gasped.
"How did you know?"
I thought of the old woman sinking in the riverbed, silent, in her
sheets, out of sight. I thought of Cal, the piano lid slammed on his
maple leaf hands.
"Even though," explained Henry with good reason, "you chew spearmint
gum, your breath was sour tonight, young sir. Which means you're not
digesting your food proper. Which means a bad day for writers come
inland with no roots."
"It was a bad day for everyone, Henry."
"I'm still huffing and puffing." Henry stood tall and shook his cane at
the darkening halls where the lightbulbs were burning out and the souls
were guttering low. "Watchdog Henry. You, now, git!"
I went out the door toward something that not only smelled but looked
like a 1928 Duesenberg.
It was Constance Rattigan's limousine. It was as long and bright and
beautiful as a Fifth Avenue shop window somehow arrived on the wrong
side of L.A.
The back door of the limo was open. The chauffeur was in the front seat,
hat crammed down over his eyes, staring straight ahead. He didn't look
at me. I tried to get his attention, but the limousine was waiting, its
motor humming, and I was wasting time.
I had never been in such a vehicle in my life.
It might be my one and only chance.
I leaped in.
No sooner had I hit the back seat than the limousine swerved in one
boa-constrictor glide away from the curb. The back door slammed shut on
me and we were up to sixty by the time we reached the end of the block.
Tearing up Temple Hill we made something like seventy-five. We managed
to make all of the green lights to Vermont where we wheeled over to
Wilshire and took it out as far as Westwood for no special reason, maybe
because it was scenic.
I sat in the back seat like Robert Armstrong on King Kong's lap, crowing
and babbling to myself, knowing where I was going but wondering why I
deserved all this.
Then I remembered the nights when I had come up to call on Fannie and
met this very same smell of Chanel and leather and Paris nights in the
air outside her door. Constance Rattigan had been there only a few
minutes before. We had missed colliding by one or two hairs of mink and
an exhalation of Grand Marnier.
As we prepared to turn at Westwood we passed a cemetery which was so
placed that if you weren't careful, you drove into a parking lot. Or was
it that some days, looking for a parking lot, you mistakenly motored
between tombstones? A confusion.
Before I could give it great mind, the cemetery and the parking lot were
left behind and we were halfway to the sea.
At Venice and Windward we wheeled south along the shore. We passed like
a slight rainfall, that quiet and swift, not far from my small
apartment. I saw my typewriter window lit with a faint light. I wonder
if I am in there, dreaming this? I thought. And we left behind my
deserted office telephone booth with Peg two thousand miles away at the
end of the silent line. Peg, I thought, if you could see me now!
We swerved in behind the big, bone-white Moorish fort at exactly
midnight and the limousine stopped as easily as a wave sinks in sand and
the limo door banged and the chauffeur, still quiet after the long,
silent glide, streaked into the backside of the fort and did not appear
again.
I waited a full minute for something to happen. When it did not, I slid
out of the back of the limousine, like a shoplifter, guilty for no
reason and wondering whether to escape.
I saw a dark figure upstairs in the house. Lights went on as the
chauffeur moved about the Moorish fort on the Venice sands.
I stayed quietly, anyway. I looked at my watch. As the minute hand
counted off the last second of the last minute, the front portico lights
went on.
I walked up to the open front door and stepped into an empty house. At a
distance down a hall I saw a small figure darting about the kitchen
making drinks. A small girl in a maid's outfit. She waved at me and ran.
I walked into a living room filled with a menagerie of pillows of every
size from Pomeranian to Great Dane. I sat on the biggest one and sank
down even as my soul kept sinking in me.
The maid ran in, put down two drinks on a tray, and ran out before I
could see her (there was only candlelight in this room). Over her
shoulder she threw away "Drink!" in what was or was not a French accent.
It was a cool white wine and a good one and I needed it. My cold was
worse. I was sneezing and honking and sneezing all the time.
In the year 2078 they excavated an old tomb or what they thought to be a
tomb on the shoreline of California where, it was rumored, queens and
kings once ruled, then went away with the tides along the flats. Some
were buried with their chariots, it was said. Some with relics of their
arrogance and magnificence. Some left behind only images of themselves
in strange canisters which, held to the light and spun on a shuttle,
talked in tongues and tossed black-and-white shadow-shows on empty
tapestry screens.
One of the tombs found and opened was the tomb of a queen and in that
vault was not a speck of dust, nor furniture, just pillows in mid-floor
and all around, row on row, rising to the ceiling, and stack on stack,
reaching to touch that ceiling, canisters labeled with the lives that
the queen had lived and none of these lives were true but they seemed
true. They were tinned and prisoned dreams. They were containers from
which djinns screamed forth or into which princesses fled to hide for
eternity from the reality that killed.
And the address of the tomb was 27 Speedway, Ocean Front, Venice,
California, in a lost year under sand and water. And the name of the
queen with her film in cans from floor to roof was Rattigan.
And I was there now, waiting and thinking:
I hope she's not like the canary lady. I hope she's not a mummy with
dust in her eyes.
I stopped hoping.
The second Egyptian queen had arrived. And not with a grand entrance at
all, and she wasn't wearing a silver lame evening gown, or even a smart
dress and scarf or tailored slacks.
I felt her in the door across the room before she spoke, and what was
she? A woman about five feet tall, in a black bathing suit, incredibly
suntanned all over her body, and with a face dark as nutmeg and
cinnamon. Her hair was cropped and a kind of blonde gray brown and
tousled as if, what the hell, she had given it a try with a comb and let
it go. The body was neat and firm and quick, and the tendons of her legs
had not been cut. She ran quickly, barefoot, across the floor and stood
looking down at me with flashing eyes.
"You a good swimmer?"
"Not bad."
"How many laps of my pool could you do?" She nodded to the great emerald
lake outside the French doors.
"Twenty."
"I can go forty-five. Any man I know has got to do forty, before he goes
to bed with me."
"I just flunked the test," I said.
"Constance Rattigan." She grabbed my hand and pumped it.
"I know," I said.
She stood back and eyed me up and down.
"So you're the one who chews spearmint and likes Tosca, " she said.
"You been talking to both Henry the blind man and Florianna?"
"Right! Wait here. If I don't have my night dip, I'll go to sleep on
you."
Before I could speak, she plunged out the French doors, skirted the
pool, and headed for the ocean. She vanished into the first wave and
swam out of sight.
I had a feeling she wouldn't want wine when she came back. I wandered
out to the kitchen, which was Dutch, cream white, sky blue, and found a
percolator in full perk, and the smell of coffee brewing for the start
of a new day. I checked my cheap watch: almost one in the morning. I
poured coffee for two and took it out to wait for her on the veranda
overlooking the incredibly greeny-blue swimming pool.
"Yes!" was her answer as she ran to shake herself like a dog on the
tiles.
She grabbed the coffee and should have burned her mouth drinking it.
Between gasps she said, "This starts my day."
"What time do you go to bed?"
"Sunrise, sometimes, like the vampires. Noon's not for me."
"How do you get such a tan?"
"Sunlamp in the basement. Why are you staring?"
"Because," I said. "You're so different from the way I thought you would
be. I imagined someone like Norma Desmond in that movie that just came
out. You see it?"
"Hell, I lived it. Half of the film's me, the rest bilge. That dimwit
Norma wants a new career. All I want most days is to hole up and not
come out. I've had it with his-hand-on-my-knee producers and
mattress-spring directors, timid writers, and cowardly scripts. No
offense. You a writer?"
"I damn well am."
"You got spunk, kid. Stay away from films. They'll screw you. Where was
I? Oh, yeah, I gave most of my fancy gowns to Hollywood Volunteer Sales
years ago. I go to maybe one premiere a year, disguised as someone else.
Once every eight weeks, if it's some old chum, I have lunch at Sardi's
or the Derby, then hole in again. Fannie I see about once a month,
usually around this time. She's a night-owl like yours truly."
She finished her coffee and toweled herself off with a huge soft yellow
towel that went well with her dark tan. She draped it over her shoulders
and gave me another stare. I had time to study this woman who was and
wasn't Constance Rattigan, the great empress from my childhood. On
screen, twenty feet of gliding, villainous, man-trapping woman, dark
haired, ravishing in her slenderness. Here, a sunblasted desert mouse,
quick, nimble, ageless, all cinnamon and nutmeg and honey as we stood in
the night wind out in front of her mosque by her Mediterranean pool. I
looked at that house and thought, no radios, no television, no
newspapers. She was quick with her telepathy.
"Right! Only the projector and the films in the parlor. Time only works
well in one direction. Back. I control the past. I'll be damned if I
know what to do with the present, and to hell with the future. I'm not
going to be there, don't want to go there, and would hate you if you
made me. It's a perfect life."
I looked at all the lit windows of her house and all the rooms behind
the windows and then over at the abandoned limousine to one side of the
mosque.
This made her nervous enough that suddenly she was gone and came running
back with the white wine. She poured it, and muttered, "What the hell.
Drink this. I'll…"
Quite suddenly, as she handed me my glass of wine, I began to laugh.
Laugh, hell, I exploded, I guffawed.
"What's the joke?" she asked, half-taking the wine back. "What's funny?"
"You," I roared, "and the chauffeur. And the maid. The maid, the
chauffeur! And you!"
I pointed at the kitchen, out at the limousine, and back at her.
She knew she was trapped and joined my hilarity, throwing her head back
and giving a delicious yell.
"Jesus Christ, kid, you caught on! But, I thought I was good."
"You are!" I cried. "You're terrific. But when you handed me my drink,
there was something in your wrist motion. I saw the chauffeur's hands on
the steering wheel. I saw the maid's fingers on the serving tray.
Constance, I mean Miss Rattigan...”
"Constance."
"You could have carried the masquerade on for days," I said. "It was
just the smallest thing about your hands and wrists."
She ran out of the room, scampered back, frisky as a lap dog, wearing
the chauffeur's cap, took it off, put on the maid's, cheeks pink, eyes
flashing.
"You want to pinch the chauffeur's bum? Or the maid's?"
"All three of you have terrific bums!"
She refilled my glass, tossed the two caps aside, and said, "It's the
only fun I have. No jobs in years, so I make my own jobs. Drive around
town nights, incognito. Shop evenings, as the maid, ditto. I also run
the projection equipment here in the parlor, and wash the limo. I'm not
a bad courtesan, either, if you like courtesans. I used to make fifty
bucks a night, much moola, in 1923, when a buck was a buck and two bits
bought dinner."
We stopped laughing as we went back inside and sank into the pillows.
"Why all the mystery, why those late nights?" I asked. "Do you ever go
out by day?"
"Only to funerals. You see,” Constance sipped her coffee and lay back
among the pillows, which resembled a kennel of dogs, "I don't much like
people. I started turning cranky young. I guess I have too many
producers' fingerprints on my skin. Anyway, it's not bad, playing house
alone."
"What am I doing here?" I asked.
"You're Fannie's friend, one. And, two, you look like a good kid. Bright
but brainless, I mean innocent. Those big blue eyes full of naivete.
Life hasn't got to you yet? I hope it never does. You look safe to me,
and rather nice, and fun. No phys. ed., though, as they say, no phys.
ed. Which means I'm not going to tackle you into the bedroom, your
virginity is safe."
"I'm no virgin."
"No, but you sure as hell look it."
I blushed furiously.
"You still haven't said. Why am I here?"
Constance Rattigan put her coffee cup down and leaned forward to stare
straight into my face.
"Fannie," she said, "is frightened. Terrified. Spooked. Are you, I
wonder, the one responsible?"
For a little while I had forgotten.
The drive to the beach had blown the darkness out of my head. Being in
this house, standing by the pool, watching this woman dive in the sea
and return, feeling the night wind on my face and the wine in my mouth
had made the last forty-eight hours vanish.
I suddenly realized I hadn't laughed really hard in a good many weeks.
This strange lady's laughter had aged me back to where I should have
been: twenty-seven years old, not ninety the way I had felt getting up
this morning.
"Are you the one responsible for scaring Fannie?" she repeated, and
stopped.
"My God," said Constance Rattigan. "You look as if I had just run over
your pet dog." She grabbed my hand and squeezed. "Did I just kick you in
the kishkas?"
"Kish...?”
"Meatballs. Sorry."
She let go of me. I didn't fall off the cliff. So she said, "It's just,
I'm protective as hell about Fannie. I don't think you know how often
I've been down to that ratty tenement to visit."
"I never saw you there."
"Sure you did, but didn't know. One night a year ago, Cinco de Mayo,
there was a mariachi Mexican Spanish Pachuco conga lineup through the
halls and down through the tenement, gassed on wine and enchiladas. I
headed the conga line dolled up as Rio Rita; nobody knew who I was,
which is the only way to have a good time. You were at the far end of
the line, out of step. We never met. After an hour I had a small chat
with Fannie and vamoosed. Most of the time I arrive there at two in the
morning because Fannie and I go back to Chicago Opera and Art Institute
days, when I was painting and in the opera chorus free, and Fannie sang
a few leads. We knew Caruso and were both skinny as rails, can you
believe that? Fannie? Skinny! But what a voice! God, we were young.
Well, you know the rest. I came a long way with mattress marks on my
back. When the marks got too numerous, I retired to pump money here in
my backyard."
She indicated at least four oil-rig machineries heaving and sighing out
back of the kitchen, wonderful pets for a good life.
"Fannie? She had a lousy love affair which cracked her permanently in
half and blew her up to the size you see now. No man, not me, not life,
could coax her back to beauty. We all just gave up on that and stayed
friends."
"A good friend from the sound of your voice."
"Well, it works both ways. She's a talented, dear, eccentric lost lady.
I Chihuahua-caper to her mammoth gavotte. Lots of good honest laughs at
the four-o'clock-in-the-morning world. We don't kid each other about the
facts of life. We know we'll never come back out into it, she for her
reasons, me for mine. She saw one man too close, I saw too many,
quickly. Retirement takes many forms, as you can see by my disguises, as
you can see by Fannie's Montgolfier balloon shape."
"The way you talk about men, I mean, you're talking to a real live one
here, now," I said.
"You're not one of them, I can tell. You couldn't rape a chorus line, or
use your agent's desk for a bed. You couldn't knock your grandma
downstairs to cadge the insurance. Maybe you're a sap, I don't know, or
a fool, but I've come to prefer saps and fools, guys who don't raise
tarantulas or yank wings off hummingbirds. Silly writers who dream about
going to Mars and never coming back to our stupid daytime world."
She stopped, hearing herself.
"Christ, I talk a lot. Let's get back to Fannie. She doesn't scare
often, been living in that old firetrap for twenty years now, door open
to one and all, and the mayonnaise jar in hand, but now something's
wrong. She jumps when fleas sneeze. So...?”
"Last night all we did was play opera and try to joke. She didn't say."
"Maybe she didn't want to bother the Martian, that's one of the things
she calls you, right? I know by the way her skin shakes. You know horses
at all? Ever see the skin on a horse twitch and jerk when flies land on
it? Invisible flies are landing on Fannie all the time now, and she just
firms her mouth and shakes her flesh. Seems her astrology chart is out
of whack. Her hourglass is malfunctioning, someone has put funeral-urn
ashes in it instead of sand. There are odd whispers in her icebox door.
The ice falls inside the fridge at midnight and sounds like the wrong
kind of laughter. The toilet across the hall gargles all night. The
termites under her chair are going to gnaw through and drop her to hell.
The spiders in the wall are mending her shroud. How's that for a list?
All intuition. No facts. Would get thrown out of court fast. You
understand?"
With nothing trembles.
I thought that, but didn't say it. Instead I said, "You talked to Henry
about this?"
"Henry thinks he's the world's greatest blind man. That don't catsup any
beans for me. He hints. Something's up, but he won't say. Can you help?
Then I can write Fannie or call her through the Gutierrez lady or drop
by tomorrow night and tell her everything's Jake. Can do?"
"Can I have some more wine, please?"
She poured, never taking her eyes off me.
"Okay," she said, "start lying."
"Something is going on, but it's too early to tell."
"By the time you tell, it may be too late." Constance Rattigan jumped up
and paced around the room, turning at last to rifle-shot me with a
stare. "Why won't you talk when you know Fannie's scared gutless?"
"Because I'm tired of being afraid of every shadow, myself. Because I've
been a coward all of my life and I'm sick of me. When I know more, I'll
call you!"
"Jesus." Constance Rattigan snorted a laugh. "You got a loud voice. I'll
move back and give you air. I know you love Fannie. You think she should
come live with me here for a few days, a week, to protect her?"
I looked around at the grand pillows, the bright elephant herd of satin
surfaces with goosedown stuffings, so much in shape and size like
Florianna.
I shook my head. "That's her nest. I've tried to get her out to movies,
to plays, even to operas. Forget it. She hasn't been out on the street
in over ten years. To take her away from the tenement, her big elephant
boneyard, well...”
Constance Rattigan sighed and refilled my glass.
"It wouldn't do any good anyway, would it?"
She was reading my profile. I was reading the dark surf out beyond the
French windows where the tidal sands turned in their sleep, in their own
good time.
"It's always too late, isn't it?" Constance Rattigan went on. "There's
no way to protect Fannie or anyone, not if someone wants to hurt or kill
you."
"Who said anything about killing?" I protested.
"You've got the kind of plain pink pumpkin face that shows everything.
When I told fortunes it wasn't tea leaves, it was obvious eyes and
vulnerable mouths. Fannie's spooked and that spooks me. For the first
time in years, when I swim at night, I figure a big wave will take me so
far out I'll never make it back. Christ, I hate to have my one really
big enjoyment spoiled like this." Then she added, swiftly, "You wouldn't
be the spoiler, would you?"
"What?"
Suddenly she sounded like Crumley, or Fannie telling me not to "bring
anyone with."
I must have looked so startled that she barked a laugh.
"Hell, no. You're just one of those guys who kill people on paper so's
not to kill for real. Sorry."
But I was on my feet now, bursting to say something, tell wild things,
but I wasn't sure what.
"Look," I said. "It's been a crazy month. I'm beginning to notice things
maybe I never noticed before. I never read the obituaries, ever. Now I
do. You ever have weeks or months when too many friends go mad, or go
away, or drop dead?"
"At sixty," Constance Rattigan laughed ironically, "there are whole
years like that. I'm afraid to go down any flight of stairs; friend
broke his neck that way. Afraid of eating; two friends choked. The
ocean? Three friends drowned. Airplanes? Six friends smashed. Cars,
twenty. Sleeping? Hell, yes. Ten friends died in their sleep, said what
the hell and quit. Drinking? Fourteen friends with cirrhosis. List me
some lists. It's only begun for you. I've got a phone book here, look."
She grabbed a small black book off the table near the door and tossed it
to me.
"Book of the dead."
"What?"
I turned the pages, saw the names. There were little red crosses by
fifty percent of the names on each page.
"That personal phone book is thirty-five years old. So half the people
in it have been gone quite a while, and I don't have the guts to finally
erase or yank out the names. It would be like a final death. So I guess
I'm the same sort of custard you are, son."
She took the book of the dead back from me.
I felt a cold wind from the window and heard the beach sand stir as if a
great and invisible beast had put a huge paw down on it.
"I didn't spook Fannie," I said, at last. "I'm not Typhoid Mary. I don't
carry the disease. If it's anywhere tonight, or here, it's on its own.
My stomach's been ruined for days. People are dying or running away, and
there's no connection, and I can't prove anything. I'm around or near
when it happens and I feel guilty I can't see, know, tell, stop it. I
have this god-awful feeling it'll go on more days than I can bear.
Everyone I look at, now, I think, I wonder if he or she is next, and
know that if I wait long enough, of course, everyone goes. They just
seem to be going faster this week. That's all I'm going to say. Now I'll
shut up."
She came and kissed the ends of her fingers and put the fingertips on my
mouth. "I won't rile you again. For a custard, you snap back. What now,
another drink? Want to run films?
Midnight dip in my pool? Mercy sex with your film mother? None of the
above?"
I ducked my head so as to avoid her mocking and fiery gaze.
"Films. I'd like to see Constance Rattigan in Lace Curtains. Last time I
saw it, I was five."
"You sure know how to make old folks feel great. Lace Curtains. Stand
back while I load the projector. My pa worked a Kansas City cinema when
I was a girl, taught me to run the machines. Still can. I don't need
anyone in this house!"
"Yes, you do. Me. To watch the film."
"Damn." She leaped across the pillows and started fiddling with the
projector in the back of the parlor. She yanked a can of film off a
nearby shelf and deftly began to thread it through the machine. "You're
right. I'll watch your face watching me."
While she was busy, humming and adjusting, I turned and stepped out on
the low porch above the sands. My eye traveled along from the south,
roving the shore, past the front of Constance Rattigan's property, and
on north until . . .
Down by the tideline, I saw something.
There was a man standing there, motionless, or something that looked
like a man. And how long he had been there, and whether he had just come
in from the surf, I couldn't say. I couldn't see if he was wet. He
looked naked.
I gasped and glanced quickly inside. Constance Rattigan, whistling
between her teeth, was still dickering away at the projector.
A wave fell like a gunshot. I flicked my gaze back. The man was still
there, hands at his side, head up, legs apart, almost defiant.
Go away! I wanted to yell. What are you doing here? We've done nothing.
Are you sure? was my next thought.
No one deserves to be killed.
No?
A final wave came in behind the shape there on the shore. It broke up
into a series of cracked mirrors that fell and seemed to envelop the
man. He was erased. When the wave pulled back out he was gone, perhaps
running away north along the sands.
Back past the lion cage in the canal, past the canary lady's empty
windows, back past my apartment with its winding-sheet bed.
"Ready?" Constance Rattigan called from inside.
Not really, I thought.
Inside, Constance said, "Come see the old lady made young."
"You're not old," I said.
"No, by God." She ran around turning off lights and fluffing pillows in
the middle of the room. "This health nut's writing a book, out next
year. Underwater gymnastics. Sex at low tide. What bicarbs to take after
you eat the local football coach. What, my God. You're blushing again.
What do you know about girls?"
"Not much."
"How many you had?"
"Not many."
"One," she guessed, and crowed when my head bobbed. "Where is she
tonight?"
"Mexico City."
"When's she coming back?"
"Ten days."
"Miss her? Love her?"
"Yes."
"You want to telephone her and stay on the phone all night so her voice
protects you from this dragon lady?"
"I'm not afraid of you."
"Like hell you're not. You believe in body warmth?"
"Body?"
"Warmth! Sex without sex. Hugs. You can give this old gila monster
canned heat without losing virtue. Just hold and hug, spoon fashion.
Keep your eyes on the ceiling. That's where the action is. Films all
night until the dawn comes up like Francis X. Bushman's erection. Sorry.
Damn. Come on, son. Let's hit the sack!"
She sank into the pillows, pulling me after, at the same time stabbing
some buttons on a control console imbedded in the floor. The last lights
went out. The sixteen-millimeter projector started humming. The ceiling
filled with light and shadow.
"Look. How d'you like that?"
She pointed up with her beautiful nose.
Constance Rattigan, twenty-eight years back in time, on the ceiling, lit
a cigarette.
Down beside me, the real lady blew smoke.
"Wasn't I a bitch!" she said.
I woke at dawn not believing where I was. I woke incredibly happy, as if
something beautiful had happened in the night. Nothing had, of course,
it was just sleeping among so many rich pillows by a woman who smelled
like spice cabinets and fine parquetry. She was a lovely chess game
carved and set in a store window when you were a kid. She was a freshly
built girl's gym, with only the faintest scent of the noon tennis dust
that clings to golden thighs.
I turned in the dawn light.
And she was gone.
I heard a wave come along the shore. A cool wind blew in through the
open French doors. I sat up. Far out in the dusky waters I saw an arm
flash up and down, up and down. Her voice called.
I ran out and dove in and swam halfway to her before I was exhausted. No
athlete this. I turned back and sat waiting for her on the shore. She
came in at last and stood over me, stark naked this time.
"Christ," she said, "you didn't even take off your underwear. What's
happened to modern youth?"
I was staring at her body.
"How you like it? Pretty good for an old empress, huh? Good buzz-um,
tight rump, marceled pubic hairs…"
But I had shut my eyes. She giggled. Then she was gone, laughing. She
ran up the beach half a mile and came back, having startled only the
gulls.
Next thing I knew the smell of coffee blew along the shore, with the
scent of fresh toast. When I dragged myself inside she was seated in the
kitchen, wearing only the mascara she had painted around her eyes a
moment before. Blinking rapidly at me, like some silent screen farm
girl, she handed me jam and toast, and draped a napkin daintily over her
lap, so as not to offend while I stared and ate. She got strawberry jam
on the tip of her left breast. I saw this. She saw me seeing this and
said, "Hungry?"
Which made me butter my toast all the faster.
"Good grief, go call Mexico City."
I called.
"Where are you?" demanded Peg's voice, two thousand miles away.
"In a phone booth, in Venice, and it's raining," I said.
"Liar!" said Peg.
And she was right.
And then, quite suddenly, it was over. It was very late, or very early.
I felt drunk on life, just because this woman had taken time to play
through the hours, talk through the darkness until the sun, way over in
the east, beyond the fogs and mists, threatened to appear.
I looked out at the surf and shore. Not a sign of bodies drowned, and no
one on the sand to know or not know. I didn't want to go but I had a
full day's work ahead, writing my stories just three steps ahead of
death. A day without writing, I often said, and said it so many times my
friends sighed and rolled their eyeballs, a day without writing was a
little death. I did not intend to pitch me over the graveyard wall. I
would fight all the way with my Underwood Standard which shoots more
squarely, if you aim it right, than any rifle ever invented.
"I'll drive you home," said Constance Rattigan.
"No, thanks. It's just three hundred yards down the beach. We're
neighbors."
"Like hell we are. This place cost two hundred thousand to build in
1920, five million today. What's your rent? Thirty bucks a month?"
I nodded.
"Okay, neighbor. Hit the sand. Come back some midnight?"
"Often," I said.
"Often." She took my two hands in hers, which is to say into the hands
of the chauffeur and the maid and the movie queen. She laughed, reading
my mind. "You think I'm nuts?"
"I wish the world were like you."
She shifted gears to avoid the compliment.
"And Fannie? Will she live forever?"
My eyes wet, I nodded.
She kissed me on both cheeks and pushed. "Get outa here." I jumped from
her tiled porch into the sand, ran a step, turned, and said, "Good day,
princess." "Shit," she said, pleased. I ran away.
Nothing much happened that day. But that night . . .
I woke and glanced at my Mickey Mouse watch, wondering what had pulled
me up. I shut my eyes tight and ached my ears, listening.
Rifle fire. Bang, bong and again bang, bong and again bang, down the
coast, from the pier.
My God, I thought, the pier's almost empty and the rifle gallery shut,
and who could be out there, middle of the night, yanking the trigger and
belling the target?
Bang and bang and the sound of the struck gong. Bang and bong. Again and
again. Twelve shots at a time and then twelve more and then twelve more,
as if someone had lined up three and then six and then nine rifles and
jumped from an empty one to a loaded one without a breath and aimed and
fired and fired and fired.
Madness.
It had to be. Whoever it was, alone on the pier in the fog, seizing the
weapons, firing at Doom.
Annie Oakley, the rifle lady herself? I wondered.
Bang. Take that you son-of-a-bitch. Bang. Take that you bastard runaway
lover. Bang. Take that you unholy womanizing freak. Bang!
Wham and again wham, far off but blowing in the wind.
So many bullets, I thought, to make something impossible die.
It went on for twenty minutes.
When it was over, I could not sleep.
With three dozen wounds in my chest, I groped over to my typewriter and,
eyes shut, typed out all the rifle shots in the dark.
“Offisa Pup?"
"How's that again?"
"Offisa Pup, this is Krazy Kat."
"Jesus," said Crumley. "It's you. Offisa Pup, eh?"
"It's better than Elmo Crumley."
"Got me there. And Krazy Kat's right for you, scribe. How goes the Great
American Epic?"
"How goes the Conan Doyle sequel?"
"This is embarrassing, but ever since I met you, son, I'm doing four
pages a night. It's like a war: should be outa there by Christmas. Krazy
Kats, it turns out, are good influences. That's the last compliment you
get from the Offisa. It's your nickel. Speak."
"I got more possibilities for our list of maybe future victims."
"Jesus in the lilies, Christ on the cross," sighed Crumley.
"Funny how you never notice…"
"It's a laugh riot. Proceed."
"Shrank still leads the parade. Then Annie Oakley, or whatever her real
name is, the rifle marksman lady. Someone, last night, was shooting on
the pier. It had to be her. Who else? I mean, she wouldn't open up her
place, two in the morning, for a stranger, would she?"
Crumley interrupted.
"Get her real name. I can't do anything without her real name."
I felt one of my legs being pulled by him and shut up.
"Cat got your tongue?" said Crumley.
Silence from me.
"You still there?" asked Crumley.
Grim silence.
"Lazarus," said Crumley, "damn it to hell, come outa that Christ-awful
tomb!"
I laughed. "Shall I finish the list?"
"Let me grab my beer. Okay. Shoot."
I reeled off six more names, including, though I didn't really believe
it, Shapeshade's.
"And maybe," I finished, and hesitated, "Constance Rattigan."
"Rattigan!" yelled Crumley. "What the hell you know about Rattigan? She
eats tiger's balls on toast and can whipsaw sharks two falls out of
three. She'd walk out of Hiroshima with her earrings and eyelashes
intact. Annie Oakley, now, no to her, too. She'd rifle someone's butt
off before he, no, only way is some night, on her own, she might toss
all her guns off the pier and follow after; that's in her face. As for
Shapeshade, don't make me laugh. He doesn't even know the real world
exists out here with us grotesque normals. They'll bury him in his
Wurlitzer come 1999. Got any more bright ideas?"
I swallowed hard and finally decided to at last tell Crumley about the
mysterious disappearance of Cal the barber.
"Mysterious, hell," said Crumley. "Where you been? The Mad Butcher
skedaddled. Piled his tin lizzie with dregs from his shop just the other
day, pulled out of the no-parking zone in front of his place, and headed
east. Not west, you notice, toward Land's End, but east. Half the police
force saw him make a big U-turn out front the station and didn't arrest
him because he yelled, 'Autumn leaves, by God, autumn leaves in the
Ozarks!' "
I gave a great trembling sigh of relief, glad for Cal's survival. I said
nothing about Scott Joplin's missing head, which was probably what drove
Cal off and away forever. But Crumley was still talking. "You finished
with your super-brand-new list of possible deads?"
"Well…" lamely.
"Dip in ocean, then dip in typewriter, says Zen master, makes for full
page and happy heart. Listen to the detective advising the genius. The
beer is on the ice, so that the pee is in the pot, later. Leave your
list at home. So long, Krazy Kat."
"Offisa Pup," I said. "Goodbye."
The forty dozen rifle shots from last night drew me. Their echoes would
not stop.
And the sound of more of the pier being pounded and compacted and eaten
away drew me, as the sounds of war must draw some.
The rifle shots, the pier, I thought, as I dipped in the ocean and then
dipped in my typewriter, like the good kat Offisa Pup wished me to be, I
wonder how many men, or was it just one, Annie Oakley killed last night.
I wonder, also, I thought, placing six new pages of incredibly brilliant
novel in my Talking Box, what new books of drunken doom A. L. Shrank has
toadstool-farmed on his catacomb library shelves?
The Hardy Boys Invite Ptomaine?
Nancy Drew and the Weltschmerz Kid?
The Funeral Directors of America Frolic at Atlantic City?
Don't go look, I thought. I must, I thought. But don't laugh when you
see the new titles. Shrank might run out and charge you.
Rifle shots, I thought. Dying pier. A. L. Shrank, Sigmund Freud's
Munchkin son. And now, there, up ahead of me hiking on the pier:
The Beast.
Or, as I sometimes called him, Erwin Rommel of the Afrika Korps. Or,
sometimes, simply:
Caligula. The Killer.
His real name was John Wilkes Hopwood.
I remember reading one of those devastating reviews about him in a small
local Hollywood theater some years before:
John Wilkes Hopwood, the matinee assassin, has done it again to another
role. Not only has he torn a passion to tatters, he has, madness
maddened, stomped on it, ravened it with his teeth, and hurled it across
the footlights at unsuspecting club ladies. The damned fools ate it up!
I often saw him riding his bright orange Raleigh eight-speed bike along
the ocean walk from Venice to Ocean Park and Santa Monica. He was always
dressed in a fine, freshly pressed, brown hound's-tooth English suit
with a dark brown Irish cap pulled over his snow-white curls and shading
his General Erwin Rommel or, if you prefer, killer hawk's
Conrad-Veidt-about-to-smother-Joan-Crawford-or-Greer-Garson face. His
cheeks were burned to a wonderful polished nutmeg color, and I often
wondered if the color stopped at his neckline, for I had never seen him
out on the sand, stripped. Forever, he cycled up and down between the
ocean towns, at liberty, waiting to be summoned by the German General
Staff or the club ladies over at the Hollywood Assistance League,
whichever came first. When there was a cycle of war films, he worked
constantly, for it was rumored he had a full closet of Afrika Korps
uniforms and a burial cape for the occasional vampire film.
As far as I could tell, he had only one casual outfit, that suit. And
one pair of shoes, fine English oxblood brogues, highly polished. His
bicycle clips, brightly clasping his tweed cuffs, looked to be pure
silver from some shop in Beverly Hills. His teeth were always so finely
polished, they seemed not his own. His breath, as he pedaled past, was
Listerine, just in case he had to take a fast call from Hitler on his
way to Playa Del Rey.
I saw him most often motionless, astride his bike, Sunday afternoons,
when Muscle Beach filled up with rippling deltoids and masculine
laughter. Hopwood would stand up on the Santa Monica pier, like a
commander in the last days of the retreat from El Alamein, depressed at
all that sand, delighted with all that flesh.
He seemed so apart from all of us, gliding by in his
Anglo-Byronic-German daydreams . . .
I never thought to see him parking his Raleigh bike outside A. L.
Shrank's tarot-card-large-belfry-with-plenty-of-bats-open-at-all-hours
shed.
But park he did, and hesitated outside the door.
Don't go in! I thought. No one goes in A. L. Shrank's unless it's for
poison Medici rings and tombstone phone numbers.
Erwin Rommel didn't mind.
Neither did the Beast, or Caligula.
Shrank beckoned.
All three obeyed.
By the time I got there, the door was shut. On it, for the first time,
though it had probably yellowed there for years, was a list, typed with
a faded ribbon, of all the folks who had passed through his portals to
be psyched back to health.
H.  B. WARNER, WARNER OLAND, WARNER BAXTER, CONRAD NAGEL, VILMA BANKY,
ROD LA ROCQUE, BESSIE LOVE, JAMES GLEASON . . .
It read like the Actor's Directory for 1929.
But Constance Rattigan was there.
I didn't believe that.
And John Wilkes Hopwood.
I knew I had to believe that.
For, as I glanced through the dusty window, where a shade was half-drawn
against prying eyes, I saw that someone was indeed on that couch from
which stuffing sprang in mad abandon from the burst seams. And the man
lying on the couch was the man in the brown tweed suit, eyes shut, doing
lines, no doubt from a revised and improved last act of Hamlet.
Jesus in the lilies, as Crumley had said. Christ fresh to the cross!
At that moment, intent upon reciting his rosary innards, Hopwood's eyes
flew open with actor's intuition.
His eyes rolled, then his head flicked swiftly to one side. He stared at
the window and saw me.
As did A. L. Shrank, seated nearby, turned away, pad and pencil in hand.
I stood back, cursed quietly, and walked quickly away.
In total embarrassment, I walked all the way to the end of the ruined
pier, bought six Nestle's Crunch bars and two Clark Bars and two Power
Houses to devour on the way. Whenever I am very happy or very sad or
very embarrassed, I cram my mouth with sweets and litter the breezeway
with discards.
It was there at the end of the pier in the golden light of late
afternoon that Caligula Rommel caught up with me. The destruction
workers were gone. The air was silent.
I heard his bicycle hum and glide just behind me. He didn't speak at
first. He just arrived on foot, the bright silver bike clips around his
trim ankles, the Raleigh held in his firm grasp like an insect woman. He
stood at the one place on the pier where I had seen him, like a statue
of Richard Wagner, watching one of his great choruses come in tides
along the shore.
There were still half a dozen young men playing volleyball below. The
thump of the ball and the rifleshots of their laughs were somehow
killing the day. Beyond, two weight-lifting finalists were lifting their
own worlds into the sky, in hopes of convincing eight or nine young
women nearby that a fate worse than death wasn't so bad after all, and
could be had upstairs in the hotdog apartments just across the sand.
John Wilkes Hopwood surveyed the scene and did not look at me. He was
making me sweat and wait, daring me to leave. I had, after all, crossed
an invisible sill of his life, half an hour ago. Now, I must pay.
"Are you following me?" I said at last, and immediately felt a fool.
Hopwood laughed that famous last-act maniac laugh of his.
"Dear boy, you're much too young. You're the sort I throw back in the
sea."
God, I thought, what do I say now?
Hopwood cricked his head stiffly back behind him, pointing his eagle's
profile toward the Santa Monica pier a mile north from here, along the
coast.
"But, if you should ever decide to follow me,” he smiled, "that is where
I live. Above the carousel, above the horses."
I turned. Far off on that other still vibrant pier was the carousel that
had been turning and grinding out its calliope music since I was a kid.
Above the big horse race were the Carousel Apartments, a grand eyrie for
retired German generals, failed actors, or driven romantics. I had heard
that great poets who published small lived there. Novelists of many wits
and no reviews lived there. Well-hung artists with unhung paintings
lived there. Courtesans of famous film stars who were now prostitutes
for spaghetti salesmen lived there. Old English matrons who had once
thrived in Brighton and missed the Rocks lived there with stacks of
antimacassars and stuffed Pekingese.
Now it seemed that Bismarck, Thomas Mann, Conrad Veidt, Admiral Doenitz,
Erwin Rommel, and Mad Otto of Bavaria lived there.
I looked at that magnificent eagle profile. Hopwood stiffened with pride
at my glance. He scowled at the golden sands and said, quietly, "You
think I am crazy, allowing myself the tender mercies of one A. L.
Shrank?"
"Well...”
"He is a very insightful man, very holistic, very special. And as you
know, we actors are the world's most unsettled people. The future is
always uncertain, the phone should ring but never does. We have much
time on our hands. So it is either numerology or the tarot cards or
astrology or the Eastern meditation up under the great tree at Ojai with
Krishnamurti, have you been? Fine! Or Reverend Violet Greener at her
Agabeg Temple on Crenshaw? Norvell the futurist? Aimee Semple McPherson,
were you ever saved? I was. She laid on the hands, then I laid her. Holy
Rollers? The ecstasy. Or the Hall Johnson Choir down in the First
Baptist Church Sunday nights. Dark angels. Such glory. Or it is the
all-night bridge or the start-at-noon, play-till-dusk bingo with all the
ladies with heliotrope hair. Actors go everywhere. If we knew a good
eviscerator we would attend. Caesar's Gut-Readers, Inc. I could make a
mint scalpeling doves and fishing out the innards like card-pips where
the future lies stinking at noon. I try it all to fill the time. That's
what all actors are, time fillers. Ninety percent of our lives,
stage-waits. Meanwhile, we lie down with A. L. Shrank to get it up at
Muscle Beach."
He had never taken his gaze from the pliant rubber Greek gods who
frolicked below, washed by equal parts of salt wind and lust.
"Have you ever wondered," he said at last, a faint line of sweat on his
upper lip, a faint brim of perspiration along the hairline under his
cap, "about vampires who do not appear in mirrors? Well, now, see those
glorious young men down there? They appear in all mirrors; but no one
else does. Only the minted gods show. And when they stare at themselves,
do they ever see anyone else, the girls that they ride like seahorses? I
have no such faith. So now," he went back to his starter subject, "do
you understand why you saw me with the wee dark mole A. L. Shrank?"
"I wait for phone calls, myself," I said. "Anything's better than that!"
"You actually understand." He stared at me with eyes that burned the
clothes off my body.
I nodded.
"Come visit me sometime." He nodded at the faraway Carousel Apartments
where the calliope groaned and lamented over something vaguely
resembling "Beautiful Ohio." "I'll tell you about Iris Tree, Sir
Beerbohm Tree's daughter, who used to live in those apartments, the
half-sister of Carol Reed, the British director. Aldous Huxley sometimes
drops up, you might see him."
He saw my head jerk at that and knew I was on the hook.
"You like to meet Huxley? Well, behave yourself,” he caressed the words,
"and you just might."
I was filled with an inexpressible and insufferable need that I had to
force myself to repress. Huxley was a madness in my life, a terrible
hunger. I longed to be that bright, that witty, that toweringly supreme.
To think, I might meet him.
"Come visit." Hopwood's hand had crept to his coat pocket. "And I will
introduce you to the young man I love best in all the world."
I forced myself to glance away, as I had often glanced off from
something Crumley or Constance Rattigan said.
"Well,  well,"  murmured John  Wilkes  Hopwood,  his Germanic mouth
curling with delight, "the young man is embarrassed. It's not what you
think. Look! No, stare."
He held out a crumpled glossy photograph. I tried to take it but he held
it gripped firmly, his thumb placed over the head of the person in the
photo.
The rest, sticking out from under the thumb, was the most beautiful body
of a young man I had ever seen in my life.
It reminded me of photos I had once seen of the statue of Antinous, the
lover of Hadrian, in the lobby of the Vatican Museum. It reminded me of
the boy David. It reminded me of a thousand young men's bodies wrestling
up and down the beach from my childhood to here, sunburned and mindless,
wildly happy without true joy. A thousand summers were compacted down
into this one single photograph, as John Wilkes Hopwood held it with his
thumb hiding the face to protect it from revelations.
"Isn't it the single most incredible body in the history of the world?"
It was a proclamation.
"And it's mine, all mine. Mine to have and hold," he said, "No, no,
don't flinch. Here."
He took his thumb off the face of the incredibly lovely young man.
And the face of the old hawk, the ancient German warrior, the African
tank general appeared.
"My God," I said. "It's you."
"Me," said John Wilkes Hopwood.
And threw his head back with that merciless grin that flashed sabers and
promised steel. He laughed silently, in honor of the old days, before
films talked. "It is I, rather," he said. I took off my glasses, cleaned
them, and looked closer.
"No. No fake. No trick photography."
It was like those contest picture puzzles they used to print in
newspapers when I was a boy. The faces of presidents, cut in three
sections and mixed. Here Lincoln's chin, there Washington's nose, and
above, Roosevelt's eyes. Mixed and remixed with thirty other presidents
you had to recut and repaste to win a fast ten bucks.
But here a young man's Greek-statue body was fused to the neck, head,
and face of a hawk-eagle-vulture ascending into villainy, madness, or
both.
Triumph of the Will was in John Wilkes Hopwood's eyes as he stared over
my shoulder, as if he had never seen this damned beauty before.
"You think it's a trick, eh?"
"No." But I stole a look at his woolen suit, his fresh clean shirt, his
neatly tied old-school tie, his vest, his cufflinks, his bright belt
buckle, the silver bike clips around his ankles.
I thought of Cal the barber and Scott Joplin's missing head.
John Wilkes Hopwood stroked his vest and legs with rust-freckled
fingers.
"Yes," he laughed, "it's covered up! So you'll never know unless you
come visit, will you? Whether the old half-gone-to-seed Richard has-been
really is the keeper of the Summer Boy flame, eh? How can it be that a
miracle of young-ness is mated with an old sea-wolf? Why does Apollo lie
down with…"
"Caligula?" I blurted, and froze.
But Hopwood didn't mind. He laughed and nodded as he touched my elbow.
"Caligula, yes!, will now speak, while lovely Apollo hides and waits!
Will power is the answer. Will power. Health foods, yes, are the center
of actors' lives! We must keep our bodies as well as our spirits up! No
white bread, no Nestle's Crunch bars…"
I flinched and felt the last of the bars melting in my pockets.
"No pies, cakes, no hard liquor, not even too much sex. In bed nights by
ten. Up early, a run along the beach, two hours in the gym every day,
every day of your life, all your friends gym instructors, and two hours
of bicycling a day. Every day for thirty years. Thirty years! At the end
of which time you stroll by God's guillotine! He chops off your crazed
old eagle's head and plants it on a sunburned, forever golden, young
man's body! What a price I have paid, but worth it. Beauty is mine.
Sublime incest. Narcissus par excellence. I need no one else."
"I believe that," I said.
"Your honesty will be your death."
He put his photo, like a flower, in his pocket.
"You still don't believe."
"Let me see that again."
He handed it to me.
I stared. And as I stared, the surf rolled on the dark shore just last
night.
From the surf, a naked man suddenly appeared.
I winced and blinked.
Was this the body, this the man who had come out of the sea to frighten
me when Constance Rattigan's back was turned?
I wanted to know. I could only say, "Do you know Constance Rattigan?"
He stiffened. "Why do you ask?"
"I saw her name at Shrank's outside, typed. I thought maybe you were
ships that passed in the night."
Or bodies? Him coming out of the surf at three a.m. some night soon, as
she plunged in?
His Teutonic mouth shaped itself to merely haughty.
"Our film Crossed Sabers was the smash of 1926 across America. Our
affair made headlines that summer. I was the greatest love of her life."
"Were you...” I started to say. Were you the one, I thought, and not the
director who drowned himself, who cut her hamstrings with your sword, so
she couldn't walk for a year?
But then, last night, I hadn't really had a chance to look for the
scars. And the way Constance ran, it was all lies told a hundred years
back.
"You should go see A. L. Shrank, a concerned man, pure Zen, all wise,"
he said, climbing back on his bike. "How so? He told me to give you
these."
He took from his other pocket a handful of candy wrappers, twelve of
them, neatly paperclipped together, mostly Clark, Crunch, and Power
House. Things I had mindlessly strewn in the beach winds and someone had
picked up.
"He knows all about you," said Mad Otto of Bavaria, and laughed with the
soundtrack off.
I took the candy wrappers shamefacedly, and felt the extra ten pounds
sag around my middle as I held these flags of defeat.
"Visit me," he said. "Come ride the carousel. Come see if innocent boy
David is truly married to old evil Caligula, eh?"
And he biked away, a tweed suit under a tweed hat, smiling and looking
only ahead.
I walked back to A. L. Shrank's melancholy museum and squinted through
the dusty window.
There was a toppling stack of bright orange, lemon, chocolate-brown
candy wrappers filed on a small table near the sunken sofa.
Those can't all be mine, I thought.
They are, I thought. I'm plump. But then, he's nuts.
I went to find ice cream.
“Crumley?"    
"I thought my name was Offisa Pup."
"I think I've got a line on the murderer himself!"
There was a long ocean silence while the policeman put down the phone,
tore his hair, and picked the phone up again.
"John Wilkes Hopwood," I said.
"You forget," said the police lieutenant, "there have been no murders
yet. Only suspicions and possibilities. There's a thing called a
courtroom and another thing called proof. No proof, no case, and they
throw you out on your butt so fast you're stopped up for weeks!"
"You ever seen John Wilkes Hopwood with his clothes off?" I asked.
"That did it."
Offisa Pup hung up on me.
It was raining when I came out of the booth.
Almost immediately the telephone rang as if knowing I was there. I
snatched at it and for some reason yelled, "Peg!"
But there was only a sound of rain, and soft breathing, miles away.
I won't ever answer this phone again, I thought.
"Son-of-a-bitch," I yelled. "Come get me, you bastard."
I hung up.
My God, I thought, what if he heard and came over to visit?
Idiot, I thought.
And the phone rang for a last time.
I had to answer, maybe to apologize to that breathing far away and tell
it to ignore my insolence.
I lifted the receiver.
And heard a sad lady five miles off somewhere in Los Angeles. Fannie.
And she was crying.
“Fannie, my God, is that you?"
"Yes, oh, yes, Lord God in heaven," she wheezed, she gasped, she
floundered. "Coming upstairs almost killed me. Haven't climbed stairs
since 1935. Where have you been? The roofs caved in. Life's over.
Everybody's dead. Why didn't you tell me? Oh, God, God, this is
terrible. Can you come over? Jimmy. Sam. Pietro." She did the litany and
the pressure of my guilt crushed me against the side of the phone booth.
"Pietro, Jimmy, Sam. Why did you lie?"
"I didn't lie, I just shut up!" I said.
"And now Henry!" she cried.
"Henry! My God. He isn't…?"
"Fell downstairs."
"Alive? Alive?" I yelled.
"In his room, yes, thank God. Wouldn't go to the hospital. I heard him
fall, ran out. That's when I found out what you didn't say. Henry lying
there, swearing, naming names. Jimmy. Sam. Pietro. Oh, why did you bring
death here?"
"I didn't, Fannie."
"Come prove it. I've got three mayonnaise jars full of quarters. Take a
cab, send the driver up, I'll pay him out of the jars! And when you get
here, how will I know when you knock at the door it'll be you?"
"How do you know it's me, even now, Fannie, on the phone?"
"I don't know," she wailed. "Isn't that awful? I don't know."
"Los Angeles," I said to the taxi driver, ten minutes later. "Three
mayonnaise jars' worth."
“Hello, Constance? I'm in a phone booth across from Fannie's. We've got
to get her out of here. Can you come? She's really scared now."
"For good reasons?"
I stared across at the tenement and judged how many thousand shadows
were crammed in it, top to bottom.
"This time for sure."
"Get over there. Stand guard. I'll be there in half an hour. I won't
come up. You argue her down, damn it, and we'll get her away. Jump."
The way Constance slammed down the phone shot me out of the booth and
almost got me run down by a car racing across the street.
The way I knocked on her door, she believed it was me. She threw the
door wide and I saw what was almost a crazed elephant, eyes wild, hair
in disarray, acting as if a rifle had just shot her through her head.
I launched her back into her chair and threw the icebox wide, trying to
decide whether mayonnaise or wine would help. Wine.
"Get that in you," I commanded, and suddenly realized my cab driver was
in the door behind me, having followed me upstairs, thinking I was a
deadbeat and trying to escape.
I grabbed and handed him one mayonnaise jar full of quarters.
"That enough?" I said.
He did a quick estimate, like someone guessing jelly beans in a vat in a
store window, sucked his teeth, and ran off with the coins rattling.
Fannie was busy emptying the wine glass. I refilled it and sat down to
wait. At last she said, "Someone's been outside my door every night now
for two nights. They come and go, go and come, not like ever before,
they stop, they breathe out and in, my God, what are they doing outside
an old collapsed ruin of an opera singer fat lady's door at midnight, it
can't be rape, can it, they don't rape 38o-pound sopranos, do they?"
And here she began to laugh so long and so hard I couldn't tell if it
was hysteria or an amazed and self-surprising humor. I had to beat her
on the back to stop the laughs and change the color in her face and give
her more wine.
"Oh, my, my, my," she gasped. "It's good to laugh. Thank God, you're
here. You'll protect me, won't you? I'm sorry I said what I said. You
didn't bring that dreadful thing with you and leave it outside my door.
It's just the hound of the Baskervilles, hungry, come in on his own to
scare Fannie."
"I'm sorry I didn't tell you about Jimmy and Pietro and Sam, Fannie," I
said, and gulped my wine. "I just didn't want to read obits to you, all
at once. Look here. Constance Rattigan will be downstairs in a few
minutes. She wants you to come stay a few days and…"
"More secrets," cried Fannie, eyes wide. "Since when have you known her?
And, anyway, it's no use. This is my home. If I left here, I'd waste
away, just die. I have my recordings."
"We'll take them with."
"My books."
"I'll carry them down."
"My mayonnaise, she wouldn't have the right brand."
"I'll buy it."
"She wouldn't have room."
"Even for you, Fannie, yes."
"And then what about my new calico cat ... ?"
And so it went until I heard the limousine shrug in against the curb
below.
"So that's it, is it, Fannie?"
"I feel fine, now, now that you're here. Just tell Mrs. Gutierrez to
come up and stay a while after you leave," said Fannie cheerily.
"Where does all this false optimism come from, when an hour ago you were
doomed?"
"Dear boy, Fannie's fine. That dreadful beast isn't coming back, I just
know, and anyway, anyway…"
With a terrible sense of timing, the entire tenement shifted in its
sleep.
The door to Fannie's room whispered on its hinges.
As if shot a final time, Fannie sat up and almost gagged on her terror.
I was across the room in an instant and threw the door wide, to stare
out into the long valley of the hall, a mile in this direction, a mile
in that; endless dark tunnels filled with jet streams of night.
I listened and heard the plaster crack in the ceiling, the doors itch in
their frames. Somewhere, a toilet muttered incessantly to itself, an
old, cold, white porcelain vault in the night.
There was no one in the hall, of course.
Whoever had been there, if he ever was, had shut a door quickly, or run
toward the front or out the back. Where the night came in in an
invisible flood, a long winding river of wind, bringing with it memories
of things eaten and things discarded, things desired, things no longer
wanted.
I wanted to shriek at the empty halls, the things I had wanted to shout
along the night shore outside Constance Rattigan's Arabian fort. Go. Let
be. We may look as if we deserve to, but we don't want to die.
What I shouted to emptiness was, "All right, you kids. Get back in your
rooms. Go on, now. Git! That's it. So. There."
I waited for the nonexistent kids to retreat to their nonexistent rooms
and turned back in to lean against the door and shut it with a fake
smile.
It worked. Or Fannie pretended it did.
"You'd make a good father." She beamed.
"No, I'd be like all fathers, out of mind and out of patience. Those
kids should have been doped with beer and slugged into their cots hours
ago. Feeling better, Fannie?"
"Better," she sighed, and shut her eyes.
I went and circled her with my arms, like Lindbergh going around the
earth and the crowds yelling.
"It will work itself out," she said. "You go now. Everything's all
right. Like you said, those kids have gone to bed."
The kids? I almost said, but stopped myself. Oh, yes, the kids.
"So Fannie's safe, and you go home. Poor baby. Tell Constance thanks but
no thanks, and she can come visit, yes? Mrs. Gutierrez has promised to
come up and stay tonight, on that bed I haven't used in thirty years,
can you imagine? I can't sleep on my back, I can't breathe, well, Mrs.
Gutierrez is coming up, and you were so kind to come visit, dear child.
I see now how kind you are, you only want to save me the sadness of our
friends downstairs."
"That's true, Fannie."
"There's nothing unusual about their passing on, is there?"
"No, Fannie," I lied, "only foolishness and failed beauty and sadness."
"God," she said, "you talk like Butterfly's lieutenant."
"That's why the guys at school beat me up."
I went to the door. Fannie took a deep breath and at last said, "If
anything does happen to me. Not that it will. But if it does, look in
the icebox."
"Look where?"
"Icebox," said Fannie, enigmatically. "Don't."
But I had jerked the icebox open already. I stared in at the light. I
saw lots of jams, sauces, jellies, and mayonnaise. I shut the door after
a long moment.
"You shouldn't have looked," protested Fannie.
"I don't want to wait, I've got to know."
"Now, I won't tell you," she said, indignantly. "You shouldn't have
peeked. I'm just willing to admit maybe it's my fault it came into the
house."
"It, Fannie? It, it!"
"All the bad things I thought you dragged in on your shoes. But maybe
Fannie was responsible. Maybe I'm guilty. Maybe I called that thing off
the streets."
"Well, did you, or didn't you?" I yelled, leaning toward her.
"Don't you love me any more?"
"Love you, hell, I'm trying to get you out of here and you won't come.
You accuse me of poisoning the toilets, and now tell me to look in
iceboxes. Jesus God, Fannie."
"Now the lieutenant is mad with Butterfly." But her eyes were starting
to well over.
I couldn't stand any more of that.
I opened the door.
Mrs. Gutierrez had been standing there a long while, I was sure, a plate
of hot tacos in her hands, always the diplomat, waiting.
"I'll call you tomorrow, Fannie," I said.
"Of course you will, and Fannie will be alive!"
I wonder, I thought, if I shut my eyes and pretend to be blind . . .
Can I find Henry's room?
I tapped on Henry's door.
"Who that?" Henry said, locked away.
"Who dat say who dat?" I said.
"Who dat say who dat say who dat?" he said, and had to laugh. Then he
remembered he was in pain.
"It's you."
"Henry, let me in."
"I'm okay, just fell downstairs is all, just almost got destroyed is
all, just let me rest here with the door locked, I'll be out tomorrow,
you're a good boy to worry."
"What happened, Henry?" I asked the locked door.
Henry came closer. I felt he was leaning against it, like someone
talking through a confessional lattice.
"He tripped me."
A rabbit ran around in my chest and turned into a big rat that kept
right on running.
"Who, Henry?"
"Him. Son-of-a-bitch tripped me."
"Did he say anything, you sure he was there?"
"How do I know the upstairs hall light is on? Me? I feel. Heat. The hall
was terrible warm where he was. And he was breathing, of course. I heard
him sucking away at the air and blowing out nice and gentle where he
hid. He didn't say nothing as I went by, but I heard his heart, too,
wham, wham, or maybe it was mine. I figured to sneak by so he can't see
me, blind man figures that if he's in the dark, why not everyone else.
And next thing you know, bam! I'm at the bottom of the stairs and don't
know how I got there. I started yelling for Jimmy and Sam and Pietro,
then I said damn fool to myself, they're gone and you, too, if you don't
ask for someone else. I started naming names, top speed, doors popped
all around the house, and while they was popping, he popped out. Sounded
almost barefoot out the door. Smelled his breath."
I swallowed and leaned on the door. "What was it like?"
"Let me think and tell. Henry's going to bed now. I'm sure glad I'm
blind. Hate to have seen myself going down stairs like a bag of laundry.
Night."
"Goodnight, Henry," I said.
And turned just as the big steamboat of a tenement house rounded a bend
of river wind in the dark. I felt I was back at the surf in Mr.
Shapeshade's movie house at one in the morning, with the tide glutting
and shaking the timbers under the seats, and the big silver-and-black
images gliding on the screen. The whole tenement shivered. The cinema
was one thing. The trouble with this big old twilight place was the
shadows had come off the screen and waited by stairwells and hid in
bathrooms and unscrewed lightbulbs some nights so everyone groped, blind
as Henry, to find their way out.
I did just that. At the top of the stairs, I froze. I heard breath
churning the air ahead of me. But it was only the echo of my own sucks
and swallows hitting the wall and bouncing back to feel at my face.
For Christ's sake, I thought, don't trip yourself, going down.
The chauffeur-driven 1928 Duesenberg limousine was waiting for me when I
came out of Fannie's. When the door slammed, we were off and halfway to
Venice when the chauffeur up front took off his cap and let his hair
down and became . . .
Rattigan the Interrogator.
"Well?" she said coldly. "Is she or isn't she upset?"
"She is damn well upset but I didn't upset her."
"No?"
"No, damn it, now just pull up at the next corner and let me the damn
hell out!"
"For a bashful boy from northern Illinois, you got some language, Mr.
Hemingway."
"Well, hell, Miss Rattigan!"
That did it. I saw her shoulders slump a little. She was losing me, if
she wasn't careful, and knew it.
"Constance," she suggested, quieter.
"Constance," I said. "It's not my fault people drown in bathtubs and
drink too much or fall downstairs or get taken away by the police. Why
didn't you come inside just now? You're Fannie's old, old friend."
"I was afraid that seeing you and me together would overload and the top
of her head fly off and we would never be able to get it back on."
She let the limousine go from a rather hysterical seventy down to a
nervous sixty or sixty-two. But she had her claws on the wheel as if it
were my shoulders and she was shaking me. I said, "You'd better get her
out of there, once and for all. She won't sleep for a week now and that
might kill her, just exhaustion. You can't feed a soul on mayonnaise
forever."
Constance slowed the limo to fifty-five.
"She give you a rough time?"
"Only called me Death's Friend, like you. I seem to be everyone's goat,
handing out bubonic fleas. Whatever is in the tenement is there all
right, but I'm not the carrier. On top of which, Fannie has done
something stupid."
"What?"
"I don't know, she won't tell me. She's put out with herself. Maybe you
can worm it out of her. I got a terrible feeling Fannie brought all this
on herself."
"How?"
The limousine slowed to forty. Constance was watching me in the rearview
mirror. I licked my lips.
"I can only guess. Something in her icebox, she said. If anything
happened to her, she said, look in the icebox. God, how stupid! Maybe
you can go back, later tonight on your own and look in the damn icebox
and figure out how and why and what it is that Fannie has invited into
the tenement that is scaring the hell out of her."
"Jesus at midnight," murmured Constance, shutting her eyes. "Mary at
dawn."
"Constance!" I yelled.
For we had just gone through a red light, blind.
Luckily, God was there, and paved the way.
She parked in front of my apartment and she got out while I unlocked the
door and she stuck her head in.
"So this is where all the genius happens, huh?"
"A little piece of Mars on earth."
"Is that Cal's piano there? I heard about the music critics who tried to
burn it once. Then there were the customers who mobbed the shop one day,
yelling and showing their funny hair."
"Cal's all right," I said.
"Have you looked in a mirror lately?"
"He tried."
"Just on one side of you. Remind me, next time you're over, my dad did
some barbering, too. Taught me. Why are we standing here in the doorway?
Afraid the neighbors will talk if you, hell. There you go again. No
matter what I say, it seems to be the truth. You're the genuine article,
aren't you? I haven't seen a bashful man since I turned twelve."
She stuck her head further in.
"God, all the junk. Don't you ever pick up? What's this, reading ten
books at a time, half of them comics? Is that a Buck Rogers
disintegrator there by your typewriter? Did you send away box tops?"
"Yep," I said.
"What a dump," she crowed, and meant it for a compliment.
"All that I have is yours."
"That bed isn't even big enough for club sandwich sex."
"One partner always has to stay on the floor."
"Jesus, what year is that typewriter you're using?"
"1935 Underwood Standard, old but great."
"Just like me, huh, kid? You going to invite the ancient celebrity in
and unscrew her earrings?"
"You've got to go back and look in Fannie's icebox, remember? Besides,
if you slept over tonight, spoons."
"Plenty of cutlery, but no fork?"
"No fork, Constance."
"The memory of your mended underwear is devastating."
"I'm no boy David."
"Hell, you're not even Ralph. Goodnight, kid. It's me for Fannie's
icebox. Thanks!"
She gave me a kiss that burst my eardrums and drove away.
Reeling with it, I somehow made it to bed.
Which I shouldn't have done.
Because then I had the Dream.
Every night the small rainfall came outside my door, stayed a moment,
whispered, and went away. I was afraid to go look. Afraid I might find
Crumley standing there, drenched, with fiery eyes. Or Shapeshade,
flickering and moving in jerks, like an old film, seaweed hung from his
eyebrows and nose. . . .
Every night I waited, the rain stopped, I slept.
And then came the Dream.
I was a writer in a small, green town in northern Illinois, and seated
in a barber chair like Cal's chair in his empty shop. Then someone
rushed in with a telegram that announced I had just made a movie sale
for one hundred thousand dollars!
In the chair, yelling with happiness, waving the telegram, I saw the
faces of all the men and boys, and the barber, turn to glaciers, turn to
permafrost, and when they did pretend at smiles of congratulation their
teeth were icicles.
Suddenly I was the outsider. The wind from their mouths blew cold on me.
I had changed forever. I could not be forgiven.
The barber finished my haircut much too quickly, as if I were
untouchable, and I went home with my telegram gripped in my sweating
hands.
Late that night, from the edge of the woods not far from my house, in
that small town, I heard a monster crying beyond the forest.
I sat up in bed, with crystals of cold frost skinning my body. The
monster roared, coming nearer. I opened my eyes to hear better. I gaped
my mouth to relax my ears. The monster shrieked closer, half through the
forest now, thrashing and plunging, crushing the wildflowers,
frightening rabbits and clouds of birds that rose screaming to the
stars.
I could not move or scream myself. I felt the blood drain from my face.
I saw the celebratory telegram on the bureau nearby. The monster shouted
a terrible cry of death and plunged again, as if chopping trees along
the way with its horrible scimitar teeth.
I leaped from bed, seized the telegram, ran to the front door, threw it
wide. The monster was almost out of the forest. It brayed, it shrieked,
it knocked the night winds with threats.
I tore the telegram into a dozen pieces and threw them out over the lawn
and shouted after them.
"The answer is no! Keep your money! Keep your fame! I'm staying here! I
won't go! No," and again, "No!" and a final, despairing, "No!"
The last cry died in the monster dinosaur's throat. There was a dreadful
moment of silence.
The moon slid behind a cloud.
I waited, with the sweat freezing over my face.
The monster sucked in a breath, exhaled, then turned and lumbered away,
back through the forest, fading, at last gone, into oblivion. The pieces
of telegram blew like moth wings on the lawn. I shut and locked the
screen and went, mourning with relief, to bed. Just before dawn, I
slept.
Now, in bed in Venice, waked from that dream, I went to my front door
and looked out at the canals. What could I shout to the dark water, to
the fog, to the ocean on the shore? Who would hear, what monster might
recognize my mea culpa or my great refusal or my protest of innocence or
my argument for my goodness and a genius as yet unspent?
Go away! could I cry? I am guilty of nothing. I must not die. And, let
the others alone, for God's sake. Could I say or shout that?
I opened my mouth to try. But my mouth was caked with dust that had
somehow gathered in the dark.
I could only put one hand out in a gesture, a begging, an empty
pantomime. Please, I thought.
"Please," I whispered. Then shut the door.
At which point, the telephone across the street in my special phone
booth rang.
I won't answer, I thought. It's him. The Ice Man.
The phone rang.
It's Peg.
The phone rang.
It's him.
"Shut up!" I shrieked.
The phone stopped.
My weight collapsed me into bed.
Crumley stood in his door blinking. "For God's sake, you know what time
it is?"
We stood there watching each other, like boxers who have knocked each
other silly and don't know where to lie down.
I couldn't think of what to say so I said, "I am most dreadfully
attended."
"That's the password. Shakespeare. Come."
He led me through the house to where coffee, a lot of it in a big pot,
was cooking on the stove.
"I been working late on my masterpiece." Crumley nodded toward his
bedroom typewriter. A long yellow page, like the tongue of the Muse, was
hanging out of it. "I use legal paper, get more on it. I suppose I
figure if I come to the end of a regular-sized page I won't go on.
Jesus, you look lousy. Bad dreams?"
"The worst." I told him about the barber shop, the
hundred-thousand-dollar movie sale, the monster in the night, my shouts,
and the great beast moaning away gone and me alive, forever.
"Jesus." Crumley poured two big cups of something so thick it was
bubbling lava. "You even dream better than I do!"
"What's the dream mean? We can never win, ever? If I stay poor and don't
ever publish a book, I lose. But if I sell and publish and have money in
the bank, do I lose, too? Do people hate you? Will friends forgive you?
You're older, Crumley, tell me. Why does the beast in the dream come to
kill me? Why do I have to give back the money? What's it all about?"
"Hell," snorted Crumley. "I'm no psychiatrist."
"Would A. L. Shrank know?"
"With finger-painting and stool-smearing? Naw. You going to write that
dream? You always advise others...”
"When I calm down. Walking over here, a few minutes ago, I remembered my
doctor once offering to tour me through the autopsy-dissection rooms.
Thank God, I said no. Then I really would have been dreadfully attended.
I'm overworked now. How do I clean out the lion cage in my head? How do
I smooth the old canary lady's bedsheets? How do I coax Cal the barber
back from Joplin? How do I protect Fannie, across town tonight and no
weapons?"
"Drink your coffee," advised Crumley.
I grubbed in my pocket and took out the picture of Cal with Scott Joplin
except Joplin's head was still missing. I told Crumley where I had found
it.
"Someone stole the head off this picture. When Cal saw that, he knew
someone was on to him, the jig was up, and got out of town."
"That's not murder," said Crumley.
"Same as," I said.
"Same as pigs flying and turkeys getting carbuncles tap-dancing. Next
case, as they say in court."
"Someone gave Sam too much booze and killed him. Someone turned Jimmy
over in the bathtub to drown. Someone called the police on Pietro and he
was hauled away and that will finish him. Someone stood over the canary
lady and very simply scared her to death. Someone shoved that old man
into the lion cage."
"Got some further coroner's reports on him," said Crumley. "Blood was
full of gin."
"Right. Someone soused him, knocked him on the head, pulled him into the
canal, already dead, shoved him behind bars, came out, and walked to his
car or his apartment somewhere in Venice, all wet, but who would notice
a wet man, no umbrella, in a storm?"
"Shoat. No, let me use a dirtier word, shirt. You couldn't buy a judge
doughnuts and Java with this garage sale of yours, buster. People die.
Accidents happen. Motive, damn it, motive. All you got is that rummy
song, last night I saw upon the stair, a little man who wasn't there. He
wasn't there again today. My God, I wish he'd go away! Think. If this
so-called killer exists, there's only one person we know who's been
around it all. You."
"Me? You don't think...”
"No, and calm down. Avert those big pink rabbity eyes. Jesus, let me go
find something."
Crumley walked over to a bookshelf on one side of his kitchen (there
were books in every room of his house) and grabbed down a thick volume.
He tossed Shakespeare's Collected Plays on the kitchen table.
"Meaningless malignity," he said.
"What?"
"Shakespeare's full of it, you're full of it, me, everyone. Meaningless
malignity. Don't that have a ring? It means someone running around doing
lousy things, a bastard, for no reason. Or none we can figure."
"People don't run around being sons-of-bitches for no reason."
"God." Crumley snorted gently. "You're naive. Half the cases we handle
over at the station are guys gunning red lights to kill pedestrians, or
beating up their wives, or shooting friends, for reasons they can't
recall. The motives are there, sure, but buried so deep it would take
nitro to blast them out. And if there is a guy like the one you're
trying to find with your beer reason and whiskey logic, there's no way
to find him. No motives, no root systems, no clues. He's walking about
scot-free and unencumbered unless you can connect the ankle-bone to the
legbone to the kneebone to the thighbone."
Crumley, looking happy, sat down, poured more coffee.
"Ever stop to think," he said, "there are no toilets in graveyards?"
My jaw dropped. "Boy! I never thought of that! No need for restrooms out
among the tombstones. Unless! Unless you're writing an Edgar Allan Poe
tale and a corpse gets up at midnight and has to go."
"You going to write that? Jesus, here I am, giving away ideas."
"Crumley."
"Here it comes," he sighed, pushing his chair back.
"You believe in hypnotism? Mind regression?"
"You're already regressed...”
"Please." I gathered my spit. "I'm going nuts. Regress me. Shove me
back!"
"Holy Moses." Crumley was on his feet, emptying the coffee and grabbing
beer out of the icebox. "Outside the nut farm, where do you want to be
sent?"
"I've met the murderer, Crumley. Now I want to meet him again. I tried
to ignore him because he was drunk. He was behind me on that last big
red train to the sea that night I found the old man dead in the lion
cage."
"No proof."
"Something he said was proof, but I've forgotten. If you could ticket me
back, let me ride that train again in the storm, and listen for his
voice, then I'd know who it is and the killings would stop. Don't you
want them to?"
"Sure, and after I talk you back with a hypnotic dog act and you bark
the results, I go arrest the killer, hmm? Come along now, bad man, my
friend the writer heard your voice in a hypnotic seance and that's more
than proof. Here are the handcuffs. Snap 'em on!"
"The hell with you." I stood up and jarred my coffee cup down. "I'll
hypnotize myself. That's what it's all about, anyway, isn't it?
Autosuggestion? It's always me that puts me under?"
"You're not trained, you don't know how. Sit down, for Christ's sake.
I'll help you find a good hypnotist. Hey!" Crumley laughed somewhat
crazily. "What about A. L. Shrank, hypnotist?"
"God." I shuddered. "Don't even joke. He'd sink me down with
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche and Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy and I'd
never surface again. You got to do it, Elmo."
"I got to get you out and me to bed."
He led me gently to the door.
He insisted on driving me home. On the way, looking straight ahead at
the dark future, he said, "Don't worry, kid. Nothing more is going to
happen."
Crumley was wrong.
But not immediately, of course. I awoke at six in the morning because I
thought I heard three dozen rifle shots again.
But it was only the annihilators at the pier, the workmen dentists,
yanking the big teeth. Why, I thought, do destroyers start so early to
destroy. And those rifle shots? Probably just their laughter.
I showered and ran out just in time to meet a fogbank rolling in from
Japan.
The old men from the trolley station were on the beach ahead of me. It
was the first time I had seen them since the day their friend Mr. Smith
who wrote his name on his bedroom wall had vanished.
I watched them watching the pier die, and I could feel the timbers fall
inside their bodies. The only motion they made was a kind of chewing of
their gums, as if they might spit tobacco. Their hands hung down at
their sides, twitching. With the pier gone, I knew, they knew, it was
only a matter of time before the asphalt machines droned along and
tarred over the railroad tracks and someone nailed shut the ticket
office and broomed away the last of the confetti. If I had been them, I
would have headed for Arizona or some bright place that afternoon. But I
wasn't them. I was just me, half a century younger and with no rust on
my knuckles and no bones cracking every time the big pliers out there
gave a yank and made an emptiness.
I went and stood between two of the old men, wanting to say something
that counted.
But all I did was let out a big sigh.
It was a language they understood.
Hearing it, they waited a long while.
And then, they nodded.
“Well, here's another fine mess you got me in!"
My voice, on its way to Mexico City, was Oliver Hardy's voice.
"Ollie," cried Peg, using Stan Laurel's voice. "Fly down here. Save me
from the mummies of Guanajuato!"
Stan and Ollie. Ollie and Stan. From the start we had called ours the
Laurel and Hardy Romance, because we had grown up madly in love with the
team, and did a fair job of imitating their voices.
"Why don't you do something to help me?" I cried, like Mr. Hardy.
And Peg as Laurel spluttered back, "Oh, Ollie, I… I mean, it seems, I…"
And there was silence as we breathed our despair, need, and loving grief
back and forth, mile on mile and dollar on Peg's dear dollar.
"You can't afford this, Stan," I sighed, at last. "And it's beginning to
hurt where aspirins can't reach. Stan, dear Stanley, so long."
"Oll," she wept. "Dear Ollie, goodbye."
As I said . . . Crumley was wrong.
At exactly one minute after eleven that night, I heard the funeral car
pull up in front of my apartment.
I hadn't been asleep and I knew the sound of Constance Rattigan's
limousine by the gentle hiss of its arrival and then the bumbling under
its breath, waiting for me to stir.
I got up, asked no questions of God or anyone, and dressed automatically
without seeing what I put on. Something had made me reach for my dark
pants, a black shirt, and an old blue blazer. Only the Chinese wear
white for the dead.
I held on to the front doorknob for a full minute before I had strength
enough to pull the door open and go out. I didn't climb in the back
seat, I climbed up front where Constance was staring straight ahead at
the surf rolling white and cold on the shore.
Tears were rolling down her cheeks. She didn't say anything, but moved
the limousine quietly. Soon we were flying steadily down the middle of
Venice Boulevard.
I was afraid to ask questions because I feared answers.
About halfway there, Constance said:
"I had this premonition."
That's all she said. I knew she hadn't called anyone. She simply had to
go see for herself.
As it turned out, even if she had called someone, it would have been too
late.
We rolled up in front of the tenement at eleven-thirty p.m.
We sat there and Constance, still staring ahead, the tears streaking
down her cheeks, said:
"God, I feel as though I weigh three-eighty. I can't move."
But we had to, at last.
Inside the tenement, halfway up the steps, Constance suddenly fell to
her knees, shut her eyes, crossed herself, and gasped, "Oh, please, God,
please, please let Fannie be alive."
I helped her the rest of the way up the stairs, drunk on sadness.
At the top of the stairs in the dark there was a vast in-sucked draft
that pulled at us as we arrived. A thousand miles off, at the far end of
night, someone had opened and shut the door on the north side of the
tenement. Going out for air? Going out to escape? A shadow moved in a
shadow. The cannon bang of the door reached us an instant later.
Constance rocked on her heels. I grabbed her hand and pulled her along.
We moved through weather that got older and colder and darker as we
went. I began to run, making strange noises, incantations, with my
mouth, to protect Fannie.
It's all right, she'll be there, I thought, making magic prayers, with
her phonograph records and Caruso photos and astrology charts and
mayonnaise jars and her singing and . . .
She was there all right.
The door hung open on its hinges.
She was there in the middle of the linoleum in the middle of the room,
lying on her back.
"Fannie!" we both shouted at once.
Get up! we wanted to say. You can't breathe lying on your back! You
haven't been to bed in thirty years. You must always sit up, Fannie,
always.
She did not get up. She did not speak. She did not sing.
She did not even breathe.
We sank to our knees by her, pleading in whispers, or praying inside. We
kneeled there like two worshippers, two penitents, two healers, and put
out our hands, as if that would do it. Just by touching we would bring
her back to life.
But Fannie lay there staring at the ceiling as if to say: how curious,
what is the ceiling doing there? and why don't I speak?
It was very simple and terrible. Fannie had fallen, or been pushed, and
could not get up. She had lain there in the middle of the night until
her own weight crushed and smothered her. It would not have taken much
to keep her in position so she could not roll over. You didn't have to
use your hands on her, around her neck. Nothing had to be forced. You
simply stood over her and made sure that she didn't roll to get leverage
to gasp herself erect. And you watched her for a minute, two minutes,
until at last the sounds stopped and the eyes turned to glass.
Oh Fannie, I groaned, oh Fannie, I mourned, what have you done to
yourself?
There was the faintest whisper.
My head jerked. I stared.
Fannie's crank-up phonograph was still turning, slowly, slowly. But it
was still running. Which meant that just five minutes ago, she had
cranked it up, put on a record, and . . .
Answered the door on darkness.
The phonograph turntable spun. But there was no record under the needle.
Tosca wasn't there.
I blinked, and then . . .
There was a swift knocking sound.
Constance was on her feet, choking, running. She headed for the door
leading out to the balcony overlooking the trash-filled empty lot, with
a view of Bunker Hill and the poolhall across the way where laughter
came and went all night. Before I could stop her, she was out the screen
door and to the balcony rail.
"Constance. No!" I yelled.
But she was out there only to be sick, bending over and leaning down and
letting it all come out, as I much wanted to do. I could only stand and
watch and look from her to the great mountain where we foothills had
stood a moment before.
At last Constance stopped.
I turned, for no reason I could imagine, and went around Fannie and
across the room to open a small door. A faint cold light played out over
my face.
"Sweet Christ!" cried Constance, in the door behind me. "What're you
doing?"
"Fannie told me," I said, my mouth numb. "Anything happened, look in the
icebox."
A cold tomb wind blew out around my cheeks.
"So I'm looking."
There was nothing in the icebox, of course.
Or rather there was too much. Jellies, jams, varieties of mayonnaise,
salad dressing, pickles, hot peppers, cheesecake, rolls, white bread,
butter, cold cuts, an Arctic delicatessen. The panorama of Fannie's
flesh was there and how it had been planned and steadily built.
I stared and stared again, trying to see what Fannie wanted me to see.
Oh, Christ, I thought, what am I looking for? Is the answer one of
these? I almost shoved in to hurl all the jams and jellies to the floor.
I had to stop my fist, halfway in.
It's not there, or if it is, I can't see it.
I gave a terrible death groan and slammed the door.
The phonograph, with Tosca gone, gave up and quit.
Someone call the police, I thought. Someone?
Constance was out on the balcony again.
Me.
It was all over by three in the morning. The police had come, and
everyone had been questioned and names taken and the whole tenement was
awake, as if someone had started a fire in the basement, and when I came
out the front of the tenement the morgue van was still parked there with
the men trying to figure out how to get Fannie out and down the stairs
and away. I hoped they wouldn't think of the piano box that Fannie had
joked about, in the alley. They never did. But Fannie had to stay in her
room until dawn, when they brought a bigger van and a larger carrier.
It was terrible, leaving her up there alone in the night. But the police
wouldn't let me stay, and after all, it was a simple case of death from
natural causes.
As I went down through the levels of the house, the doors were beginning
to close and the lights go out, like those nights at the end of the war
when the last conga line, exhausted, drained away into the rooms and
down into the streets and there was the lonely walk for me up over
Bunker Hill and down to the terminal where I would be taken home in
thunders.
I found Constance Rattigan curled up in the back seat of her limousine,
lying quietly, staring at nothing. When she heard me open the back door
she said, "Get behind the wheel."
I climbed up front behind the steering wheel.
"Take me home," she said quietly.
It took me a full moment of sitting there to say finally, "I can't."
"Why not?"
"I don't know how to drive," I said.
"What?"
"I never learned. There was no reason, anyway." My tongue moved like
lead between my lips. "Since when can writers afford cars?"
"Jesus." Constance managed to prop herself up and get out, like someone
with a hangover. She got out and came around walking slowly and blindly
and waved. "Get over."
Somehow she started the car. This time we drove at about ten miles an
hour, as if there were a fog so you could only see ten feet ahead.
We made it as far as the Ambassador Hotel. She turned in there and drove
up just as the last of a Saturday night party came out with balloons and
funny hats. The Coconut Grove was putting out its lights above us. I saw
some musicians hurrying away with their instruments.
Everyone knew Constance. We signed in and had a bungalow on the side of
the hotel in a few minutes. We had no luggage but no one seemed to mind.
The bellboy who took us through the garden to our place kept looking at
Constance as if maybe he should carry her. When we were in the room,
Constance said, "Would a fifty-dollar tip find the key and unlock the
gate to let us in the swimming pool around back?"
"It would go a long way toward finding the key," the bellboy said. "But
a swim, this time of night…?"
"It's my hour," said Constance.
Five minutes later the lights came on in the pool and I sat there and
watched Constance dive in and swim twenty laps, on occasion swimming
underwater from one end to the other without coming up for air.
When she came out, ten minutes later, she was gasping and red-faced and
I cloaked her in a big towel and held her.
"When do you start crying?" I said, at last.
"Dummy," she said. "I just did. If you can't do it in the ocean, a
pool's fine. If you don't have a pool, hit the shower. You can scream
and yell and sob all you want, and it doesn't bother anyone, the world
never hears. Ever think of that?"
"I never thought," said I, in awe.
At four o'clock in the morning, Constance found me in our bungalow
bathroom, standing and staring at the shower. "Hit it," she said,
gently. "Go on. Give it a try." I got in and turned the water on, hard.
At eleven in the morning, we motored through Venice and looked at the
canals with a thin layer of green slime on their surface, and passed the
half-torn-down pier and looked at some gulls soaring in the fog up
there, and no sun yet, and the surf so quiet it was like muffled black
drums.
"Screw this," said Constance. "Flip a nickel. Heads we go north to Santa
Barbara. Tails, south to Tijuana."
"I don't have a nickel," I said.
"Christ." Constance grubbed in her purse and took out a quarter and
tossed it in the air. "Tails!"
We were in Laguna by noon, no thanks to the highway patrol that somehow
missed us.
We sat out in the open air on a cliff overlooking the beach at Victor
Hugo's and had double margaritas.
"You ever see Now, Voyager?"
"Ten times," I said.
"This is where Bette Davis and Paul Henried sat having a love lunch
early in the film. This was the location, back in the early Forties.
You're sitting in the very chair where Henried put his behind."
We were in San Diego by three and outside the bullring in Tijuana just
at the hour of four.
"Think you can stand this?" asked Constance.
"I can only try," I said.
We made it through the third bull and came out into the late-afternoon
light and had two more margaritas and a good Mexican dinner before we
went north and drove out onto the island and sat in the sunset at the
Hotel del Coronado. We didn't say anything, but just watched the sun go
down, lighting the old Victorian towers and fresh-painted white sidings
of the hotel with pink color.
Along the way home we swam in the surf at Del Mar, wordless and, from
time to time, hand in hand.
At midnight we were in front of Crumley's jungle compound.
"Marry me," said Constance.
"Next time I live," I said.
"Yeah. Well, that's not bad. Tomorrow."
When she was gone I walked up the jungle path.
"Where have you been?" said Crumley, in the door.
“Uncle Wiggily says go back three hops," I said.
"The Skeezix and the Pipsisewah say come in," said Crumley.
The something cold in my hand was a beer.
"Lord," he said, "you look terrible. Come here."
He gave me a hug. I didn't think a man like Crumley ever hugged anyone,
not even a woman.
"Be careful," I said, "I'm made out of glass."
"I heard this morning, friend of mind down in Central. I'm sorry, kid. I
know she was a close friend. You got that list with you?"
We were out in the jungle with just the crickets sounding and Segovia,
lost inside the house, playing a lament for some day a long time past
when the sun stayed up for forty-eight hours in Seville.
I found my dumb list crumpled in my pocket and handed it over. "How come
you want to see?"
"All of a sudden, I don't know," said Crumley. "You made me curious."
He sat down and began to read:
Old man in lion cage. Killed. Weapon unknown.
Canaries-for-sale lady. Frightened.
Pietro Massinello. In jail.
Jimmy. Drowned in bathtub.
Sam. Dead from alcohol given him by someone.
Fannie.
With an addition made in the last few hours.
Smothered.
Other new and possible victims:
Henry, the blind man.
Annie Oakley, the rifle lady.
A. L. Shrank, the fraudulent psychiatrist.
John Wilkes Hopwood.
Constance Rattigan.
Mr. Shapeshade.
With an addition. No, cross him out.
Myself.
Crumley turned the list upside down and backward, eyeing it, rereading
the names.
"That's quite a menagerie you got there, buster. How come I'm not in
your sideshow?"
"There's something broken about all those people. You? You got your own
self-starter."
"Just since I met you, kid." Crumley stopped and turned red. "Christ,
I'm getting soft. How come you put yourself on the list?"
"I'm scared gutless."
"Sure, but you got a self-starter, too, and it works. According to your
logic, that should protect you. As for those others? They're so busy
running away fast they'll run off cliffs."
Crumley turned the list upside down again, refusing to meet my gaze, and
read the names out loud.
I stopped him.
"Well?"
"Well, what?" he said.
"It's time," I said. "Hypnotize me, Crum. Elmo, in the name of the sweet
Lord, put me under."
“Jesus," said Crumley.
"You've got to do it, now, tonight. You owe it to me."
"Jesus. Okay, okay. Sit down. Lie down. Do I turn out the lights? God,
give me hard liquor!"
I ran to fetch chairs and put them one behind the other.
"This is the big train at night," I said. "I sit here. You sit behind."
I ran to the kitchen and brought Crumley a slug of whiskey. "You got to
smell like he smelled."
"For this relief, much thanks." Crumley belted it down and shut his
eyes. "This is the dumbest damn thing I have ever done, ever."
"Shut up and drink."
He finished a second one. I sat. Then I remembered and jumped to put on
Crumley's African storm record. It began to rain all through the house,
all around the big red train. I turned down the lights. "There.
Perfect."
"Shut your yap and shut your eyes," said Crumley. "God, I don't know how
to do this."
"Sh. Gently," I said.
"Sh, it is. Quiet. Okay, kid. Go to sleep."
I listened closely and carefully.
"Easy does it," drawled Crumley, behind me on the train in the night in
the rain. "Serenity. Quiet. Lazy. Easy. Around the curves softly.
Through the rain, quietly."
He was getting into the rhythm of it and, I could tell from his voice,
beginning to enjoy.
"Easy. Slow. Quiet. Long after midnight. Rain, soft rain," whispered
Crumley. "Where are you, kid?"
"Asleep," I said drowsily.
"Asleep and traveling. Traveling and asleep," he murmured. "Are you on
the train, kid?"
"Train," I murmured. "Train. Rain. Night."
"That's it. Stay there. Move. On the straightaway through Culver City,
past the studios, late, no one on the train but you and…someone."
"Someone," I whispered.
"Someone who's been drinking."
"Drinking," I mourned.
"Swaying, swaying, talking, talking, muttering, whispering. You hear
him, son?"
"Hear, talk, murmur, mutter, talk," I said quietly.
And the train moved down the night through dark storm and I was there, a
good subject well transported and asleep but hearing, waiting, swaying,
eyes shut, head down, hands numb on my knees. . . .
"You hear his voice, son?"
"Hear."
"Smell his breath?"
"Smell."
"Raining harder now."
"Rain."
"Dark?"
"Dark."
"You're underwater on the train, there's so much rain and someone
swaying behind you, behind you, moaning, speaking, whispering."
"Yesssss."
"Can you hear what he says?"
"Almost."
"Deeper, slower, going, moving, swaying. Hear his voice?"
"Yes."
"What's he say?"
"He says...”
"What's he say?"
"He...”
"Deeper, sleeping. Listen."
His breath fanned my neck, warm with alcohol.
"What, what?"
"He says...”
The train screamed around an iron bend in my head. Sparks flew. There
was a clap of thunder.
. "Gah!" I shrieked. And "Gah!" and a final "Gah!"
I writhed in my chair in my panic to escape that maniac breath, the
flaming alcohol beast. And something else I had forgotten. But it was
back now and it blasted my face, my brow, my nose.
A smell of opened graves, abattoirs, raw meat left too long in the sun.
Eyes slammed tight, I began to retch.
"Kid! Christ, wake up, God, kid, kid!" yelled Crumley, shaking me,
slapping my face, massaging my neck, now down on his knees, yanking at
my head and cheeks and arms, not knowing where to grab or shake me.
"Now, kid, now, for Christ's sake, now!"
"Gah!" I shrieked and flailed a final time, and floundered straight up,
staring about, falling into the grave with the terrible meat, as the
train ran over me and the rain showered into the tomb, with Crumley
slapping me and a great gout of sour food jetting from my mouth.
Crumley stood me outside in the garden air, made sure I was breathing
right, cleaned me up, then went inside to mop up and came back.
"Jesus," he said, "it worked. We got more than we wanted, yes?"
"Yes," I said, weakly. "I heard his voice. And he said just what I
thought he would say. The title I put on your book. But I heard his
voice clearly, and I almost know him now. Next time I meet him, wherever
it is, I'll know. We're close, Crum, we're close. He won't escape now.
But now I'll know him an even better way."
"How?"
"He smells like a corpse. I didn't notice that night, or if I did I was
so nervous I forgot. But now it's back. He's dead, or next to dead. Dogs
killed in the street smell like him. His shirt, his pants, his coat, are
moldy and old. His flesh is worse. So…"
I wandered into the house and found myself at Crumley's desk.
"At last, I have a new title for my own book," I said.
I typed. Crumley watched. The words came out on the paper. We both read
them.
"Downwind from Death."
"That's some title," he said.
And went to shut off the sound of the dark rain.
There was a graveside service for Fannie Florianna the next afternoon.
Crumley took an hour off and drove me over to the nice old-fashioned
graveyard on a hill with a view of the Santa Monica mountains. I was
astonished to see the line of cars outside the place, and more
astonished to see the queue of flowers being carried in to be placed by
the open grave. There must have been two hundred people there, and a few
thousand flowers.
"Criminently," said Crumley. "Look at the mob. See who that is over
there. And just beyond. King Vidor?"
"Vidor, sure. And that's Salka Viertel. She wrote films for Garbo a long
time back. And that other chap is Mr. Fox, Louis B. Mayer's lawyer. And
that one there is Ben Goetz, who headed up MGM's unit in London. And…"
"Why didn't you tell me your friend Fannie knew so many big people?"
"Why didn't Fannie tell me?" I said.
Fannie, dear Fan, I thought, how like you, never to tell, never to brag
that so many of these came up and down the tenement stairs over the
years, for a chat and a remembrance and a song. Lord, Fannie, why didn't
you let me in on it, I would have liked to have known. I wouldn't have
told anyone.
I looked at all the faces gathered near the flowers. Crumley did
likewise.
"Think he's here, kid?" he said, quietly.
"Who?"
"The one you claim did this to Fannie."
"I'll know him when I see him. No, I'll know him when I hear him."
"And then what?" said Crumley. "Have him arrested for being drunk on a
train a couple of nights ago?"
I must have shown a terrible frustration in my face.
"Just trying to ruin your day," said Crumley.
"Friends," someone said.
And the crowd grew very quiet.
It was the best kind of graveside service, if there is such a thing.
Nobody asked me to speak, why would they do that?
But a dozen others took a minute or three minutes and said things about
Chicago in 1920 or Culver City in the mid-Twenties when there were
meadows and fields and the false civilization of MGM was a-building and
ten or twelve nights a year the big red car pulled up on a siding behind
the studio and Louis B. Mayer and Ben Goetz and all the others piled on
and played poker training out to San Bernardino where they went to the
movie house to see the latest Gilbert or Garbo or Novarro and come home
with fistfuls of preview cards: "Lousy!" "Great!" "Terrible!" "Fine!"
and sort out the cards along with the kings and queens and jacks and
spades to figure out just what in hell kind of hand they had. And pull
in behind the studio at midnight, still playing cards, and get off
smelling of Prohibition whiskey with happy smiles or grim smiles of
determination on their faces, to watch Louis B. toddle to his limousine
and go first home.
They were all there and they all spoke with great honesty and clarity.
There were no lies. A true grief lay just beneath every word that was
said.
In the midst of the hot afternoon, someone touched my elbow. I turned
and was surprised.
"Henry! How'd you get here?"
"I sure didn't walk."
"How'd you find me in all this mob?" I whispered.
"You're the only Ivory soap, the rest is Chanel and Old Spice. I'm sure
glad I'm blind on a day like this. Don't mind listening, but I surely do
not want to see this."
The tributes continued. Mr. Fox, Louis B. Mayer's lawyer, was next, a
man who knew law but who rarely went to see any of the films they made.
Right now, he remembered early days in Chicago when Fannie . . .
A hummingbird darted among the bright colors. A dragonfly hummed by soon
after.
"Armpits," said Henry, quietly.
Startled, I waited and whispered, "Armpits?"
"On the street outside the tenement," whispered Henry, staring at a sky
he could not see, speaking from the corner of his mouth. "Inside, the
halls. By my room. By Fannie's room. The smell. Him. The one." A pause.
A nod. "Armpits."
My nose twitched. My eyes began to run. I stirred my feet, wanting to
get away, go see, find.
"When was this, Henry?" I whispered.
"The other night. Night Fannie went away forever."
"Sh!" said someone nearby.
Henry shut up. When there was a change of speakers I whispered, "Where?"
"Crossing the street early on," said Henry. "That night. Powerful, real
powerful smell. Then, later, seemed to me the armpits came into the hall
behind me. I mean, it was so strong it cleared my sinuses. Like having a
grizzly bear breathe on you. You ever smell that? I froze half-across
the street, like I been hit with a baseball bat. Thought, anyone smells
like that's got a grudge against God, dogs, mankind, the world. Step on
a cat rather than walk around. Bad-ass mean. Armpits, like I said.
Armpits. That help you any?"
My whole body was frozen. I could only nod. Henry said, "That smell's
been around the halls some few nights now, but just got stronger is all,
maybe because that dumb son-of-a-bitch was getting closer. I was tripped
up by Mr. Smell, I know that now. I got it figured."
"Sh!" said someone.
An actor spoke, and a priest, and a rabbi, and then the Hall Johnson
Choir from the First Baptist Church on Central Avenue filed through the
tombstones and gathered to sing "Great Day in the Morning," "In the
Sweet Bye and Bye," and "Dear God, Joy Me When I'm Gone." And their
voices were the voices I had heard in the late Thirties, chanting Ronald
Colman over the snow peaks and down into Shangri-La, or standing on
white clouds in the fields of the Lord in Green Pastures. By the end of
their radiant singing, I was overflowed and joyed and Death had had a
new coat of sunlight and time, and the hummingbird came back for nectar,
and the dragonfly sank down to scan my face and go away.
"That," said Crumley, on the way out of the graveyard, with Henry
walking between us, "is the way I want to be sung out of the world. God,
I'd love to be that whole damn choir. Who needs money when you can sing
like that!"
But I was staring at Henry. He felt my stare.
"Thing is," said Henry, "he keeps coming back. Armpits. You'd think he'd
had enough, sure? But he's hungry-mean, can't stop. Scaring people is
like Cracker Jack to him. Hurt's his byword. Pain is a living. He
figures to get old Henry, like he got the rest. But I won't fall again."
Crumley was listening with some seriousness.
"If Armpits comes again…"
"I'll call you, immediamente. He's fiddling around the rooms. Caught him
fiddling Fannie's locked door. It's padlocked and pasted over by the
law, right? He was fiddling it and I yelled him off. He's a coward for
sure. Got no weapons, just goes around putting his foot out so blind men
take a whole flight of steps in one jump. Armpits! I yelled. Scat!"
"Call us," said Crumley. "Can we give you a lift?"
"Some of the ugly ladies from the tenement brought me, thanks, and will
take me home."
"Henry," I said. I put out my hand. He took it swiftly. It was almost as
if he had seen it coming.
"How do I smell, Henry?" I said.
Henry sniffed and laughed. "They don't make heroes like they used to.
But you'll do."
Driving back toward the beach with Crumley, I saw a big limousine pass
us at seventy miles an hour, putting a lot of space between it and the
flowered graveyard. I waved and yelled.
Constance Rattigan did not even glance over. She had been at the
graveside somewhere, hidden away to one side, and now she was roaring
home angry at Fannie for leaving us all, and maybe angry with me for
somehow bringing Death to present a bill.
Her limousine vanished in a great white-gray cloud of exhaust.
"The harpies and the Furies just screamed by," observed Crumley.
"No," I said, "only a lost lady, running to hide."
I tried calling Constance Rattigan during the next three days, but she
wouldn't answer. She was brooding and mad. Somehow, in some dumb way, I
was in cahoots with the man who stood in halls and did terrible things
to people.
I tried calling Mexico City, but Peg was off lost forever, I was sure.
I prowled around Venice, staring and listening and sniffing, hoping for
that dreadful voice, searching for the terrible smell of something dying
or long dead.
Even Crumley was gone. I stared, but he was nowhere up ahead, following.
At the end of three days of failed phone calls, unmet killers, furious
with fate, and confounded by funerals, I did what I had never done
before.
Around ten o'clock at night I strode down the empty pier not knowing
where I was going until I got there.
"Hey," someone said.
I yanked a rifle up off the shelf and, without checking to see if it was
loaded or if anyone was in the way, I fired it, fired it, fired it,
sixteen times!
Wham, wham. And wham wham. And wham wham, and someone was yelling.
I didn't hit any of the targets. I had never handled a rifle in my life.
I don't know what I was shooting at, but yes I did.
"Take that, you son-of-a-bitch, take that, you bastard!"
Wham, wham, and wham wham.
The rifle was empty but I kept yanking the trigger. I suddenly knew it
was impotent. Someone took the rifle away from me. Annie Oakley, staring
at me as if she had never seen me before.
"You know what you're doing?" she asked.
"No, and I don't give a damn!" I glanced around. "How come you're open
so late?"
"Nothing else to do. I can't sleep. What's wrong with you, mister?"
"Everybody in the whole damn world is going to be dead by this time next
week."
"You don't believe that?"
"No, but it feels like it. Give me another rifle."
"You don't want to shoot any more."
"Yes, I do. And I haven't money to pay, you'll have to trust me!" I
cried.
She stared at me for a long time. Then she handed me a rifle. "Sock 'em,
cowboy. Kill 'em, Bogie," she said.
I fired sixteen times. This time I hit two targets by mistake, even
though I couldn't see them, my glasses were that fogged.
"Had enough?" asked Annie Oakley, quietly, behind me.
"No!" I shouted. Then I said, lower, "Yes. What are you doing outside
the gallery on the boardwalk?"
"I was afraid I'd get shot in there. Some maniac just unloaded two
rifles without aiming."
We looked at each other and I began to laugh.
She listened and said, "Are you laughing or crying?"
"What's it sound like? I got to do something. Tell me what."
She studied my face for a long time and then she went around shutting
off the running ducks and the bobbing clowns and the lights. A door
opened in the back of the gallery. She was silhouetted there. She said:
"If you've got to shoot at anything, here's the target." And she was
gone.
It was a full half minute before I realized she expected me to follow.
"Do you behave this way often?" asked Annie Oakley. "Sorry," I said.
I was on one far side of her bed, she on the other, listening to me talk
about Mexico City and Peg and Peg and Mexico City so far away it was a
dreadful ache.
"The story of my life," said Annie Oakley, "is men in bed with me bored
silly or talking about other women, or lighting cigarettes or rushing
off in their cars when I go to the bathroom. You know what my real name
is? Lucretia Isabel Clarisse Annabelle Maria Monica Brown. My mom gave
me all those, so what do I choose? Annie Oakley. Problem is, I'm dumb.
Men can't stand me after the first ten minutes. Dumb. Read a book, an
hour later, it's gone! Nothing sticks. I talk a lot, don't I?"
"A bit," I said, gently.
"You'd think some guy would like someone as truly dumb as me, but I wear
them out. Three hundred nights a year it's some damn different male goof
lying where you're lying. And that damn foghorn blowing out in the bay,
does it get to you? Some nights, even with a jerk of a cluck in bed with
me, when that foghorn goes off, I feel so alone and there he is,
checking his keys, looking at the door…"
Her telephone rang. She grabbed it, listened, said, "I'll be damned."
She waved it at me. "For you."
"Impossible," I said. "No one knows I'm here."
I took the phone.
"What are you doing at her place?" said Constance Rattigan.
"Nothing. How did you find me?"
"Someone called. Just a voice. Told me to check on you and hung up."
"Oh, my God." I was turning cold.
"Get out of there," said Constance. "I need your help. Your strange
friend has come to visit."
"My friend?"
The ocean roared under the Rifle Gallery, shuddering the room and the
bed.
"Down by the shore, two nights in a row. You've got to come scare him
off… oh, God!"
"Constance!"
There was a long silence in which I could hear the surf outside
Constance Rattigan's windows. Then she said, in a strange numb way,
"He's there now."
"Don't let him see you."
"The bastard is down on the shoreline, just where he was last night. He
just stares up at the house, like he's waiting for me. The bastard's
naked. What does he think, the old lady is so crazy she'll run out and
jump him? Christ."
"Shut the windows, Constance, turn off the lights!"
"No. He's backing off. Maybe my voice carries. Maybe he thinks I'm
calling the police."
"Call them!"
"Gone." Constance took a deep breath. "Get over here, kid. Fast."
She didn't hang up. She just let the phone drop and walked off. I could
hear her sandals slapping the tiled floor making typewriter sounds.
I didn't hang up, either. For some reason I just put the phone down as
if it were an umbilical cord between me and Constance Rattigan. As long
as I didn't disconnect, she couldn't die. I could still hear the night
tide moving on her end of the line.
"Just like all the other men. There you go," said a voice.
I turned.
Annie Oakley sat up in bed, huddled in her sheets like an abandoned
manatee.
"Don't hang up that telephone," I said.
Not until I reach the far end, I thought, and save a life.
"Dumb," said Annie Oakley, "that's why you're going. Dumb."
It took a lot of guts to run the night shore toward Constance
Rattigan's. I imagined some terrible dead man rushing the other way.
"Jesus!" I gasped. "What happens if I meet him?" "Gah!" I shrieked.
And ran full-tilt into a solid shadow.
"Thank God, it's you!" someone yelled.
"No, Constance," I said. "Thank God, it's you."
“What's so damn funny?"
"This." I slapped the big bright pillows on all sides of me. "This is
the second bed I've been in tonight."
"Hilarious," said Constance. "Mind if I bust your nose?"
"Constance. Peg's my girl. I was just lonely. You haven't called in
days. Annie asked me for pillow talk, and that's all it was. I can't
lie. It shows in my face. Look."
Constance looked and laughed.
"Christ, fresh apple pie. Okay, okay." She sank back. "I scare the hell
out of you just now?"
"You should've yelled ahead as you ran."
"I was glad to see you, son. Sorry I haven't phoned. Once I forgot
funerals in a few hours. Now, it takes days."
She touched a switch. The lights dimmed and the sixteen-millimeter
projector flashed on. Two cowboys knocked each other down on the white
wall.
"How can you watch films at a time like this?" I said.
"To rev me up so I can go out and knock Mr. Naked's block off if he
shows again tomorrow night."
"Don't even joke about it." I looked out the French windows at the empty
shore where only white waves sounded on the edge of night. "Do you think
he telephoned you to tell you where I was, with Annie, and then walked
up the beach to stand out there?"
"No. His voice wasn't right. It's got to be two different guys. Christ,
I can't figure it, but the one guy, the one with no clothes, he's got to
be some sort of exhibitionist, a flasher, right?
Or why doesn't he just run up in here and ruin the old lady or kill her
or both? It's the other one, the guy on the phone, that gives me the
willies."
I know, I thought, I've heard his breathing.
"He sounds like a real monster," said Constance.
Yes, I thought. A long way off I heard the big red trolley shriek around
an iron curve in the rain, with the voice behind me, chanting the words
of a title for Crumley's book.
"Constance," I said, and stopped. I was going to tell her I had seen the
stranger on the shore many nights ago.
"I've got some real estate south of here," said Constance. "I'm going to
go check it tomorrow. Call me, late, yes? And meantime, you want to look
into something for me?"
"Anything. Well, almost anything."
Constance watched William Farnum knock his brother Dustin down, pick him
up, knock him down again.
"I think I know who Mr. Naked on the Shore is."
"Who?"
She searched down along the surf as if his ghost was still there.
"A son-of-a-bitch from my past with a head like a mean German general,"
she said, "and a body like all the boys of summer who ever lived."
The small motorbike pulled up outside the carousel building with a young
man in swimshorts astride, his body bronzed and oiled and beautiful. He
was wearing a heavy helmet with a dark visor down over his face to his
chin, so I couldn't see his face. But the body was the most amazing I
think I have ever seen. It made me think of a day years before when I
had seen a beautiful Apollo walking along the shore with a surf of young
boys walking after him, drawn for they knew not what reasons, but they
walked in beauty with him, loving but not knowing it was love, never
daring to name and trying not to think of this moment later in life.
There are beauties like that in this world, and all men and all women
and all children are pulled in their wake, and it is all pure and
wondrous and clean and there is no residue of guilt, because nothing
happened. You just saw and followed and when the time on the shore was
over, he went away and you went off, smiling the kind of smile that is
such a surprise you put your hand up an hour later and find it still
attached.
On a whole beach in an entire summer you only see bodies like that, on
some young man, or some young woman, once. Twice, if the gods are
snoozing and not jealous.
Here was Apollo, astride the motorbike, gazing through his dark,
featureless visor at me.
"You come to see the old man?" The laugh behind the glass was rich and
throaty. "Good! Come on."
He propped the bike and was in and up the stairs ahead of me. Like a
gazelle, he took the steps three at a time and vanished into an upstairs
room.
I followed, one step at a time, feeling old.
When I got to his room I heard the shower running. A moment later he
came out, stripped and glistening with water, the helmet still over his
head. He stood in the bathroom door, looking into me as he might into a
mirror, and liking what he saw.
"Well," he said, inside his helmet, "how do you like the most beautiful
boy, the young man that I love?"
I blushed furiously.
He laughed and shucked off his helmet.
"My God," I said, "it really is you!"
"The old man," said John Wilkes Hopwood. He glanced down at his body and
smiled. "Or the young. Which of us do you prefer?"
I swallowed hard. I had to force myself to speak quickly, for I wanted
to run back down the stairs before he closed and locked me in the room.
"That all depends," I said, "on which one of you has been standing on
the beach, late nights, outside Constance Rattigan's home."
With wondrous timing, the calliope downstairs in the rotunda started up,
running the carousel. It sounded like a dragon that had swallowed a
corps of bagpipers and was now trying to throw them back up, in no
particular order to no particular tune.
Like a cat that wants time to consider its next move, old-young Hopwood
turned his tanned backside toward me, a signal that was supposed to
fascinate.
I shut my eyes to the golden sight.
That gave Hopwood a moment to decide what he wanted to say.
"What makes you think I would bother with an old horse like Constance
Rattigan?" he said, as he reached into the bathroom and dragged out a
towel which he now used to swab his shoulders and chest.
"You were the great love of her life, she was yours. That was the summer
all America loved the lovers, yes?"
He turned to check on how much irony might show in my face to match my
voice.
"Have you come here because she sent you, to warn me off?"
"Perhaps."
"How many pushups can you do, can you do sixty laps of a pool, or bike
forty miles in a day without sweating, what weights can you lift, and
how many people,” I noticed he did not say women, "can you bed in one
afternoon?" he asked.
"No, no, no, no, and maybe two," I said, "to answer all those
questions."
"Then," said Helmut the Hun, turning to show me Antinous' magnificent
facade, something to match the golden hind, "you are in no position to
threaten me, ja?"
His mouth was a razor slit from which bursts of bright shark teeth
hissed and chewed.
"I will come and go on the beach," he said.
With the Gestapo ahead and the summer boys soon after, I thought.
"I admit nothing. Perhaps I was there some nights." He nodded up the
coast. "Perhaps not."
You could have cut your wrists with his smile.
He hurled the towel at me. I caught it.
"Get my back for me, will you?"
I hurled the towel away. It fell and hung over his head, masking his
face. The Horrible Hun was, for a moment, gone. Only Sun King Apollo,
his rump as bright as the apples of the gods, remained.
From under the towel his voice said quietly:
"The interview is over."
"Did it ever really begin?" I said.
I went downstairs as the dragon's sick calliope music was coming up.
There were no words at all on the Venice Cinema marquee. All the letters
were gone.
I read the emptiness half a dozen times, feeling something roll over and
die in my chest.
I went around trying all the doors, which were locked, and looked into
the box office, which was deserted, and glanced at the big poster frames
where Barrymore and Chancy and Norma Shearer had smiled just a few
nights ago. Now, nothing.
I backed off and read the emptiness a last time to myself, quietly.
"How do you like the double bill?" asked a voice from behind me.
I turned. Mr. Shapeshade was there, beaming. He handed over a big roll
of theater posters. I knew what it was. My diplomas from Nosferatu
Institute, Graduate School of Quasimodo, Postgraduate in d'Artagnan and
Robin Hood.
"Mr. Shapeshade, you can't give these to me."
"You're a romantic sap, aren't you?"
"Sure, but...”
"Take, take. Farewell, goodbye. But another farewell, goodbye, out
beyond. Kummensei pier oudt!"
He left the diplomas in my hands and trotted off.
I found him at the end of the pier, pointing down and watching my face
to see me crumple and seize the pier rail, staring over.
The rifles were down there, silent for the first time in years. They lay
on the sea bottom about fifteen feet under, but the water was clear
because the sun was coming out.
I counted maybe a dozen long, cold, blue metal weapons down there where
the fish swam by.
"Some farewell, huh?" Shapeshade glanced where I was looking. "One by
one. One by one. Early this morning. I came running up, yelled, what're
you doing!? What does it look like? she said. And one by one, over and
down. They're closing your place, they're closing mine this afternoon,
so what the hell, she said. And one by one."
"She didn't," I said, and stopped. I searched the waters under the pier
and far out. "She didn't?"
"Was she the last one in? No, no. Just stood here a long time, with me,
watching the ocean. They won't be here long, she said. Week from now,
gone. A bunch of stupid guys will dive and bring them up, yes? What
could I say. Yes."
"She leave any word when she went?"
I could not take my eyes off the long rifles that shone in the flowing
tide.
"Said she was going somewhere to milk cows. But no bulls, she said, no
bulls. Milk cows and churn butter, was the last thing I heard."
"I hope she will," I said.
The rifles suddenly swarmed with fish who seemed to have come to see.
But there were no sounds of firing.
"Their silence," said Shapeshade, "is nice, eh?"
I nodded.
"Don't forget these," said Shapeshade.
They had fallen out of my hands. He picked up and handed me my diplomas
for all the years of my young life running up and down popcorn aisles in
the dark with the Phantom and the Hunchback.
On the way back, I passed a little boy who stood staring down at the
remains of the rollercoaster lying like strewn bones on the shore.
"What's that dinosaur doing lying there dead on the beach?" he said.
I had thought of it first. I resented this boy who saw the collapsed
rollercoaster as I saw it: a beast dead in the tides.
No! I wanted to yell at him.
But aloud I said, gently, "Oh, Lord, son, I wish I knew."
I turned and staggered away, carrying an armload of invisible rifles
down the pier.
I had two dreams that night. In the first, A. L. Shrank's Sigmund Freud
Schopenhauer tarot card shop was knocked to flinders by the great hungry
steamshovel, so off in the tide floated the Marquis de Sade and Thomas
De Quincey, and Mark Twain's sick daughters and Sartre on a truly bad
day, drowning in the dark waters over the shine of the shooting gallery
rifles.
The second dream was a newsreel I had seen of the Russian royal family,
lined up by their graves, and shot so that they jerked and jumped like a
silent film projection, knocked, blown away, end over end, like popped
corks, into the pit. It made you gasp with horrid laughter. Inhuman.
Hilarious. Bam!
There went Sam, Jimmy, Pietro, canary lady, Fannie, Cal, old lion-cage
man, Constance, Shrank, Crumley, Peg, and me!
Bam!
I slammed awake, sweating ice.
The telephone, across the street in the gas station, was ringing.
It stopped.
I held my breath.
It rang again once, and stopped.
I waited.
It rang again, once, and stopped.
Oh, God, I thought, Peg wouldn't do that. Crumley wouldn't do that. Ring
once and stop?
The phone rang again, once. Then, silence.
It's him. Mr. Lonely Death. Calling to tell me things I don't want to
know.
I sat up, the hairs on my body fuzzed as if Cal had run his Bumblebee
Electric barber shears down my neck to strike a nerve.
I dressed and ran out to the shoreline. I took a deep breath, then
stared south.
Far away down the coast, all of the windows in Constance Rattigan's
Moorish fort were brightly lit.
Constance, I thought. Fannie won't like this.
Fannie?
And then I really ran.
I came in from the surf, like Death himself. Every light in Constance's
place was burning, and every door stood wide open, as if she had opened
them all to let nature and the world and night and the wind in to clean
her place while she was gone.
And she was gone.
I knew without even going in her place, because there was a long line of
her footprints coming down to the tideline where I stopped and looked to
see where they went in the water, but never came out.
I wasn't surprised. I was surprised that I wasn't surprised. I walked up
to her wide-open front door and didn't call, or almost called for her
chauffeur and laughed to think I might have been so foolish, and went in
without touching anything. The phonograph was playing in the Arabian
parlor. Dance music by Ray Noble, from London, in 1934, some Noel Coward
tunes. I let the music play. The projector was on, mindlessly whirling
its reel, the film done, the white light of the bulb staring at the
blank front wall. I didn't think to turn it off. A bottle of Moe't et
Chandon stood iced and waiting, as if she had gone down to the sea
expecting to bring some golden god of the deep back with her.
Cheeses were laid out on a plate on a pillow, along with a shaker of
martinis, getting watery. The Duesenberg was in the garage and the
footprints still lay in the sand, going only one way. I telephoned
Crumley, and congratulated myself on not crying just yet, feeling numb.
"Crumley?" I said into the telephone.
"Crumley. Crum," I said.
"Child of the night," he said. "You bet on another wrong horse again?"
I told him where I was.
"I can't walk very well." I sat down suddenly, clenching the phone.
"Come get me."
Crumley met me on the shore.
We stood looking up at that Arabian fort all brightly lit like a festive
tent in the middle of a desert of sand. The door opening out on the
shore was still wide and the music was playing inside, a stack of
records that seemed never to want to stop dropping. It was "Lilac Time,"
then it was "Diane," then it was "Ain't She Sweet?" followed by "Hear My
Song of the Nile" and then "Pagan Love Song." I expected Ramon Novarro
to show up at any moment, run in, and come out wild haired and mad of
eye, rushing down to the shore.
"But there's just me and Crumley."
"Unh?"
"I didn't know I was thinking out loud," I apologized.
We trudged up the shore.
"You touch anything?"
"Only the phone."
When we reached the door I let him go in and prowl through the house and
come out.
"Where's the chauffeur?"
"That's something else I never told you. There never was one."
"What?"
I told him about Constance Rattigan and her role playing.
"She was her own all-star cast, huh? Jesus. Louder and funnier, as they
say."
We went back out to stand on the wind-blown porch to look at the
footprints that were beginning to blow away.
"Could be suicide," said Crumley.
"Constance wouldn't do that."
"Christ, you're so godawful sure about people. Why don't you grow up?
Just because you like someone doesn't mean they can't take the big jump
without you."
"There was someone on the shore, waiting for her."
"Proof."
We followed Constance's single line of prints down to the surf.
"He was standing over there." I pointed. "Two nights. I saw him."
"Swell. Ankle deep in water. So no prints for the killer. What else you
want to show me, son?"
"Someone called me an hour ago, woke me up, told me to come along the
beach. That someone knew her house was empty or soon going to be."
"Phone call, huh? Swell again. Now you’re ankle deep in water and no
prints. That the whole story?"
My cheeks must have reddened. He saw that I had been telling a
half-truth. I didn't want to admit I hadn't answered the phone the last
time, but ran down the beach on a terrible hunch.
"At least you got integrity, scribe." Crumley looked at the white waves
combing in, then at the footprints, then at the house, white, cold, and
empty in the middle of the night. "You know what integrity means? Based
on the word integers. Numbers. Integrity means to add up. Has nothing to
do with virtue. Hitler had integrity. Zero plus zero plus zero makes
zero, no score. Phone calls and footprints underwater and blind hunches
and dopey faith. These late-night shootings are beginning to tell on me.
That about do it?"
"No, damn it. I've got a real, live suspect. Constance recognized him. I
did, too, went to see him. Find out where he was tonight, you got the
killer! You…"
I lost control of my voice. I had to take my glasses off and wipe the
tiny wet salt-marks off so I could see.
Crumley patted my cheek and said, "Hey, don't. How do you know this guy,
whoever he is, didn't take her in the water and…"
"Drown her!"
"Swim with her, talk nice, and they swam north one hundred yards and
walked back to his place. For all you know, she'll be dragging home at
dawn with a funny smile on her face."
"No," I said.
"What, am I spoiling the mysterious romance of all this for you?"
"No."
But he could tell I was uncertain.
He touched my elbow. "What else haven't you said?"
"Constance mentioned she had some real estate not far from here, down
the coast."
"You sure she didn't just go there tonight? If what you say's true, what
if she got spooked, pulled up stakes?"
"Her limousine's still here."
"People walk, you know. You do it all the time. Lady could walk a mile
south, spooked, in an inch of water, and us no wiser."
I looked south to see if I could see a beautiful lady, escaped along the
strand.
"Thing is," said Crumley, "we got nothing to go on. Empty house. Old
records playing. No suicide note. No sign of violence. We got to wait
for her to come back. And if she doesn't, there's still no case, no
corpus delicti. I bet you a bucket of beer she'll…"
"Let me take you to the upstairs apartment at the carousel tomorrow.
When you see that strange man's face…"
"God. Do you mean who I think you mean?"
I nodded.
"The airy-fairy?" said Crumley. "The fag?"
There was a tremendous flop in the water just then.
We both jumped.
"Jesus, what was that?" cried Crumley, peering out over the midnight
waters.
Constance, I thought, coming back.
I stared and at last said, "Seals. They do come and play out there."
There was a series of small flops and splashes which faded as some sea
creature departed in darkness.
"Hell," said Crumley.
"The projector's still running there in the parlor," I said.
"Phonograph's still playing. Oven's on in the kitchen, something baking.
And all the lights in all the rooms."
"Let's shut some off before the damn place burns down."
We followed Constance Rattigan's footprints back up to her fortress of
white light.
"Hey," whispered Crumley. He stared at the eastern horizon. "What's
that?"
There was a faint band of cold light there.
"Dawn," I said. "I thought it would never come."
Constance Rattigan's footprints blew away off the sand in the dawn wind.
And Mr. Shapeshade came along the shore, looking back over his shoulder,
cans of film under his arms. Far off there, at this very moment, his
movie house was being trashed by huge steel-toothed monsters that had
risen, summoned by real estate speculators, out of the sea.
When Shapeshade saw me and Crumley standing on Constance Rattigan's
front porch, he blinked at our faces and then at the sand and then at
the ocean. We didn't have to tell him anything, our faces were that
pale.
"She'll be back," he said again and again, "she'll be back. Constance
wouldn't go away. My God, who would I run films with, who? She'll be
back, sure!" His eyes spilled over.
We left him in charge of the empty fort and drove back toward my place.
On the way, Detective Lieutenant Crumley, in a burst of invective, using
harsh epithets like cow-chappatis, Bull Durham, bushwah, and
watch-out-you'll-step-in-it, refused my offer to go ride on that damn
carousel questioning Field Marshal Erwin Rommel or his pretty pal,
dressed up in rose petals, Nijinsky.
"In one or two days, maybe. If that goony old woman doesn't swim back
from Catalina, sure. Then I start asking questions. But now? I will not
shovel horse-flops to find the horse."
"Are you angry with me?" I asked.
"Angry, angry, why would I be angry? Angry? Christ, you drive me out of
my skull. But angry? Here's a buck, go buy ten rides on that calliope
racetrack."
He dropped me, running, at my door, and roared off.
Inside, I looked at Cal's old piano. The sheet had fallen off the big
white ivory teeth.
"Don't laugh," I said.
Three things happened that afternoon. Two were fine. One was terrible.
A letter arrived from Mexico. In it was a photo of Peg. She had colored
her eyes with a blend of brown and green ink, to help me remember what
they looked like.
Then there was a postcard from Cal, postmarked Gila Bend.
"Son," it said, "you keeping my piano tuned? I'm torturing folks
part-time in the local beer joint. This town is full of bald men. Me
being here, they don't know how lucky they are. Cut the sheriffs hair
yesterday. He gave me twenty-four hours to leave town. Will gas up for
Sedalia tomorrow. Be happy. Yours, Cal."
I turned the card over. There was a photo of a gila monster with black
and white patterns on its back. Cal had drawn a bad portrait of himself
seated there as if the creature were a musical instrument and him
playing only the dark keys.
I laughed and walked north toward the Santa Monica pier, wondering what
I might say to that odd man who lived a double life above the moaning
carousel.
"Field Marshal Rommel," I shouted, "how and why did you set out to kill
Constance Rattigan?"
But no one was there to hear.
The carousel ran in silence.
The calliope was turned on, but the music was at the end of its roll and
the slots flapped around and around.
The carousel owner was not dead in his ticket booth, only dead drunk. He
was awake, but seemed not to hear the silence or know that the horses
were galloping to the slap of the Swiss cheese roll in the mouth of the
big machine.
I surveyed it all with disquiet and was about to trudge upstairs when I
noticed a fine-blowing litter on the floor of the circling horse race.
I waited for the carousel to turn twice more, then grabbed a brass pole
and hopped on, moving drunkenly among the poles.
Pieces of torn paper blew in the wind made by the horses jumping up and
down and the passage of the carousel itself, going nowhere.
I found a thumbtack on the circular floor under the ripped paper.
Someone had perhaps tacked the message to the forelock of one of the
wooden horses. Someone had found it, read it, torn it, run away.
John Wilkes Hopwood.
I spent a good three minutes picking up the pieces, feeling as hopeless
as the carousel's journey, then hopped off and tried piecing it
together. It took another fifteen minutes of finding a terrible word
here, an awful word there, and a damning word further on, but finally
there was a death and a doom. Anyone reading this, anyone, that is, with
the wrong old skeleton hung inside his young bright flesh, might wither
at these strikes to the groin.
I could not put it all together. There were missing pieces. But the
essence was that the reader was an old man, ugly man. Truly ugly. He
made love to that body because with that face, who would want him?
Nobody for years. It recalled how the studios threw him out in 1929,
attacked the fake Kraut voice and broken wrists and strange boyfriends
and old sick women. "In bars late at night they say your name and laugh
at you when you go away full of cheap gin. And now you have caused
death. I saw you on the beach last night when she swam out and did not
come back. People will say murder. Goodnight, sweet prince."
That was it. A dreadful weapon, posted and found.
I gathered the pieces and went upstairs, about ninety years older than I
had been a few days before.
The door to Hopwood's room whispered open under my hand.
There were clothes all over the place, on the floor and by several
suitcases, as if he had tried to pack, panicked, and gone off traveling
light.
I looked out the apartment window. Down on the pier, his bike was still
padlocked against a lamppost. But his motorbike was gone. Proving
nothing. He might have driven, rather than walked, into the sea.
Christ, I thought, what if he catches up with Annie Oakley, and then the
two of them catch up with Cal?
I dumped a small wastebasket out on a flimsy desk by his bed and found
some torn bits of fine bright yellow Beverly Hills-type stationery with
C.R. for Constance Rattigan along the top. There was typewriting on the
paper:
MIDNIGHTS. WAIT. SIX NIGHTS RUNNING ON THE SHORELINE. MAYBE, JUST MAYBE,
LIKE OLD TIMES. And the typed initials C.R.
The typeface looked like the machine I had seen open on a desk in her
Arabian parlor.
I touched the fragments, thinking, had Constance written Hopwood? No.
She would have told me. Someone else must have sent this to Hopwood, a
week ago. And he had jogged up the shore like a stallion to wait in the
surf for Constance to come laughing down. Had he gotten tired of waiting
and dragged her in the water and drowned her? No, no. He must have seen
her dive in and never come out. Scared, he ran home, to find what? The
last note, the one with the terrible words and awful degradations that
shot him below the belt. So he had two reasons to leave town: fright and
the insults.
I glanced at the telephone and sighed. No use calling Crumley. No corpus
delicti. Just torn paper which I shoved in my jacket pockets. They felt
like moth-wings, fragile but poisonous.
Melt all the guns, I thought, break the knives, burn the guillotines,
and the malicious will still write letters that kill.
I saw a small bottle of cologne near the phone and took it, remembering
blind Henry and his memory and his nose.
Downstairs the carousel still turned in silence, the horses still leaped
over invisible barriers toward finish lines that never arrived.
I glanced at the drunken ticketman in his coffin booth, shivered, and,
to absolutely no music whatsoever, got the hell out of there.
The miracle came just after lunch.
A special-delivery letter arrived from the American Mercury offering to
buy a short story if I wouldn't mind their sending a check for three
hundred dollars.
"Mind?" I shrieked. "Mind! Good grief, they must be nuts!"
I stuck my head out into the empty street and yelled at the houses, the
sky, and the shore.
"I just sold to the American Mercury! Three hundred bucks! I'm rich!"
I lurched over to shove the Mercury letter under the bright glass eyes
in the small shop window.
"Look!" I cried. "How about that? See.
"Rich," I muttered and gasped as I ran to the liquor store to flap the
letter in the owner's face. "Look." I waved it around in the Venice
train ticket office. "Hey!" I jolted to a halt. For I discovered I had
jumped into the bank thinking I had the actual check with me and was
about to deposit the damn letter.
"Rich…" I blushed and backed off.
At my apartment, I suddenly remembered the nightmare.
That dire beast rising to seize and eat me.
Idiot! Fool! You shouted good rice when it should have been bad.
That night for the first night in a long while, the small rainstorm did
not drench my doormat. There was no visitor, no seaweed on my sidewalk
at dawn.
Somehow my truth, my blundering yells, had scared it away.
Curiouser, I thought, and curiouser.
There was nobody and so no funeral the next day, just a memorial service
for Constance Rattigan that seemed to have been organized by a rat pack
of autograph and film-photo fans, so there was a mob of milling extras
stomping the sand out front of Constance Rattigan's Arabian fort on the
shore.
I stood a long way off from the stampede and watched "some aging
lifeguards sweat a portable organ across the sands to where someone had
forgotten the stool so the lady who played it badly played it standing
up, beads of salt on her brow, bobbing her head to conduct the
lugubrious choir as the gulls flew down to investigate a scene without
food so they flew away, and a fake minister barked and yipped like a
poodle and the sandpipers rushed away, frightened, as the sandcrabs dug
deeper to hide, and I gritted my teeth halfway between outrage and demon
laughter as one by one the various grotesques, come down off the night
screen at Mr. Shapeshade's or out from under the midnight piers,
staggered down to the surf and hurled withered flower garlands at the
tide.
Damn it, Constance, I thought, swim in now. Stop this damn freakshow.
But my magic thinking failed. The only thing that came in was the
wreaths, upchucked by a tide that didn't want them. A few people tried
to throw them back again, but the damn things simply returned, and it
began to rain. There was a frantic search for newspapers to protect
their heads, and the lifeguards grunted the damn organ back across the
sand, and I was left alone in the rain with a newspaper draped over my
skull and the headlines upside down over my eyes.
FAMED SILENT STAR VANISHES.
I went down to kick the floral wreaths into the surf. This time, they
stayed. Stripped down to my swimsuit, I grabbed an armload of flowers
and swam out as far as I could before I let go.
Coming back, I almost drowned when my feet caught, tangled in one of the
wreaths.
"Crumley," I whispered.
And did not know if his name on my lips was a curse or a prayer.
Crumley opened his door. His face was bright and shining, but not with
beer. Something else had happened.
"Hey!" cried the detective. "Where you been? I been calling and calling
you. Christ, come see what the old man's got."
He ran ahead to his workroom and pointed dramatically at his desk where
a pile of manuscript, half an inch high, lay filled with words.
"Why, you old s.o.b.," I said, and whistled.
"That's me! S. O. B. Crumley. Crumley, S. O. B. Boy howdy."
He ripped a page out of the typewriter.
"Wanta read?"
"I don't have to." I laughed. "It's good, right?"
"Git outa the way." He laughed back. "The dam has broke."
I sat down, snorting with happiness at the sun in his face. "When did
all this happen?"
"Two nights ago, midnight, one, two, I dunno. I was just lying here with
my teeth in my mouth, staring at the ceiling, not reading a book, not
listening to any radio, not drinking beer, and the wind blew outside,
and the trees shook, and all of a sudden the damn ideas seethed like
maggots on a hotplate. And I just got the hell up and walked over and
sat down and next thing I know I’m typing and typing like hell and can't
stop, and by dawn there's a big mountain, or molehill, of stuff and I'm
laughing and crying all the time. Lookit that. And come six in the
morning I go to bed and just lie there looking at all this paper and I
laugh and laugh and I'm as happy as if I just had a brand-new love
affair with the greatest lady in the world."
"You had," I said, softly.
"Funny thing is," said Crumley, "what started it. Maybe the wind outside
the house. Somebody leaving seaweed calling cards on the porch? But did
the old detective rush out, firing guns, yelling 'Freeze!' Hell, no. No
yells, no shots. Just me banging my typewriter, making lots of noise
like on New Year's or Halloween. And you know what happened next?
Guess?"
My body was cold. A whole population of frosted bumps had come up on my
neck.
"The wind went away," I said. "The footsteps outside your house
stopped."
"What?" said Crumley, amazed.
"And there's been no seaweed ever again. And he, whoever he was, has not
come back since."
"How'd you know that?" gasped Crumley.
"I just did, is all. You did the right thing, without knowing. Just like
me. I shouted, and he went away from me, too. Oh, God, God."
I told Crumley about my sale to the Mercury, my running around town like
a fool, my yelling to the sky, and the rain not raining on my
three-o'clock-in-the-morning door any more, maybe forever.
Crumley sat down as if I had handed him an anvil.
"We're getting close, Elmo," I said. "We've scared him off, without
meaning to. The further away he gets, the more we know about him. Well,
maybe, anyway. At least we know he's put off by loud fools and laughing
detectives doing maniac things to typewriters at five in the morning.
Keep typing, Crumley. Then you'll be safe."
"Horseradish," said Crumley. But he laughed when he said it.
His smile made me brave. I dug in my pockets and brought out the
poison-pen letter that had scared Hopwood, plus the warm love-letter on
sun-yellow paper that had lured him down the coast in the first place.
Crumley toyed with the bits and pieces and sank halfway back into his
old bathrobe of cynicism.
"Each typed on a different typewriter. Neither signed. Hell, anyone
could have typed both. And if old Hopwood was the sex freak we took him
for, he read that one on yellow paper and really believed Rattigan wrote
it, hell, he raced up the shore and waited like a good boy for her to
come down and grab his behind. But you know and I know, Rattigan never
wrote a note like that in her life. She had an ego like a ten-ton truck.
She never begged in the big Hollywood houses, on the streets, or on the
shore. So what does that leave us with? She swam at strange hours. I'd
run along the beach, my workout, and see that, night after night.
Anyone, even me, could have snuck in while she was two hundred yards out
in the bay playing with the sharks, anyone could have sat in her parlor,
used her typewriter and stationery, and snuck back out, mailed this
foreplay sex-note to that Hopwood son-of-a-bitch, and waited for the
fireworks."
"And?" I said.
"And," said Crumley, "maybe the whole thing backfired. Rattigan, bugged
by the flasher, panicked, swam out to escape him, got caught in a
riptide. Then Hopwood, on the shore, watching, waiting, turned chicken
when she didn't swim back in, and fled. The next day he gets the second
note, the real doomsday attack. He knows someone saw him on the beach,
and can finger him as Rattigan's so-called killer. So…"
"He's left town already," I said.
"It figures. Which leaves us still ten miles up from Tampico in
Cleopatra's barge with no paddles. What in hell do we have to go on?"
"A guy who makes phone calls and steals Scott Joplin's head off Cal the
barber's old photo and scares Cal out of town."
"Check."
"A guy who stands in halls and gets an old man drunk and stuffs him in a
lion cage and maybe saves some ticket-punch confetti stolen from the old
man's pockets."
"Check."
"A guy who scares the old canary lady to death and steals the newspaper
headlines from the bottom of her birdcages. And after Fannie stops
breathing, the same guy steals her record of Tosca as a keepsake. And
then he writes letters to old actor Hopwood and frightens him away
forever. Probably stole something from Hopwood's apartment, too, but
we'll never know. And, if you checked, probably swiped a bottle of
champagne from Constance Rattigan's wine racks just before I got there
the other night. The guy can't stop himself. He's a real collector…"
Crumley's telephone rang. He picked it up, listened, handed it to me.
"Armpits," said a mellow voice.
"Henry!" Crumley put his ear to the receiver with me.
"Armpits is back, messing around, hour, two hours ago," said Henry, off
in that other country, the tenement far across Los Angeles in a rapidly
dying past. "Someone got to stop him. Who?"
Henry hung up.
"Armpits." I took Hopwood's springtime cologne out of my pocket and
placed it on Crumley's desk.
"Nope," said Crumley. "Whoever that bad ass is in the tenement ain't
Hopwood. The old actor always smelled like a bed of marigolds and an
acre of stardust. You want me to go sniff around your friend Henry's
door?"
"No," I said, "by the time you got there, Mr. Armpits'd be back out
here, waiting to snuffle around your door or mine."
"Not if we type and shout, shout and type, you forget that? Hey, what
was it you shouted?"
I told Crumley more about my American Mercury story sale and the billion
dollars that came with it.
"Jesus," said Crumley, "I feel like a pa whose boy has just made it
through Harvard. Tell me again, kid. How do you do it? What should I
do?"
"Throw up in your typewriter every morning."
"Yeah."
"Clean up every noon."
"Yeah!"
The foghorn out in the bay started blowing, saying over and over in a
long gray voice, Constance Rattigan would never come back.
Crumley started typing.
And I drank my beer.
That night, at ten minutes after one, someone came and stood outside my
door. Oh, Jesus, I thought, awake. Please. Not again.
There was a fierce bang and a hard bang and then a terrible bang on my
door. Someone out there was asking to get in.
God. Coward, I thought. Get it over with. Now, at last . . .
I jumped up to fling the door wide.
"You look great in those lousy torn jockey shorts," said Constance
Rattigan.
I grabbed and yelled, "Constance!"
"Who in hell would it be?"
"But…but I went to your funeral."
"So did I. Hell, it's Tom Sawyer time. All those bimbos on the beach and
the crappy organ. Shove your ass in your pants. We gotta get out of
here. Jump."
Gunning the engine of an old beat-up Ford V-8, Constance made me
fast-zip my fly.
Driving south along the sea I kept mourning, "You're alive."
"Hold the funeral and wipe your nose." She laughed at the empty road
ahead. "Jesus God, I fooled everyone."
"But why, why?"
"Well, crud, honey, that bastard kept combing the surf line night after
night."
"You didn't write, I mean, invite him to…"
"Invite? Jesus, you got no taste."
She braked the car in behind her shut Arabian fort, lit a cigarette,
puffed smoke out the window, glared.
"All clear?"
"He's never coming back, Constance."
"Good! He looked better every night. When you're one hundred ten years
old it's not the man, it's the pants. Besides, I thought I knew who he
was."
"You were right."
"So I decided to fix things for good. I stashed groceries in a bungalow
south of here, and parked this Ford there. Then I came back."
She jumped out of the old Ford and led me to the back door of her house.
"I turned on all the lights, music, fixed food that night, opened every
door and window, and when he showed up, ran down, yelled, beat you to
Catalina and dove in. He was so stunned he didn't follow, or he might
have, part way, and given up. I swam out two hundred yards and lay easy.
I saw him on the shore the next half-hour, waiting for me to come in,
then he ran like hell. I had really spooked him. I swam south and surfed
in by my old el cheapo bungalow near Playa Del Rey. I had a ham sandwich
and champagne on the porch, feeling great. Hid there ever since. Sorry
to worry you, kid. You okay? Give me a kiss. But no phys. ed. "
She kissed me and unlocked the door and we walked through to open the
beach-front door and let the wind haunt the curtains and sift sand on
the tiles.
"Jesus, who the hell lived here?" she wondered. "I'm my own ghost come
home. I don't own this any more. You ever feel, back from vacation, all
the furniture, books, radio, seem like neglected cats, resentful. They
cut you dead. Feel? It's a morgue."
We walked through the rooms. The furniture, white sheeted in the dust
and wind, moved restlessly, perturbed.
Constance leaned out the front door and yelled. "Okay, son-of-a-bitch.
Gotcha!"
She turned back. "Find some more champagne. Lock up. Place gives me the
creeps. Out."
Only the empty shore and the empty house saw us drive away.
“How about this?" yelled Constance Rattigan against the wind. She had
put the top of her Ford down and we drove in a warm-cold flood of night,
our hair blowing.
And we pulled up in a great sluice of sand next to a little bungalow by
a half-tumbled wharf and Constance was out shucking clothes down to her
bra and pants. The embers of a small fire burned in the front-yard
sands. She stoked it with kindling and paper and, when it flared, shoved
some forked hotdogs into it and sat knocking my knees like a teenage
ape, drinking the champagne, and tousling my hair.
"See that hunk of driftwood there? All that's left of the Diamond Dance
Pier, 1918. Charlie Chaplin sat at a table there. D. W. Griffith beyond.
Me and Desmond Taylor at the far end. Wally Beery? Well, why go on. Burn
your mouth. Eat."
She stopped suddenly and looked north along the sands.
"They won't follow, will they? He or they or them or whatever. They
didn't see us, did they? We're safe forever?"
"Forever," I said.
The salt wind stirred the fire. Sparks flew up to shine in Constance
Rattigan's green eyes.
I looked away.
"There's just one last thing I have to do."
"What?"
"Tomorrow, around five, go in and clean out Fannie's icebox."
Constance stopped drinking and frowned.
"Why would you want to do that?"
I had to think of something so as not to spoil the champagne night.
"Friend of mine, Streeter Blair, the artist, used to win blue ribbons at
the county fair every autumn with his baked bread. After he died they
found six loaves of his bread in his home freezer. His wife gave me one.
I had it around for a week and ate a slice with real butter once in the
morning, once at night. God, it was swell. What a great way to say
goodbye to a wonderful man. When I buttered the last slice, he was gone
for good. Maybe that's why I want Fannie's jellies and jams. Okay?"
Constance was disquieted.
"Yes," she said at last.
I popped another cork.
"What do we drink to?"
"My nose," I said. "At last, my damn head cold is over. Six boxes of
Kleenex later. To my nose."
"Your lovely big nose," she said, and drank.
We slept out on the sand that night, feeling safe two miles south of
those funeral flowers touching the shore by the late Constance
Rattigan's former Arabian lean-to, and three miles south of an apartment
where Cal's piano smile and my battered Underwood waited for me to come
save earth from Martians on one page and Mars from earthmen on the next.
In the middle of the night I awoke. The place next to me on the sand was
empty, but still warm from where Constance had lain cuddling the poor
writer. I got up to hear her thrashing and chortling with seal-bark
commotions out in the waves. When she ran in, we finished the champagne
and slept until almost noon.
That day was one of those no-excuses-needed-for-living-weather days when
you just lie and let the juices flow and drip. But finally I had to say,
"I didn't want to ruin last night. God, it was good to find you alive.
But the truth is, it's one down, one to go. Mr. Devil-in-the-Flesh on
the beach ran away because he thought he had caused you to drown. He
never intended anything but skin diving, anyway, and midnight frolics
like 1928. What he got was you drowned, it seemed.
"So, he's gone, but there's still the one who sent him."
"Jesus," whispered Constance. Her eyelids flinched like two spiders over
her shut eyes. At last she sighed, exhausted, "So it's not over after
all?"
I clenched her sand-gritty hand in mine.
After a long silent time of thinking she said, her eyes still shut,
"About Fannie's icebox? I never made it back that night five centuries
ago, to look in. You looked, saw nothing."
"That's why I've got to go look again. Trouble is, the law has padlocked
her apartment."
"You want me to go jimmy the lock?"
"Constance."
"I'll go in, clear the halls, chase out the spooks, you hit 'em with a
club, then we both crack the padlock, spoon Fannie's mayonnaise, and at
the bottom of the third jar, we find the answer, the solution, if it's
still there, if it hasn't spoiled or been taken away…"
A fly buzzed, touched my brow. An old notion stirred.
"Reminds me, that story, years ago in some magazine. Girl fell and froze
in a glacier. Two hundred years later, the ice melts and there she is,
beautiful, young as the day she was frozen."
"That's no beautiful girl in Fannie's fridge."
"No, it's something terrible."
"And when and if you find and take whatever it is out, do you kill it?"
"Nine times, I guess. Yeah. Nine should do it."
"How," said Constance, her face pale under her tan, "does that damn
first aria from Tosca go?"
I got out of her car in front of the tenement just at dusk. The night
looked even darker just inside the waiting hall. I stared at it for a
long moment. My hands trembled on the door of Constance Rattigan's
roadster.
"Want old Ma to come in with you?" she said.
"Good grief, Constance."
"Sorry, kid." She patted my cheek, gave me a kiss that made my eyelids
fly up like windowshades, handed me a piece of paper, and shoved.
"That's my bungalow phone, listed under the name Trixie Friganza, the
I-Don't-Care Girl, remember her? No? Nuts. If someone kicks your bung
downstairs, yell. If you find the bastard, form a conga line and throw
him off the second-floor porch. You want me to wait here?"
"Constance," I moaned.
Down the hill, she found a red light and went through it.
I came up the stairs to a hall that was dark forever. The lightbulbs had
been stolen years ago. I heard someone run. It was a very light tread,
like a child's. I froze, listening.
The footsteps diminished and ran down the steps at the rear of the
tenement.
The wind blew down the hall and brought the smell with it. It was the
scent that Henry had told me about, of clothes that had hung in an attic
for a hundred years, and shirts that had been worn for a hundred days.
It was like standing in a midnight alley where a pack of hounds had gone
to lift their legs with mindless panting smiles.
The smell pulled me into a jumping run. I made it to Fannie's door and
braked myself, heart pounding. I gagged because the smell was so strong.
He had been here only a few moments ago. I should have run after, but
the door itself stopped me. I put out my hand.
The door scraped softly inward on unoiled hinges.
Someone had broken the lock on Fannie's door.
Someone had wanted something.
Someone had gone in to search.
Now, it was my turn.
I stepped forward into a dark remembrance of food.
The air was pure delicatessen, a warm nest where a great, kind, strange
elephant had browsed and sung and eaten for twenty years.
How long, I wondered, before the scent of dill and cold cuts and
mayonnaise would blow away lost down the tenement stairwells. But now .
. .
The room was a ramshackle mess.
He had come in and tumbled the shelves and closets and bureaus.
Everything was flung to the linoleum floor. All of Fannie's opera scores
were strewn among the broken phonograph records that had been kicked
against the wall or toppled in his search.
"Jesus, Fannie," I whispered. "I'm glad you can't see this."
Everything that could have been searched and wrecked was wrecked. Even
the great throne chair where Fannie had queened it for half a generation
or more was tossed down on its back, as she had been tossed down to
stay.
But the one place he had not looked, the last place, I looked now.
Stumbling on the shambles, I grabbed the icebox door and pulled.
The cool air sighed out around my face. I stared as I had stared many
nights ago, aching to see what was right there before me. What was the
thing the stander in the hall, the stranger on the night train, had come
to find but left behind for me?
Everything was just as it had always been. Jams, jellies, salad
dressings, wilted lettuce, a rich cold shrine of colors and scents where
Fannie had worshipped.
But suddenly, I sucked my breath.
I reached out and shoved the jars and bottles and cheese boxes way to
the back. They had been placed all this while on a thin folded paper of
some size which, until now, I had simply taken as a sheet to catch
drippings.
I pulled it out and read by the icebox light, Janus, the Green Envy
Weekly.
I left the box door wide and staggered over to put Fannie's old chair
upright and collapse in it, to wait for my heart to slow.
I turned the green-tinted newspaper pages. On the back were obits and
personals. I ran my eye down, found nothing, ran it down again, and saw…
A small box, circled faintly with red ink.
And this was what he had searched for, to take away forever.
How could I know? Here were the words:
WHERE HAVE YOU BEEN ALL THESE YEARS? MY HEART CRIES OUT, DOES YOURS? WHY
DON'T YOU WRITE OR CALL? I CAN BE HAPPY IF ONLY YOU'D REMEMBER ME AS I
REMEMBER YOU. WE HAD SO MUCH AND LOST IT ALL. NOW, BEFORE IT'S TOO LATE
TO REMEMBER, FIND YOUR WAY BACK.
CALL!
And it was signed:
SOMEONE WHO LOVED YOU, LONG AGO.
And in the margin were these words, scrawled by someone:
SOMEONE WHO LOVED YOU, WITH A FULL HEART, LONG AGO.
Jesus at midnight, Mary in the morn.
I read it six times in disbelief.
I let the paper fall, walked on it, stood in the icebox draft to cool
off. Then I went back to read the damn message for a seventh time.
What a piece of work it was, what a beaut, what a come-on, what a baited
trap. What a Rorschach test, what a piece of palmistry, what a numbers
game that anyone could sum and win with. Men, women, old, young, dark,
light, tall, thin. "Listen, look! This means YOU.
It applied to anyone who had ever loved and lost, meaning every single
soul in the whole damned city, state, and universe.
Who, reading it, would not be tempted to lift a phone, dial, wait, and
whisper at last, late at night:
Here I am. Please, come find me.
I stood in the middle of the linoleum floor of Fannie's apartment and
tried to imagine her here, the ship's deck creaking underfoot as her
weight shifted this way and that, as Tosca lamented from the phonograph,
and the icebox door stood wide with its enshrined condiments, her eyes
moving, her heart beating like a hummingbird trapped in a vast aviary.
Christ. The Fifth Horseman of the Apocalypse had to be the editor of a
paper like this.
I checked all the other advertisements. The telephone number was the
same in each. You had to call one number to get referrals to all the
ads. And that phone number belonged to the publishers of, damn them to
hell forever, Janus, the Green Envy Weekly.
Fannie had never in her life bought a paper like this. Someone had given
it to her or ... I stopped and glanced at the door.
No!
Someone had left it for her to find with the red ink circling this one
ad, so she would be sure to see.
SOMEONE WHO LOVED YOU, WITH A FULL HEART, LONG AGO.
"Fannie!" I cried in dismay. "Oh, you damn, damn fool." I waded through
broken shards of La Boheme and Butterfly, then remembered and stumbled
back to slam the icebox door.
Things were no better on the third floor. Henry's door was wide open. I
had never seen it open before. Henry believed in shut doors. He didn't
want anyone having a sighted advantage on him. But now . . .
"Henry?"
I stepped through, and the small apartment was neat, incredibly neat and
clean and filed, everything in place, everything fresh, but empty.
"Henry?"
His cane lay in the middle of the floor, and by it a dark string, a
black twine with knots in it.
It all looked scattered and impromptu, as if Henry had lost these in a
fight, or left behind when he ran . . .
Where?
"Henry?"
I handled the twine, and looked at the knots. In a line, two knots, a
space, three knots, a long space, then a series of three, six, four, and
nine knots.
"Henry!" Louder.
I ran to knock on Mrs. Gutierrez's door.
When she opened it and saw me, she welled over. Tears dropped from her
eyes as she saw my face. She put her tortilla-scented hand out to touch
my cheeks. "Aw, poor, poor. Come in, oh, poor, sit down. Sit. You wanta
eat? I bring something. Sit, no, no, sit. Coffee, yes?" She brought me
coffee and wiped her eyes. "Poor Fannie. Poor man. What?"
I unfolded the newspaper and held it out for her to see.
"No read inglese," she said, backing off.
"Don't have to read," I said. "Did Fannie ever come up to phone and
bring this paper with her?"
"No, no!" Her face changed color with memory. "Estupido! Si. She came.
But I don't know who she call."
"Did she talk a long while, a long time?"
"Long time?" She had to translate my words for a few seconds, then she
nodded vigorously. "Si. Long. Long she laugh. Oh, how she laugh and
talk, talk and laugh."
While she was inviting Mr. Night and Time and Eternity to come over, I
thought.
"And she had this paper with her?"
Mrs. Gutierrez turned the paper over like it was a Chinese puzzle.
"Maybe si, maybe no. This one, some other. I dunno. Fannie is with God."
I turned, weighing 380 pounds, and leaned toward the door, the folded
newspaper in my hands.
"I wish I were," I said. "Please, may I use your phone?"
On a hunch I did not dial the Green Envy number. Instead, counting the
knots, I dialed the numbers of blind Henry's twine.
"Janus Publications," said a nasal voice. "Green Envy. Hold."
The phone was dropped to the floor. I heard heavy feet shuffling through
wintry mounds of crumpled paper.
"It fits!" I yelled, and scared Mrs. Gutierrez, who jumped back. "The
number fits." I yelled at the Green Envy paper in my hand. For some
reason Henry had knotted the Janus publication's number onto his
remembrance twine.
"Hello, hello!" I shouted.
Far off in the Green Envy office I could hear some maniac shrieking
because he was trapped and electrocuted by a bin of wildly berserk
guitars. A rhinoceros and two hippos were dancing a fandango in the
latrine to rebut the music. Someone typed during the cataclysm. Someone
else was playing a harmonica to a different drummer.
I waited four minutes, then jammed the phone down and stormed out of
Mrs. Gutierrez's, raving.
"Mister," said Mrs. Gutierrez, "why you so upset?"
"Upset, upset, who's upset!" I cried. "Christ, people don't come back to
phones, I got no money to get out to that damn place, wherever it is in
Hollywood, and there's no use calling back, the damn phone's off the
hook, and time's running out, and where the hell is Henry. He's dead,
damn it!"
Not dead, Mrs. Gutierrez should have said, merely sleeping.
But she didn’t say and I thanked her for her silence and stormed down
the hallway, not knowing what to do. I didn't even have money for the
stupid red trolley car to Hollywood. I ...
"Henry!" I shouted down the stairwell.
"Yes?" said a voice behind me.
I whirled around. I yelled. There was nothing but darkness there.
"Henry. Is that…?"
"Me," said Henry, and stepped out into what little light there was.
"When Henry decides to hide, he truly hides. Holy Moses Armpits was
here. I think he knows that we know what he knows about this mess. I
just skedaddled out my apartment door when I heard him prowl the porch
outside my view window, I just dropped and jumped. Left stuff, I don't
care, on the floor. You find it?"
"Yes. Your cane. And the string with knots for numbers."
"You want to know about them knots, that number?"
"Yes."
"I heard crying in the hall, day before Fannie's gone forever. There she
is, at my door. I open it to let all that sadness in. Not often I see
her upstairs, it kills her to climb. I shouldn't've done it, no,
shouldn't have done it, she says, all my fault she says, over and over.
Watch this junk, Henry, take this junk, here, what a fool I am she says,
and she gave me some old phonograph records and some newspapers,
special, she said, and I thanked her and thought what the hell and she
went down the hall crying for herself being a fool and I just put the
old newspapers by and the records and didn't think a long while till
after Fannie was tributed and sung after and gone, and then this morning
I ran my hand over those fool papers and thought, what is this? And I
called Mrs. Gutierrez and said, "What?" and in Mexican and English she
looked over the paper and saw the words, you see 'em, circled in ink,
the same words in five different issues of the paper and the same
number, and I got to thinking, why was Fannie crying so hard, and what's
this number, so I knotted the knots and called. You call?"
"Yes, Henry," I said. "I found the same paper in Fannie's place now. Why
didn't you tell me you had them?"
"What for? Sounded foolish. Woman stuff. I mean, did you read it? Mrs.
Gutierrez read it, bad, but read it out loud. I laughed. God, I thought,
that's trash, real trash. Only now, I think different. Who would read
and believe junk like that?"
"Fannie," I said, at last.
"Tell me this, now. When you called that number, some dumb
son-of-a-bitch come on, talk, and not come back again ever?"
"Some son-of-a-bitch."
Henry started steering me back toward the open door of his apartment. As
if I were the blind one, I let him.
"How they run a business like that?" he wondered.
We were at his door. I said, "I guess when you don't give a damn, people
throw money at you."
"Yeah, that was always my trouble. I cared too much. So nobody ever
threw nothing. Hell, I got plenty cash anyway, uh."
He stopped, for he had heard me suck my breath.
"That," he said, with a quiet nod and smile, "is the sound of someone
wants to borrow my life's savings."
"Only if you come with, Henry. To help me find the guy who hurt Fannie."
"Armpits?"
"Armpits."
"This nose is yours. Lead on."
"We need money for a taxicab to save time, Henry."
"I never been in a taxi in my life, why would I take one now?"
"We got to get out to that newspaper before it closes. The sooner we
find out what we need to know, the safer it'll be. I don't want to spend
one more night worrying about you here in this tenement, or me at the
beach."
"Armpits has teeth, huh?"
"You'd better believe it."
"Come on." He circled his room, smiling. "Let's find where a blind man
hides his money. All over the place. You want eighty bucks?"
"Hell, no."
"Sixty, forty?"
"Twenty, thirty will do."
"Well, hell then." Henry snorted, stopped, laughed, and yanked a great
wad of bills out of his hip pocket. He began to peel the lettuce.
"Here's forty."
"It'll take awhile to pay it back."
"If we get whoever pushed Fannie over, you don't owe nothing. Grab the
money. Find my cane. Shut the door. C'mon! Let's go find that dumb bunny
who answers phones and goes off on vacation."
In the taxicab, Henry beamed around at sources of scent and odor he
could not see.
"This is dandy. I never smelled a cab before. This one's new and going
fast."
I couldn't resist. "Henry, how'd you save up so much?"
"I don't see 'em, touch 'em, even smell 'em, but I play the horses. Got
friends at the track. They listen, and lay on the lettuce. I bet more
and lose less than most sighted fools. It mounts up. When it gets too
big, I trot along to one of those ugly ladies, so they tell me, in the
bungalows out front near the tenement. They say ugly but I don't mind.
Blind is blind, and…Well, now. Where are we?"
"Here," I said.
We had pulled into an alley behind a building in a rundown block in
Hollywood south of the boulevard. Henry snuffed a deep breath. "It ain't
Armpits. But it's his first cousin. Watch out."
"I'll be right back."
I got out. Henry stayed in the back seat, his cane in his lap, eyes
restfully shut.
"I'll just listen to the meter," he said, "and make sure it don't run
fast."
The dusk was long since gone and it was full night as I picked my way
along the alley, looking up at a half-lit neon sign on the backstairs of
a building, with the great god Janus painted facing two ways above it.
Half of one face had flaked off in the rains. The rest would be soon
gone.
Even the gods, I thought, are having a bad year.
I dodged upstairs among various young men and women with old faces,
hunched like beaten dogs, smoking, begging their pardon, excusing
myself, but nobody seemed to mind. I stepped in at the top.
The offices looked as if they hadn't been cleaned since the Civil War.
There was paper balled, wadded, tossed over every inch, foot, and yard
of the floor. There were hundreds of old newspapers, crumpled and
yellowing, in the windows, on the desktops. Three wastebaskets stood
empty. Whoever had thrown the paper wads had missed ten thousand times.
I waded in through a tide that reached my ankles. I walked on dried
cigars, cigarette stubs, and, by the crackling sound of their small
thoraxes, cockroaches. I found the abandoned phone under a snow-piled
desk, picked it up, listened.
I thought I could hear the traffic going by under Mrs. Gutierrez's
window. Crazy. She must have hung up, long ago.
"Thanks for waiting," I said.
"Hey, man, what gives?" said someone.
I hung up and turned.
A tall, skinny man, with a clear drop of water on the end of his thin
nose, came wading through the paper tide. He sized me up with
nicotine-stained eyes.
"I called about half an hour ago." I nodded at the phone. "I just hung
up on me."
He gazed at the phone, scratched his head, and finally got it. He
managed a feeble smile and said, "Sheeit."
"Those are my very thoughts."
I had a feeling he was proud of never coming back to the phone; it was
better to make up your own news.
"Hey, man," he said, getting another idea to replace the first. He was
the sort of thinker who has to move out the furniture before he can
bring in the cows. "You, you wouldn't happen to be the fuzz."
"No, just the Goofer Feathers."
"Unh?"
"Remember the Two Black Crows?"
"Huh?"
"Nineteen twenty-six. Two white men in blackface talked about Goofer
Feathers. The fuzz. From peaches. Forget it. Did you write this?" I held
out the Janus, Green Envy page with the terribly sad advertisement at
the bottom.
He blinked at it. "Hell, no. It's legit. It was sent in."
"You ever stop to think what you're doing with an ad like that?"
"Hey, man, like we don't read, we just print 'em. It's a free country,
right? Lemme see that!" He grabbed the ad and peered at it, moving his
lips. "Oh, sure. That one. Funny, huh?"
"You realize someone just might look up that geek and believe in him?"
"Them's the breaks. Hey, look, why don't you fall downstairs outa my
life?" He thrust the paper back at me.
"I don't leave without the home phone number of this weirdo."
He blinked at me, stunned, then laughed. "That's Q/T information, like
no one knows. You want to write him, sure. We pass mail on. Or he comes,
picks it up."
"This is an emergency. Someone's dead. Someone..." I ran out of gas and
looked around at the ocean of paper on the floor and, without thinking
about it, took out a box of small stick matches.
"Looks like a fire hazard here," I said.
"What fire hazard?"
He glanced around at the year's growth of paper wadding, empty beer
cans, dropped paper cups, and old hamburger wrappings. A look of immense
pride overcame him. His eyes almost danced when he saw the
five-or-six-quart wax milk cartons busy manufacturing penicillin on the
window sills, next to some tossed men's jockey shorts that gave the
place its real touch of class.
I struck a match to get his attention.
"Hey," he said.
I blew out the first match, to show what a good sport I was, and when he
made no further offer of help, lit a second.
"What if I dropped this on the floor?"
He gave the floor a second look around. The paper junk seethed and
lapped at his ankles. If I had dropped the match the flames would have
reached him in about five seconds.
"You ain't going to drop that," he said.
"No?" I blew it out and lit a third.
"You got the goddamnedest sense of humor, don't you?"
I dropped the match.
He yelled and jumped.
I stepped on the flame before it could spread.
He took a deep breath and let it blast.
"Now you get the hell outa here! You…"
"Wait." I lit a final match and crouched, guarding the flame, close down
to a half-ton of wadded rewrites, old calling cards, torn envelopes.
I touched the flame here and there and the paper started burning.
"What in hell you want?"
"Just a phone number. That's all. I still won't have an address, so I
can't get at the guy, trace him. But I do, damn it to hell, want that
phone, or the whole place burns."
I realized my own voice had gone up about ten decibels, to maniac.
Fannie was fighting in my blood. A lot of other dead people were
screaming in my breath, wanting out.
"Give it here!" I shouted.
The flames were spreading.
"Shit, man, stomp out the fire, you'll get the goddamn dumb number.
Shit, hold on, jump!"
I jumped on the fire, dancing around. Smoke rose and the fire was out by
the time Mr. Janus, the editor who faced two ways at once, found the
number on his Rolodex.
"Here, goddamn it, here's the crapping number. Vermont
four-five-five-five. Got that? Four-five-five-five!"
I struck a final final match until he shoved the Rolodex card under my
nose.
"Someone who loved you," it read, and the telephone.
"Okay!" shrieked the editor.
I blew out the match. My shoulders sank with sudden relief.
Fannie, I thought, we'll get him now.
I must have said it out loud, for the editor, his face purple, sprayed
me with his saliva. "What you going to get?"
"Myself killed," I said, going downstairs.
"I hope so!" I heard him yell.
I opened the door of the taxicab.
"Meter's ticking like crazy," said Henry, in the back seat. "Thank God
I'm rich."
"Be right with you."
I beckoned the taxi driver to follow me out to a corner where there was
an outdoor phone booth.
I hesitated for a long while, afraid to call the number, afraid someone
might really answer.
What, I wondered, do you say to a murderer during suppertime?
I dialed the number. Someone who loved you, long ago. Who would answer a
dumb ad like that? All of us, on the right night. The voice from the
past, making you remember a familiar touch, a warm breath in the ear, a
seizure of passion like a strike of lightning. Which of us is not
vulnerable, I thought, when it comes to that three-in-the-morning voice.
Or when you wake after midnight to find someone crying, and it's you,
and tears on the chin and you didn't even know that during the night you
had had a bad dream.
Someone who loved you . . .
Where is she now? Where is he? Still alive somewhere? It can't be. Too
much time is gone. The one who loves me can't still be in the world
somewhere. And yet? Why not, as I was doing, call?
I called three times and went back to sit with Henry in the back seat of
the taxi, listening to the meter tick. "Don't worry," he said. "That
meter don't bother me. There's plenty of horses waiting and lots of
lettuce up ahead. Go dial the number again, child."
The child went to dial.
This time, a long way off in another country, it seemed, a
self-appointed funeral director picked up the phone.
"Yes?" said a voice.
At last I gasped, "Who's this?"
"For that matter, who's this?" said the guarded voice.
"What took you so long to get to the phone?" I could hear cars going by
on the other end.
It was a phone booth in an alley somewhere in the city. Christ, I
thought, he does as I do. He's using the nearest pay booth for his
office.
"Well, if you're not going to say anything…" said the voice on the other
end.
"Wait," I said. I almost know your voice, I thought. Let me hear more.
"I saw your ad in Janus. Can you help me?"
The voice on the other end relaxed, pleased by my panic. "I can help
anyone, anywhere, anytime," he said, easily. "You one of the Lonelies?"
"What?" I cried.
"You one of the…"
Lonelies he had said. And that did it.
I was back at Crumley's, back in time, back on the big train in the cold
rain rounding a curve. The voice on the phone was that voice in the
night storm half a lifetime ago, saying its say about death and lonely,
lonely and death. First the memory of a voice, then the session with
Crumley knocking my head, and now this real sound on the phone. There
was only one missing piece. I still couldn't put a name on the voice.
Close, familiar, I almost had it, but. . . .
"Speak up," I practically shouted.
There was an interval of suspicion on the other end. In that moment I
heard the most beautiful sounds of half a lifetime.
The wind blowing at the far end of the line. But more than that: surf
rolling in, louder and louder, closer and closer, until I almost felt it
roll under my feet.
"Oh, Jesus, I know where you are!" I cried.
"No way," said the phone voice, and broke the connection.
But not soon enough. I stared wildly at the empty phone in my hand and
squeezed it in my fist. "Henry!" I yelled.
Henry leaned out of the taxicab, staring at nothing. I fell getting in
the cab. "You still with me?"
"If I ain't," said Henry, "where am I? Speak to the driver." I spoke. We
went.
The taxicab rolled to a stop with its windows down. Henry leaned
forward, his face like the prow of a dark ship. He sniffed.
"Ain't been here since childhood. That smell's the ocean.
That other smell, rotten? The pier. This where you live, scribe?"
"The Great American Novelist? Sure."
"I hope your novels smell better than this."
"If I live, maybe. Can we keep the cab waiting, Henry?"
Henry licked his thumb, peeled off three twenty-dollar bills, held them
over the front seat of the cab.
 "That keep you from being nervous, son?" "That," the cab driver took
the money, "will buy you midnight."
"It'll all be over by then," said Henry. "Child, you know what you're
doing?"
Before I could answer, a wave came in under the pier. "Sounds like the
New York subway," said Henry. "Don't let it run over you."
We left the cab waiting at the foot of the Venice pier. I tried to steer
Henry along in the night.
"Don't need no steering," said Henry. "Just warn me on wires, ropes, or
loose bricks is all. But I got a nervous elbow, don't like touching."
I let him walk proudly on.
"Wait here," I said. "Step back about three feet. There, you can't be
seen. When I come back I'll just say one word, 'Henry,' and then you
tell me what you smell, okay? And then just turn and go to the cab."
"I can still hear the motor running, sure."
"Tell the taxi to take you to the Venice Police Station. Ask for Elmo
Crumley. If he's not there, have them call his home. He's to come here
with you, fast as possible, once we get the whole thing rolling. That
is, if it rolls. Maybe we won't use your nose tonight, after all."
"I hope I do. I brought my cane to hit that guy. You let me hit him,
once?"
I hesitated. "Once," I said. "You okay, Henry?"
"Br'er Fox, he lie low."
Feeling like Br'er Rabbit, I walked away.
It was the elephants' graveyard, the pier at night, all dark bones and a
lid of fog over it and the sea rushing in to bury, reveal, and bury
again.
I picked my way along past the shops and shoebox apartments and shut
poker parlors, noting, on my way, various phones here or there, standing
in their unlit caskets, waiting to be taken away tomorrow or next week.
I walked out along the plankings, over the sighs and rustles and stirs
of moist and dry wood. The whole structure creaked and heaved like a
sinking ship, as I passed red warning flags and signs which read DANGER,
as I stepped over strung chains and found myself as far as I could go,
at the edge of the pier, looking back at all the nailed-shut doors and
rolled-down-and-pinned canvas fronts.
I slid into the last phone booth, rummaged my pockets, cursing until I
found the nickels Henry had given me. I dropped one in the phone slot
and dialed the number given me by the Janus editor.
"Four, five, five, five," I whispered, and waited.
At this moment, the frayed strap on my Mickey Mouse wristwatch broke.
The watch fell to the booth floor. Cursing, I picked it up, and shoved
it on the shelf under the phone. Then, listened. Far off, I could hear
the phone ringing at the other end.
I let my receiver drop and hang. I stepped out of the booth and stood
listening, eyes shut. At first there was only one great roll of surf
traveling under my feet, shaking the timbers. It passed. At last,
straining, I could hear.
Far down at the halfway point on the pier, a phone rang.
Coincidence? I thought. Phones ring everywhere all the time. But this
phone, a hundred yards away, now, had I dialed its number?
Half in, half out of the booth, I grabbed the receiver and planted it
back on its hook.
Far off in the windy darkness, that other phone stopped ringing.
Which still proved nothing.
I dropped my nickel back in and redialed.
A deep breath and . . .
That telephone in its glass coffin, half a light-year away, started
ringing again.
It made me jump and hurt in my chest. I felt my eyes widen and my breath
suck in cold.
I let the phone ring. I stood out of my booth, waiting for someone off
there in the night to run from the alleys or out of the damp canvas or
from behind the old Knock the Milk Bottles game. Someone, like me, would
have to answer. Someone who, like myself, jumped up at two in the
morning to run in the rain and talk to the sunlight in Mexico City where
life still walked and lived and seemed never to die. Someone. . . .
The whole pier stayed dark. No shack windows lit. No canvasses
whispered. The phone rang. The surf wandered under the boards, looking
for someone, anyone, to answer. The phone rang. It rang. I wanted to run
answer the damn thing myself, just to shut it up.
Jesus, I thought. Get your nickel back. Get . . .
Then it happened.
A crack of light appeared swiftly and went out. Something stirred down
there, across from that telephone. The phone rang. The phone rang. And
someone stood in the shadows listening to it, tentatively. I saw a
whiteness turn and knew that whoever it was was looking along the pier,
fearful, careful, searching.
I froze.
The phone rang. At last the shadow moved, the face turned back,
listening. The phone rang. The shadow suddenly ran.
I leaped back into my booth and grabbed the receiver just in time.
Click.
On the far end, I heard breathing. Then, at last, a man's voice said,
"Yes?"
Oh, my God! I thought. It's the same. The voice I heard an hour ago, in
Hollywood.
Someone who loved you, long ago.
I must have said it aloud.
There was a long pause, a wait, an in-sucked gasp from the far end of
the line.
"Yes?"
It shot me through the ear, then the heart.
I know that voice now, I thought.
"Oh, Christ," I said hoarsely, "it's you!"
That must have shot him through the head. I heard him seize in a great
storm of breath and blast it out.
"Damn you," he cried. "Damn you to hell."
He didn't hang up. He just let the red-hot telephone drop, bang, dance
on its hangman's noose. I heard his footsteps rush away.
By the time I got out of the booth, the pier was empty in all
directions. Where the brief light had been was dark. Only bits of old
newspaper blew along the plankings as I forced myself to walk, not run,
the hundred long yards to that other phone. I found it dangling and
tapping the cold glass of the booth.
I picked it up and listened.
I could hear my ten-dollar Mickey Mouse watch ticking at the other end,
back in that other phone booth, a hundred miles away.
If I was lucky and alive, I'd go save the Mouse.
I hung up this telephone and turned, staring at all the little
buildings, shacks, shop fronts, shut-down games, wondering if I would do
something crazy now.
I did.
I walked about seventy feet to a small shop front and stood in front of
it, listening. Someone was in there, moving around, perhaps shoving
himself into street clothes in the dark. I heard rustles and someone
whispering angrily to himself, someone talking under his breath, telling
him where to find socks, where shoes, and where, where the damn tie? Or
maybe it was just the tide under the pier, making up lies no one could
ever check.
The muttering stopped. He must have felt me outside the door. I heard
footsteps move. I fell backward, clumsily, realizing my hands were
empty. I hadn't even thought to bring Henry's cane as weapon.
The door opened with savage swiftness.
I stared.
Crazily, I saw two things at once.
Beyond, on a small table in half-light, a stack of yellow and brown and
red Clark Bar and Nestle's Crunch and Power House wrappers.
And then . . .
The small shadow, the little man himself, staring out at me with stunned
eyes, as if wakened from a forty-year sleep.
A. L. Shrank, in person.
Tarot card reader, phrenologist, dime-store psychiatrist, day- and
nighttime psychologist, astrologer, Zen / Freudian / Jungian
numerologist, and full Life Failure stood there, buttoning his shirt
with mindless fingers, trying to see me with eyes that were either fixed
by some drug or shocked numb by my inept bravado.
"Damn you to hell," he said, quietly, again.
And then added, with some quick sort of impromptu quiver of a smile,
"Come in."
"No," I whispered. Then I said it louder. "No. You come out."
The wind was blowing the wrong way, or perhaps the right way, this time.
My God, I thought, cringing back, then holding my ground. All those
other days, how did the wind blow? How could I not have noticed?
Because, I thought, oh damn simple fact: I had had a head cold for a
solid ten days. No nose at all. No nose.
Oh, Henry, I thought, you and your always lifted, always curious beak,
connected to all that bright awareness within. Oh, smart Henry crossing
an unseen street at nine of an evening, and sniffing the unwashed shirt
and the unlaundered underclothes as Death marched by the other way.
I looked at Shrank and felt my nostrils wince. Sweat, the first smell of
defeat. Urine, the next smell of hatred. Then, what mixtures? Onion
sandwiches, unbrushed teeth, the scent of self-destruction. It came like
a storm cloud, full flood, from the man. I might have been standing on
an empty shore with a ninety-foot tidal wave poised to crush me, for the
sick fear I suddenly knew. My mouth baked dry even as sweat broke on my
body.
"Come in," said A. L. Shrank again, uncertainly.
There was a moment when I thought he might suck backward like a
crayfish. But then he saw my glance at the phone booth directly across
from his shop, and my second glance down the pier to the phone at the
far end where my Mickey Mouse watch ticked, and he knew. Before he could
speak again, I called into the shadows.
"Henry?"
Dark stirred in dark. I felt Henry's shoes scrape as his voice called
back, warm and easy, "Yes?"
Shrank's eyes jerked from me to where Henry's voice stirred the shadows.
At last I was able to say:
"Armpits?"
Henry took a deep breath and let it out.
"Armpits," he said.
I nodded. "You know what to do."
"I hear the meter running," said Henry.
From the corners of my eyes, I saw him walking away, then stop and throw
his hand up.
Shrank flinched. So did I. Henry's cane sailed through the air to land
with a sharp clatter on the planks.
"You might need that," said Henry.
Shrank and I stood staring at the weapon on the pier.
The sound of the taxi driving off jerked me forward. I grabbed the cane
and held it to my chest, as if it might really work against knives or
guns.
Shrank looked at the vanishing lights of the taxi, far off.
"What in hell was that all about?" he said.
Behind him, Schopenhauer and Nietzsche and Spengler and Kafka all leaned
on their mad elbows, sank in their dusts, and whispered, yes, what was
that all about?
"Wait’ll I get my shoes." He vanished.
"Don't get anything else," I cried.
That made him laugh a choking laugh.
"What would I get?" he called, unseen, rummaging around. In the door he
showed me a shoe in each hand. "No guns. No knives." He shoved them on,
but didn't lace them.
I couldn't believe what happened next. The clouds, over Venice, decided
to pull back, revealing a full moon.
Both of us looked up at it, trying to decide if it was bad or good, and
for which of us?
Shrank's gaze wandered to the shoreline and along the pier.
"He wept like anything to see such quantities of sand," he said. Then
hearing himself he snorted softly. "Come oysters, said the carpenter,
and took them close in hand. A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk, along the
golden strand."
He began to walk. I stayed. "Aren't you going to lock your door?"
Shrank gave the merest nodding glance over his shoulder at the books
clustered like vultures with their black feathers and dusty golden
stares, waiting on shelves for the touch that gave life. In invisible
choirs, they sang forth wild tunes I should have heard long days ago. My
eye ran and reran the stacks.
My God, why hadn't I truly seen?
That dreadful escarpment inhabited by dooms, that lineup of failures,
that literary Apocalypse of wars, squalors, diseases, pestilences,
depressions, that downfall of nightmares, that pit of deliriums and
mazes from which mad mice and insane rats never found light or made
exit. That police lineup of degenerates and epileptics dancing the rims
of shelved library cliffs with teams replacing teams of nausea and
revulsion waiting in the higher darkness.
Single authors, single books, fine. A Poe here or a Sade there is a
spice. But this was no library, it was an abattoir, a dungeon, a tower
where ten dozen men in iron masks were penned, silently raving, forever.
Why hadn't I seriously seen and known?
Because Rumpelstiltskin was in charge.
Staring at Shrank even now I thought, at any moment he'll grab his foot
and rip himself straight up in half and fall in two pieces!
He was hilarious.
Which made him all the more terrible.
"Those books," said Shrank at last, breaking the spell, not looking at
them, staring up at the moon, "they don't care for me. Why should I care
for them?"
"But…"
"Besides," said Shrank, "would anyone really want to steal Decline of
the Wat?"
"I thought you loved your collection!"
"Loved?" He blinked once. "My God, don't you see? I hate everything.
Name it, there's nothing in the world I like."
He strode off in the direction Henry had taken with his taxicab.
"Now," he said, "coming or not?" "Coming," I said.
Is that a weapon?"
We walked slowly, feeling each other out. I was amazed to find Henry's
cane in my hands.
"No, an antenna, I think," I said.
"Of a very large insect?"
"A very blind one."
"Can he find his way without it, and where's he going this time of
night?"
"Running errands. Back immediately," I lied.
Shrank was a lie detector. He almost writhed with delight at my voice.
He quickened his pace, then stopped to examine me.
"I take it he steers by his nose. I heard what you asked and what he
answered back."
"Armpits?" I said.
Shrank shriveled inside his old clothes. His eyes darted first to his
left, then to his right underarm and down along a vast history of stains
and time's discolorings.
"Armpits," I said again.
It was a bullet in the heart.
Shrank staggered, then firmed himself.
"Why and where are we walking?" he gasped. I could sense the rabbit
palpitation under his greasy tie.
"I thought you were leading the way. I only know one thing." I moved,
this time half a step ahead of him. "Blind Henry was searching for some
unwashed shirts, dirty underclothes, bad breath. He found and named them
for me."
I did not repeat the dread epithet. But Shrank, with each word, was
diminished.
"Why would a blind man want me?" said Shrank at last.
I didn't want to give it all away at once. I had to test and try.
"Because of Janus, the Green Envy Weekly," I said. "I've seen copies in
your place, through your window."
That was pure lie, but it struck midriff.
"Yes, yes," said Shrank. "But a blind man, and you…?"
"Because." I took a deep breath and let it out. "You're Mr. Fixit."
Shrank shut his eyes, spun his thoughts, chose a reaction. Laughed.
"Fixit? Fixit! Ridiculous! Why would you think?"
"Because." I walked on, making him dog-trot to follow. I talked to the
mist which gathered ahead. "Henry smelled someone crossing the street,
many nights ago. The same smell was in his tenement hall, and here now
tonight. And the smell is you."
The rabbit palpitation shook the little man again, but he knew he was
still clear. Nothing was proven!
"Why," he gasped, "would I prowl some downtown lousy tenement I wouldn't
dream to live in, why?"
"Because," I said, "you were looking for Lonelies. And damn fool stupid
dumb me, blinder than Henry, helped you find them. Fannie was right.
Constance was right! I was the death goat after all. Christ, I was
Typhoid Mary. I carried the disease, you, everywhere. Or at least you
followed. To find Lonelies." A drumbeat of breath. "Lonelies."
Almost as I said it, both Shrank and I were seized with what were almost
paroxysms. I had spoken a truth that was like a furnace lid thrown back
so the heat scorched out to sear my face, my tongue, my heart, my soul.
And Shrank? I was describing his unguessed life, his need; all yet to be
revealed and admitted, but I knew I had at last yanked the asbestos up
and the fire was in the open.
"What was that word?" asked Shrank, some ten yards off and motionless as
a statue.
"Lonelies. You said the word. You described them last month. Lonelies."
And it was true. A funeral march of souls went by in a breath, on
soundless feet, in drifts of fog. Fannie and Sam and Jimmy and Cal and
all the rest. I had never put a proper label on them. I had never seen
the carry-over that tied them all and made them one.
"You're raving," said Shrank. "Guessing. Making up. Lying. None of this
has to do with me."
But he was looking down at the way his coat was run up on his skinny
wrists and the weathermarks of late-night sweats down his coat. His suit
seemed to be diminishing even as I watched. He writhed in his own pale
skin, underneath.
I decided to attack.
"Christ, you're rotting even as you stand there. You're an affront. You
hate everything, all, anything in the world. You told me that just now.
So you attack it with your dirt, your breath. Your underwear is your
true flag, so you run it up a pole to ruin the wind. A. L. Shrank.
Proprietor of the Apocalypse!"
He was smiling, he was overjoyed. I had complimented him with insults. I
was paying attention. His ego roused. Without knowing it, I had made and
baited a trap.
What now? I thought. What, what, for God's sake do I say now, now? How
draw him out? How finish him?
But he was walking ahead again now, all inflated with insults, all
magnificent with the medals of ruin and despair I had pinned to his
greasy tie.
We walked. We walked. We walked.
My God, I thought, how long do we walk, how long do we talk, how long
does this go on?
This is a movie, I thought, one of those unbelievable scenes that
continue and continue when people explain and others talk back and
people say again,
It can't be.
It is.
He's not sure what I know and I'm not sure that I know, either, and both
of us wonder if the other is armed.
"And both of us are cowards," said Shrank.
"And both are afraid to test the other."
The Carpenter went on. The Oyster followed.
We walked.
And it was not a scene from a good or bad film where people talked too
much; it was a scene growing late at night and the moon vanishing to
reappear as the fog thickened and I was having a dialogue with Hamlet's
father's idiot psychiatrist's friend's ghost.
Shrank, I thought. What a name. Shrink from this, shrink from that, you
wind up shrunk! How had it started? Out of college, on top of the world,
hang a shingle; then the great earthquake of some year, did he recall?
the year his legs and mind broke and there was the long slide without a
toboggan, just on his skinny backside, and no women between him and the
downfall pit to ease the concussion, lubricate the nightmare, stop his
crying at midnight and hatred at dawn? And one morning, he got out of
bed and found himself, where?
Venice, California, and the last gondola long since departed and the
lights going out and the canals filling with oil and old circus wagons
with only the tide roaring behind the bars. . . .
"I have a little list," I said.
"What?" said Shrank.
"The Mikado," I told him. "One song explains you. Your object all
sublime, you will achieve in time. To make the punishment fit the crime.
The Lonelies. All of them. You put them on your list, in the words of
the song, they never will be missed. Their crime was giving up or never
having tried. It was mediocrity or failure or lostness. And their
punishment, my God, was you."
He was puffed now, with a peacock stride.
"Well?" he said, walking ahead. "Well?"
I loaded my tongue and took aim and fired a round.
"I imagine," I said, "that somewhere nearby is the decapitated head of
Scott Joplin."
He could not help the impulse that moved his right hand to his greasy
coat pocket. He pretended to pat it in place, found himself staring with
pleasure at that hand, glanced away, and went on walking.
One shot, one hit. I glowed. Detective Lieutenant Crumley, I thought,
wish you were here.
I fired a second round.
"Canaries for sale," I said in a tiny voice like the faded lead-pencil
lettering on the cardboard in the old lady's window. "Hirohito ascends
throne. Addis Ababa. Mussolini."
His left hand twitched with secret pride toward his left coat pocket.
Christ! I thought. He's carrying her old bottom-of-the-birdcage
headlines with him!
Bull's-eye!
He strode. I followed.
Target three. Aim three. Fire three.
"Lion cage. Old man. Ticket office."
His chin dropped toward his breast pocket.
There, by God, would be found punchout ticket confetti from a train
never taken!
Shrank plowed on through the mist, absolutely oblivious of the fact that
I was butterfly-netting his crimes. He was a happy child in the fields
of the Antichrist. His tiny shoes flinted on the planks. He beamed.
What next? My mind swarmed. Ah, yes.
I saw Jimmy in the tenement hall with his new choppers, all grin. Jimmy
in the bathtub, turned over and six fathoms deep.
"False teeth," I said. "Uppers. Lowers."
Thank God, Shrank did not pat his pockets again. I might have shouted a
terrible laugh of dread to think he carried a dead grin about. His
glance over his shoulder told me it was back (in a glass of water?) in
his hut.
Target five, aim, fire!
"Dancing Chihuahuas, preening parakeets!"
Shrank's shoes did a dog-dance on the pier. His eyes jumped to his left
shoulder. There were bird-claw marks and droppings there! One of Pietro
Massinello's birds was back there in the hut.
Target six.
"Moroccan fort by an Arabian sea."
Shrank's little lizard tongue made a tiny whiplash along his thirsty
lips.
One bottle of Rattigan's champagne, shelved behind us, leaning on De
Quincey in his dope, Hardy in his gloom.
A wind rose.
I shuddered, for suddenly I sensed that ten dozen candy wrappers, all
mine, were blowing along after Shrank and me, ghost rodent hungers from
other days, rustling along the night pier.
And at last I had to say and could not say but finally made myself say
the terrible final sad words that broke my tongue even as something
burst in my chest.
"Midnight tenement. Full icebox. Tosca."
Like a black discus hurled across the town, the first side of Tosca
struck, rolled, and slid under A. L. Shrank's midnight door.
The list had been long. I was poised on the near rim of hysteria, panic,
terror, delight at my own perception, my own revulsion, my own sadness.
I might dance, strike, or shriek at any moment.
But Shrank spoke first, eyes dreaming, the whispered arias of Puccini
turning and turning in his head.
"The fat woman's at peace now. She needed peace. I gave it to her."
I hardly remember what happened next. Somebody yelled. Me. Someone else
yelled. Him.
My arm thrust up, Henry's cane in it.
Murder, I thought. Kill.
Shrank fell back only in time as the cane chopped down. Instead of him,
it struck the pier and was shocked from my grip. It fell, rattled, and
was kicked by Shrank so it sailed over the edge of the pier and down
into the sand.
Now I could only lunge at the little man with empty fists and lurch to a
halt as he stepped aside because a final thing had broken in me.
I gagged, I wept. Days ago, the crying in the shower was only a start.
Now the full flood came. My bones began to crumble. I stood weeping and
Shrank, astounded, almost reached out to touch me and murmur, there,
there.
"It's all right," he said at last. "She's at peace. You should thank me
for that."
The moon went behind a great bank of fog and gave me time to recover. I
was all slow motion now. My tongue dragged and I could hardly see.
"What you mean is," I said, at last, underwater, "they're all gone and I
should thank you for all of them. Yes?"
It must have been a terrible relief for him, having waited all these
months or years to tell someone, no matter who, no matter where, no
matter how. The moon came out again. His lips trembled with the renewed
light and the need for release.
"Yes. I helped them all."
"My God," I gasped. "Helped? Helped?"
I had to sit down. He helped me to do that and stood over me, astonished
at my weakness, in charge of me and the night's future, the man who
could bless people with murder, keep them from suffering, put off their
loneliness, sleep them from their private dooms, save them from life.
Benefit them with sunsets.
"But you helped, too," he said, reasonably. "You're a writer. Curious.
All I had to do was follow, collecting your candy wrappers as you went.
Do you know how easy it is to follow people? They never look back.
Never. You never did. Oh dear, you never knew. You were my good dog of
death, for more times than you guess. Over a year. You showed me the
people you were collecting for your books. All the gravel on the path,
chaff in the wind, empty shells on the shore, dice with no spots, cards
with no pips. No past, no present. So I gave them no future."
I looked up at him. My strength was coming back. The sadness was just
about over for now. My anger built a slew pressure.
"You admit it all, do you?"
"Why not? It's all sour breath on the wind. If when we finish here and I
actually walk you to the police station, which I will, you have no proof
of what I've said. It's all lost hot air."
"Not quite," I said. "You couldn't resist taking one thing from each
victim. Your godawful place is full of phonograph records, champagne,
and old newspapers."
"Son-of-a-bitch!" said Shrank, and stopped. He barked a laugh and then
made a grin. "Pretty smart. Got it out of me, eh?"
He rocked on his heels, thinking about it.
"Now," he said, "I'll just have to kill you."
I jumped up. I was a foot taller and not brave, but he jumped back.
"No," I said. "You can't do that."
"Why not!"
"Because," I said, "you can't lay hands on me. You didn't lay hands on
them. It was all hands off. I see it now. Your logic was to get people
to do things to themselves, or destroy them indirectly. Right?"
"Right!" His pride was involved again. He forgot me standing there and
looked off at his bright and glorious past.
"Train ticket office old man. All you did was get him drunk? Knock his
head on the edge of the canal, maybe, then jump in and make sure he got
in the lion cage."
"Right!"
"Canaries-for-sale old lady. All you did was stand over her bed and make
faces?"
"Right!"
"Sam. Gave him enough hard liquor to put him in the hospital."
"Right!"
"Jimmy. Made sure he had three times too much booze.
You didn't even have to turn him over in the bathtub. Rolled over
himself, gone."
"Right!"
"Pietro Massinello. You wrote the city government to come get him and
his ten dozen dogs, cats, and birds. If he isn't dead now, soon will
be?"
"Right!"
"Gal the barber, of course."
"I stole Scott Joplin's head," said Shrank.
"So Cal, scared, left town. John Wilkes Hopwood. Him and his immense
ego. Wrote him using Constance Rattigan's stationery, got him to come
naked on the beach every night. Scaring Constance out to drown herself?"
"Indeed!"
"Then got rid of Hopwood by letting him know you had seen him on the
beach the night Constance vanished. You added a really terrible dirty
letter, calling him everything vile."
"Everything he was."
"And Fannie Florianna. Left your ad by her door. And when she called and
you made an appointment, all you did was come over, burst in, same as
with the old canary lady, frighten Fannie so she ran backward, yes, fell
and couldn't get up, and all you had to do was stand over her to make
sure she didn't, yes?"
He knew better than to say yes to this, to say anything, for I was
furious now, still shaky but getting strength from my own madness.
"You made only one mistake all along the way over the weeks. Sending the
papers to Fannie, leaving them, marked. When you remembered this and
went back and broke in, you couldn't find them. The one place you didn't
think to look was the icebox. Your newspaper notice put under the jars
to catch drips. I found it there. That's why I'm here. And not about to
be the next on your list. Or do you have other plans?"
"Yes."
"No, and do you know why not? For two reasons. One, I'm not a Lonely.
I'm not a failure. I'm not lost. I'm going to make it. I'm going to be
happy. I'm going to marry and have a good wife and children. I'm going
to write damned fine books and be loved. That doesn't fit your pattern.
You can't kill me, you damn stupid jerk, because I'm okay. You see? I'm
going to live forever. Secondly, you can't lay a finger on me. No one
else has been touched by you. If you touch me, it spoils your record.
You got all your other deaths by fear or intimidation. But now if you
try to prevent my going to the police, you'll have to commit real
murder, you sick bastard.
I plowed off with him running after in utter confusion, almost tugging
at my elbows for attention. "Right, right. I almost killed you a year
ago. But then you made those sales to magazines and then you met that
woman and I decided to just follow you and collect people, yes, that was
it. And it really began that night on the Venice train, in the storm,
and me drunk. You were so close to me that night on the train, I could
have reached out and touched. And the rain came down and if you had just
turned, but you didn't, you would have seen me and known me, but you
didn't and…"
We were off the pier and in the dark street by the canal now and moving
swiftly over the bridge. The boulevard was empty. I saw no cars, no
lights. I rushed.
In the middle of the bridge over the canal, by the lion cages, Shrank
stopped and caught hold of the railing.
"Why don't you understand me, help me!" he wailed. "I wanted to kill
you, I did! But it would have been like killing Hope, and there has to
be some of that in the world, doesn't there, even for people like me?"
I stared at him. "Not after tonight."
"Why?" he gasped, "why?" looking at the cold oily water.
"Because you're utterly and completely insane," I said.
"I'll kill you now."
"No," I said, with immense sadness. "There's only one person left to
kill. One last Lonely. The empty one. You."
"Me?" shrieked the little man.
"You."
"Me?" he screamed. "Damn, damn, damn you!"
He spun. He grabbed the rails. He leaped.
His body went down in darkness.
He sank in waters as oiled and scummy as his coat, as terrible and dark
as his soul, to be covered and lost.
"Shrank!" I yelled.
He did not rise.
Come back, I wanted to yell.
But then, suddenly, I was afraid he would.
“Shrank," I whispered. "Shrank." I bent over the bridge, staring at the
green scum and the gaseous tide. "I know you're there."
It just couldn't be over. It was too simple. He was somewhere out of the
light, brooding like a dark toad, under the bridge, maybe, eyes up,
waiting, face green, sucking air, very quietly. I listened. Not a drip.
Not a ripple. Not a sigh.
"Shrank," I whispered.
Shrank, echoed the timbers under the bridge.
Off along the shore, the great oil beasts lifted their heads up at my
summons, sank them down again, in time to a long sighing roll of water
on the coast.
Don't wait, I thought I heard Shrank murmuring. It's nice down here.
Quiet at last. I think I'll stay.
Liar, I thought. You'll come up when I least expect it.
The bridge creaked. I whirled.
Nothing. Nothing but fog sifting across the empty boulevard.
Run, I thought. Run telephone. Call Crumley. Why isn't he here? Run. But
no. If I did, Shrank might go free.
Far away, two miles off, the big red trolley bucketed along, whistling,
wailing, sounding like the terrible beast in my dream, come to take my
time, my life, my future away, heading for a tar pit at the end of the
line.
I found a small pebble and dropped it in.
Shrank.
It hit and sank. Silence.
He's escaped me. I wanted to pay him back for Fannie.
Then, Peg, I thought. Call her.
But no, she would have to wait, too.
My heart pounded so loudly that I feared the waters would stir below and
the dead rise. I feared that my very breathing would knock down the oil
derricks. I held onto my heart and breath and made them slow, eyes shut.
Shrank, I thought, come out. Fannie's here, waiting. The canary lady's
here, waiting. The old man from the ticket office is beside me. Pietro's
here and wants his pets. Come out. I'm here, along with the rest,
waiting.
Shrank!
This time he must have heard.
He came to get me.
He shot out of the black water like a cannonball off a springboard.
Christ, I thought, fool! Why did you call to him?
He was ten feet tall, a dragon yeasted up from a dwarf. Grendel, who was
once a jockey.
He snatched up like a Fury, talons out. He hit me like a balloon full of
scalding water, with thrash and yell and shriek. He had long since
forgotten his good intentions, his plans, his myth, his murderous
integrity.
"Shrank!" I yelled.
There was something slow-motion and terrible about it, as if, frame by
frame, I might stop him along the way and examine his astonishing arc
and growth, and how his eyes blazed and his mouth ached with hate and
hands gripped with rage as he seized my coat, my shirt, my neck in iron
grapples. His mouth was blooded with my name as he heaved back. The tar
waters waited. Christ, not there, I thought. The lion cages waited with
doors flung wide.
"No!"
The slow motion stopped. The swift fall followed.
Fused by his rage, we fell down, sucking air in flight.
We struck like two concrete statues and sank, loving each other with a
mindless frenzy of passion, climbing each other to keep each other down,
making ladders to air and light.
On the way down I thought I heard him whining, wailing, "Get in there,
get in there, get in," like a boy at some rude game without rules, and I
was playing wrong. "Get in!"
But now, under, we went from sight. We whirled around like two
crocodiles at each other's necks. From up top we must have seemed like a
moil and welter of piranhas self-feasting, or a great propeller off
center and amok in rainbow oils and tars.
And at center of the drowning there was a small pinpoint flash of hope
which burst but to fire again behind my eyes.
This is his first real murder, I must have thought, or was there time?
But I am flesh and will not behave. I fear dark more than he fears life.
He must know that. I must win!
Not proven.
We rolled and struck something that knocked most of the air from my
lungs. The lion cage. He was shoving and kicking me through the open
door. I thrashed. We whirled and in the surge and white water I suddenly
thought:
God. I'm inside. The cage. The whole thing ends as it began! Crumley
comes to find me! beckoning behind the bars at dawn. Christ. My lungs
ballooned with fire. I tried to whirl and knock free. I wanted to shout
him off with my last breath. I wanted to ...
It was over.
Shrank relaxed his grip.
What? I thought. What? What!
He almost let go.
I seized him to push but it was like grabbing a dummy that had suddenly
lost its ability to gesticulate. It was like handling a corpse that had
leaped out of the grave and now wanted back.
He's quit, I thought. He knows he must be the last one. He knows he
can't kill me, it doesn't fit.
He had indeed made up his mind and as I held him I could see his face,
the merest pale ghost, and the shrug that said I was to at last go free
and move up toward night and air and life. In the dark water, I saw his
eyes accept his own dread as he opened his mouth, flexed his nostrils,
and let out a terrible gaseous illumination. Whereupon he took a deep
breath of black water and sank away, a lost man seeking his final loss.
He was a cold marionette I left behind in the cage as blindly I thrashed
for the door, pushed out, and pushed up, wildly praying to live forever,
to seek the fog, to find Peg, wherever she was in all the dread damned
world.
I broke up and out into a mist that had begun to rain. As my head burst
out, I gave a great cry of relief and sorrow. All the souls of all the
people lost and not wanting to be lost in the last month wailed out of
me. I gagged, threw up, almost sank again, but made it to the bank and
dragged myself out to sit and wait on the rim of the canal.
Somewhere in the world I heard a car pull up, a door slam, running feet.
Out of the rain, one long arm reached and a big hand clutched to shake
my shoulder. Crumley's face, like a frog's under glass, came to view in
a movie closeup. He looked like a father in shock, bending to his
drowned son.
"You okay, you all right, you okay?"
I nodded, gasping.
Henry came up behind, sniffing the rain, alert for dread smells and
finding none.
"He okay?" said Henry.
"Alive," I said, and truly meant it. "Oh, God, alive."
"Where's Armpits? I got to give him one for Fannie."
"I already did, Henry," I said.
I nodded down at the lion cage, where a new ghost drifted like pale
gelatin behind the bars.
"Crumley," I said, "he's got a whole shack full of stuff, evidence."
"I'll check it."
"Where the hell have you guys been?" I wondered.
"Damn-fool taxi driver's blinder than me." Henry felt his way to the
canal rim and sat down on one side of me. Crumley sat on the other, all
of us letting our feet dangle over almost into the dark water. "Couldn't
even find the police station. Where's he at? I'll give him a hit, too."
I snorted a laugh. Water flew out of my nostrils.
Crumley leaned close to look me over.
"You hurt?"
Nowhere anyone could ever see, I thought. Ten years from now, some
night, it'll all surface. I hope Peg won't mind a few screams just to
get a little mothering.
In a moment, I thought, got to go phone. Peg, I'll say.
Marry me. Come tonight, come home. We'll starve together but by God
we'll live. Marry me at last, Peg, and protect me from the Lonelies.
Peg.
And she would answer yes and come home.
"Not hurt," I answered Crumley.
"Good," said Crumley, " 'cause who in hell would read my novel, if not
you?"
I barked with laughter.
"Sorry." Crumley ducked his head with embarrassment at his own honesty.
"Hell." I grabbed his hand and put it on the back of my neck, showing
him where to massage. "I love you, Crum. I love you, Henry."
"Damn," said Crumley, gently.
"Bless you, boy," said the blind man. - Another car arrived. The rain
was stopping.
Henry took a deep sniff. "I know that limo smell."
"Jesus God," said Constance Rattigan, leaning out. "What a sight.
World's champion Martian. World's Greatest Blind Man. And Sherlock
Holmes's Bastard Son."
We all responded one way or another to this, too tired to keep it up.
Constance got out and stood behind me, looking down.
"Is it all over? Is that him?"
We all nodded, like an audience at a midnight theater, not able to take
our eyes away from the canal waters, and the lion cage and the ghost
behind the bars that rose and fell and beckoned.
"God, you're drenched; you'll catch your death. Let's get the kid
stripped and warm. All right if I take him to my place?"
Crumley nodded.
I put my hand on his shoulder and held tight.
"Champagne now, beer later?" I said.
"See you," said Crumley, "at my jungle compound."
"Henry," said Constance, "come along?"
"Couldn't keep me away," said Henry.
And more cars arrived and police were getting ready to dive in to get
whatever that was out of the cage and Crumley was walking over toward
Shrank's hut, and I stood there trembling as Constance and Henry peeled
off my wet jacket and helped me into the limousine and we drove along
the middle of the night coast among the big, sighing derricks, leaving
behind a strange, small apartment where I worked and leaving behind the
dark, small lean-to where Spengler and Genghis Khan and Hitler and
Nietzsche and a few dozen old candy wrappers waited and leaving behind
the shut trolley station where tomorrow some lost old men would sit
again waiting for the last trains of the century.
Along the way, I thought I saw myself passing on a bike, twelve years
old, delivering papers in the dark morn. Further on, my older self,
nineteen, wandered home, bumping into poles, lipstick on his cheek,
drunk with love.
Just before we turned in at Constance's Arabian fort, another limousine
came roaring the other way, along the shore highway. It passed like
thunder. Is that me too, I wondered, some year soon? And Peg, in an
evening gown, with me, coming back from a dance? But the other limousine
vanished. The future would have to wait.
As we pulled in to Constance's sandlot backyard, I knew a simple present
and the best kind of alive happiness.
With the limo parked and Constance and me waiting for him to move, with
a grandiose wave Henry raised his arm.
"One side or a leg off."
We stood aside.
"Let the blind man show you the way."
He did.
We gladly followed.
This book was converted to LIT by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/9j/4AAQSkZJRgABAQEASABIAAD/2wBDAAoHBwgHBgoICAgLCgoLDhgQDg0NDh0VFhEYIx8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