prose_contemporaryRayBradburyColonel Stonesteel’s Genuine Home-made
Truly Egyptian MummycutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Colonel Stonesteel’s Genuine Home-made Truly Egyptian Mummy
That was the autumn they found the genuine Egyptian mummy out past Loon
Lake.
How the mummy got there, and how long it had been there, no one knew.
But there it was, all wrapped up in its creosote rags, looking a bit
spoiled by time, and just waiting to be found.
The day before, it was just another autumn day with the trees blazing
and letting down their burned-looking leaves and a sharp smell of pepper
in the air when Charlie Flagstaff, aged twelve, stepped out and stood in
the middle of a pretty empty street, hoping for something big and
special and exciting to happen.
‘Okay,’ said Charlie to the sky, the horizon, the whole world. ‘I’m
waiting. Comeon!’
Nothing happened. So Charlie kicked the leaves ahead of him across town
until he came to the tallest house on the greatest street, the house
where everyone in Green Town came with troubles. Charlie scowled and
fidgeted. He had troubles, all right, but just couldn’t lay his hand on
their shape or size. So he shut his eyes and just yelled at the big
house windows:
‘Colonel Stonesteel!’
The front door flashed open, as if the old man had been waiting there,
like Charlie, for something incredible to happen.
‘Charlie,’ called Colonel Stonesteel, ‘you’re old enough to rap. What is
there about boys makes them shout around houses? Try again.’
The door shut.
Charlie sighed, walked up, knocked softly.
‘Charlie Flagstaff, is that you?’ The door opened again, the colonel
squinted out and down. ‘I thought I told you toyellaround the house!’
‘Heck,’ sighed Charlie, in despair.
‘Look at that weather. Hell’s bells!’ The colonel strode forth to hone
his fine hatchet nose on the cool wind. ‘Don’t you love autumn, boy?
Fine, fine day! Right?’
He turned to look down into the boy’s pale face.
‘Why, son, you look as if your last friend left and your dog died.
What’s wrong? School starts next week?’
‘Yep.’
‘Halloween not coming fast enough?’
‘Still six weeks off. Might as well be a year. You ever notice,
colonel.…’ The boy heaved an even greater sigh, staring out at the
autumn town. ‘Not much ever happens around here?’
‘Why, it’s Labor Day tomorrow, big parade, seven cars, the mayor, maybe
fireworks – er.’ The colonel came to a dead stop, not impressed with his
grocery list. ‘How old are you, Charlie?’
‘Thirteen, almost.’
‘Things do tend to run down, come thirteen.’ The colonel rolled his eyes
inward on the rickety data inside his skull. ‘Come to a dead halt when
you’re fourteen. Might as well die, sixteen. End of the world,
seventeen. Things only start up again, come twenty or beyond. Meanwhile,
Charlie, what do we do to survive until noon this very morn before Labor
Day?’
‘If anyone knows, it’s you, colonel,’ said Charlie.
‘Charlie,’ said the old man, flinching from the boy’s clear stare, ‘I
can move politicians big as prize hogs, shake the Town Hall skeletons,
make locomotives run backward uphill. But small boys on long autumn
weekends, glue in their head, and a bad case of Desperate Empties?
Well.…’
Colonel Stonesteel eyed the clouds, gauged the future.
‘Charlie,’ he said, at last. ‘I am moved by your condition, touched by
your lying there on the railroad tracks waiting for a train that will
never come. How’s this? I’ll bet you six Baby Ruth candy bars against
your mowing my lawn, that Green Town, Upper Illinois, population five
thousand sixty-two people, one thousand dogs, will be changed forever,
changed for the best, by God, some time in the next miraculous
twenty-four hours. That sound good? A bet?’
‘Gosh!’ Charlie, riven, seized the old man’s hand and pumped it. ‘A bet!
Colonel Stonesteel, I knew you could do it!’
‘It ain’t done yet, son. But look there. The town’s the Red Sea. I order
it topart. Gangway!’
The colonel marched, Charlie ran, into the house.
‘Here we are, Charles, the junkyard or the graveyard. Which?’
The colonel sniffed at one door leading down to raw basement earth,
another leading up to dry timber attic.
‘Well—’
The attic ached with a sudden flood of wind, like an old man dying in
his sleep. The colonel yanked the door wide on autumn whispers, high
storms trapped and shivering in the beams.
‘Hear that, Charlie? What’s it say?’
‘Well—’
A gust of wind blew the colonel up the dark stairs like so much flimsy
chaff.
‘Time, mostly, it says, and oldness and memory, lots of things. Dust,
and maybe pain. Listen to those beams! Let the wind shift the timber
skeleton on a fine fall day, and you truly got time-talk. Burnings and
ashes, Bombay snuffs, tomb-yard flowers gone to ghost—’
‘Boy, colonel,’ gasped Charlie, climbing, ‘you oughta write forTop Notch
Story Magazine!’
‘Did once! Got rejected. Here we are!’
And there indeed they were, in a place with no calendar, no months, no
days, no year, but only vast spider shadows and glints of light from
collapsed chandeliers lying about like great tears in the dust.
‘Boy!’ cried Charlie, scared, and glad of it.
‘Chuck!’ said the colonel. ‘You ready for me to birth you a real, live,
half-dead sockdolager, on-the-spot mystery?’
‘Ready!’
The colonel swept charts, maps, agate marbles, glass eyes, cobwebs and
sneezes of dust off a table, then rolled up his sleeves.
‘Great thing about midwifing mysteries is, you don’t have to boil water
or wash up. Hand me that papyrus scroll over there, boy, that darning
needle just beyond, that old diploma on the shelf, that wad of
cannonball cotton on the floor. Jump!’
‘I’m jumping.’ Charlie ran and fetched, fetched and ran.
Bundles of dry twigs, clutches of pussy willow and cattails flew. The
colonel’s sixteen hands were wild in the air, holding sixteen bright
needles, flakes of leather, rustling of meadow grass, flickers of owl
feather, glares of bright yellow fox-eye. The colonel hummed and snorted
as his miraculous eight sets of arms and hands swooped and prowled,
stitched and danced.
‘There!’ he cried, and pointed with a chop of his nose. ‘Half-done.
Shaping up. Peel an eye, boy. What’s it commence to start to resemble?’
Charlie circled the table, eyes stretched so wide it gaped his mouth.
‘Why – why—’ he gasped.
‘Yes?’
‘It looks like—’
‘Yes, yes?’
‘A mummy!Can’tbe!’
‘Is! Bull’s-eye on, boy!Is!’
The colonel leaned down on the long-strewn object. Wrists deep in his
creation, he listened to its reeds and thistles and dry flowers whisper.
‘Now, you may well ask, why would anyonebuilda mummy in the first place?
You, you inspired this, Charlie. You put me up to it. Go look out the
attic window there.’
Charlie spat on the dusty window, wiped a clear viewing spot, peered
out.
‘Well,’ said the colonel. ‘What do you see? Anything happening out there
in the town, boy? Any murders being transacted?’
‘Heck, no—’
‘Anyone falling off church steeples or being run down by a maniac
lawnmower?’
‘Nope.’
‘AnyMonitors orMerrimacs sailing up the lake, dirigibles falling on the
Masonic Temple and squashing six thousand Masons at a time?’
‘Heck, colonel, there’s only five thousand peopleinGreen Town!’
‘Spy, boy. Look. Stare. Report!’
Charlie stared out at a very flat town.
‘No dirigibles. No squashed Masonic Temples.’
‘Right!’ The colonel ran over to join Charlie, surveying the territory.
He pointed with his hand, he pointed with his nose. ‘In all Green Town,
in all your life, not one murder, one orphanage fire, one mad fiend
carving his name on librarian ladies’ wooden legs! Face it, boy, Green
Town, Upper Illinois, is the most common mean ordinary plain old bore of
a town in the eternal history of the Roman, German, Russian, English,
American empires! If Napoleon had been born here, he would’ve committed
hara-kiri by the age of nine. Boredom. If Julius Caesar had been raised
here, he’d have got himself in the Roman Forum, aged ten, and shoved in
his own dagger—’
‘Boredom,’ said Charlie.
‘Kee-rect! Keep staring out that window while I work, son.’ Colonel
Stonesteel went back to flailing and shoving and pushing a strange
growing shape around on the creaking table. ‘Boredom by the pound and
ton. Boredom by the doomsday yard and the funeral mile. Lawns, homes,
fur on the dogs, hair on the people, suits in the dusty store windows,
all cut from the same cloth.…’
‘Boredom,’ said Charlie, on cue.
‘And what do you do when you’re bored, son?’
‘Er – break a window in a haunted house?’
‘Good grief, we got no haunted houses in Green Town, boy!’
‘Used to be. Old Higley place. Torn down.’
‘See mypoint? Now whatelsedo we do so’s not to be bored?’
‘Hold a massacre?’
‘No massacres here in dogs’ years. Lord, even our police chief’s honest!
Mayor – not corrupt! Madness. Whole town faced with stark staring ennuis
and lulls! Last chance, Charlie, what do wedo!’
‘Build a mummy?’ Charlie smiled.
‘Bulldogs in the belfry! Watch my dust!’
The old man, cackling, grabbed bits of stuffed owl and bent lizard tail
and old nicotine bandages left over from a skiing fall that had busted
his ankle and broken a romance in 1895, and some patches from a 1922
Kissel Kar inner tube, and some burned-out sparklers from the last
peaceful summer of 1913, and all of it weaving, shuttling together under
his brittle insect-jumping fingers.
‘Voilà!There, Charlie! Finished!’
‘Oh, colonel.’ The boy stared and gasped. ‘Can I make him a crown?’
‘Make him a crown, boy. Make him a crown.’
The sun was going down when the colonel and Charlie and their Egyptian
friend came down the dusky backstairs of the old man’s house, two of
them walking iron-heavy, the third floating light as toasted cornflakes
on the autumn air.
‘Colonel,’ wondered Charlie. ‘What we going to do with this mummy, now
wegothim? It ain’t as if he could talk much, or walk around—’
‘No need, boy. Let folks talk, let folks run. Look there!’
They cracked the door and peered out at a town smothered in peace and
ruined with nothing-to-do.
‘Ain’t enough, is it, son, you’ve recovered from your almost fatal
seizure of Desperate Empties. Whole town out there is up to their
earlobes in watchsprings, no hands on the clocks, afraid to get up every
morning and find it’s always and forever Sunday! Who’ll offer salvation,
boy?’
‘Amon Bubastis Rameses Ra the Third, just arrived on the four o’clock
limited?’
‘God love you, boy, yes. What we got here is a giant seed. Seed’s no
good unless you dowhatwith it?’
‘Why,’ said Charlie, one eye shut. ‘Plant it?’
‘Plant! Then watch it grow! Then what? Harvest time. Harvest! Come on,
boy. Er – bring your friend.’
The colonel crept out into the first nightfall.
The mummy came soon after, helped by Charlie.
Labor Day at high noon, Osiris Bubastis Rameses Amon-Ra-Tut arrived from
the Land of the Dead.
An autumn wind stirred the land and flapped doors wide not with the
sound of the usual Labor Day Parade, seven tour cars, a fife-and-drum
corps, and the mayor, but a mob that grew as it flowed the streets and
fell in a tide to inundate the lawn out front of Colonel Stonesteel’s
house. The colonel and Charlie were sitting on the front porch, had been
sitting there for some hours waiting for the conniption fits to arrive,
the storming of the Bastille to occur. Now with dogs going mad and
biting boys’ ankles and boys dancing around the fringes of the mob, the
colonel gazed down upon the Creation (his and Charlie’s) and gave his
secret smile.
‘Well, Charlie … do I win my bet?’
‘You sure do, colonel!’
‘Come on.’
Phones rang all across town and lunches burned on stoves, as the colonel
strode forth to give the parade his papal blessings.
At the center of the mob was a horse-drawn wagon. On top of the wagon,
his eyes wild with discovery, was Tom Tuppen, owner of a half-dead farm
just beyond town. Tom was babbling, and the crowd was babbling, because
in the back of the wagon was the special harvest delivered out of four
thousand lost years of time.
‘Well, flood the Nile and plant the Delta,’ gasped the colonel, eyes
wide, staring. ‘Is or is not that a genuine old Egyptian mummy lying
there in its original papyrus and coal-tar wrappings?’
‘Sure is!’ cried Charlie.
‘Sure is!’ yelled everyone.
‘I was plowing the field this morning,’ said Tom Tuppen. ‘Plowing, just
plowing! and – bang! Plow turned this right up, rightbeforeme! Like to
had a stroke! Think! The Egyptians must’ve marched through Illinois
three thousand years ago and no one knew! Revelations, I call it! Outa
the way, kids! I’m taking this find to the post office lobby. Set it up
on display! Giddap, now, git!’
The horse, the wagon, the mummy, the crowd, moved away, leaving the
colonel behind, his eyes still pretend-wide, his mouth open.
‘Hot dog,’ whispered the colonel, ‘we did it, Charles. This uproar,
babble, talk and hysterical gossip will last for a thousand days or till
Armageddon, whichever comes first!’
‘Yessir, colonel!’
‘Michelangelo couldn’t’ve done better. Boy David’s a
castaway-lost-and-forgotten wonder compared to our Egyptian surprise
and—’
The colonel stopped as the mayor rushed by.
‘Colonel, Charlie, howdy! Just phoned Chicago. News folks here tomorrow
breakfast! Museum folks by lunch! Glory Hallelujah for the Green Town
Chamber of Commerce!’
The mayor ran off after the mob.
An autumn cloud crossed the colonel’s face and settled around his mouth.
‘End of Act One, Charlie. Start thinking fast. Act Two coming up.
Wedowant this commotion to last forever, don’t we?’
‘Yes, sir—’
‘Crack your brain, boy. What does Uncle Wiggily say?’
‘Uncle Wiggily says – ah – gobacktwo hops?’
‘Give the boy an A-plus, a gold star, and a brownie! The Lord giveth and
the Lord taketh away, eh?’
Charlie looked into the old man’s face and saw visitations of plagues
there. ‘Yes, sir.’
The colonel watched the mob milling around the post office two blocks
away. The fife-and-drum corps arrived and played some tune vaguely
inclined toward the Egyptian.
‘Sundown, Charlie,’ whispered the colonel, eyes shut. ‘We make our final
move.’
What a day it was! Years later people said: That was a day! The mayor
went home and got dressed up and came back and made three speeches and
held two parades, one going up Main Street toward the end of the trolley
line, the other coming back, and Osiris Bubastis Rameses Amon-Ra-Tut at
the center of both, smiling now to the right as gravity shifted his
flimsy weight, and now to the left as they rounded a corner. The
fife-and-drum corps, now heavily implemented by accumulated brass, had
spent an hour drinking beer and learning the triumphal march fromAïdaand
this they played so many times that mothers took their screaming babies
into the house, and men retired to bars to soothe their nerves. There
was talk of a third parade and a fourth speech, but sunset took the town
unawares, and everyone, including Charlie, went home to a dinner mostly
talk and short on eats.
By eight o’clock, Charlie and the colonel were driving along the leafy
streets in the fine darkness, taking the air in the old man’s 1924 Moon,
a car that took up trembling where the colonel left off.
‘Where we going, colonel?’
‘Well,’ mused the colonel, steering at ten philosophical miles per hour,
nice and easy, ‘everyone, including your folks, is out at Grossett’s
Meadow right now, right? Final Labor Day speeches. Someone’ll light the
gasbag mayor and he’ll go up about forty feet, kee-rect? Fire
department’ll be setting off the big skyrockets. Which means the post
office, plus the mummy, plus the police chief sitting there with him,
will be empty and vulnerable. Then, the miracle will happen, Charlie.
Ithasto. Ask me why.’
‘Why?’
‘Glad you asked. Well, boy, folks from Chicago’ll be jumping off the
train steps tomorrow hot and fresh as pancakes, with their pointy noses
and glass eyes and microscopes. Those museum snoopers, plus the
Associated Press, will rummage our Egyptian Pharaoh seven ways from
Christmas and blow their fuse boxes. That being so, Charles—’
‘We’re on our way to mess around.’
‘You put it indelicately, boy, but truth is at the core. Look at it this
way, child, life is a magic show, orshouldbe if people didn’t go to
sleep on each other. Always leave folks with a bit of mystery, son. Now,
before people get used to our ancient friend, before he wears out the
wrong bath towel, like any smart weekend guest he should grab the next
scheduled camel west. There!’
The post office stood silent, with one light shining in the foyer.
Through the great window, they could see the sheriff seated alongside
the mummy-on-display, neither of them talking, abandoned by the mobs
that had gone for suppers and fireworks.
‘Charlie.’ The colonel brought forth a brown bag in which a mysterious
liquid gurgled. ‘Give me thirty-five minutes to mellow the sheriff down.
Then you creep in, listen, follow my cues, and work the miracle. Here
goes nothing!’
And the colonel stole away.
Beyond town, the mayor sat down and the fireworks went up.
Charlie stood on top of the Moon and watched them for half an hour.
Then, figuring the mellowing time was over, dogtrotted across the street
and moused himself into the post office to stand in the shadows.
‘Well, now,’ the colonel was saying, seated between the Egyptian Pharaoh
and the sheriff, ‘why don’t you just finish that bottle, sir?’
‘It’s finished,’ said the sheriff, and obeyed.
The colonel leaned forward in the half-light and peered at the gold
amulet on the mummy’s breast.
‘You believe them old sayings?’
‘What old sayings?’ asked the sheriff.
‘If you read them hieroglyphics out loud, the mummy comes alive and
walks.’
‘Horse radish,’ said the sheriff.
‘Just look at all those fancy Egyptian symbols!’ the colonel pursued.
‘Someone stole my glasses. You read that stuff to me,’ said the sheriff.
‘Make the fool mummy walk.’
Charlie took this as a signal to move, himself, and sidled around
through the shadows, closer to the Egyptian king.
‘Here goes.’ The colonel bent even closer to the Pharaoh’s amulet,
meanwhile slipping the sheriff’s glasses out of his cupped hand into his
side pocket. ‘First symbol on here is a hawk. Second one’s a jackal.
That third’s an owl. Fourth’s a yellow fox-eye—’
‘Continue,’ said the sheriff.
The colonel did so, and his voice rose and fell, and the sheriff’s head
nodded, and all the Egyptian pictures and words flowed and touched
around the mummy until at last the colonel gave a great gasp.
‘Good grief, sheriff, look!’
The sheriff blinked both eyes wide.
‘The mummy,’ said the colonel. ‘It’s going for a walk!’
‘Can’t be!’ cried the sheriff. ‘Can’t be!’
‘Is,’ said a voice, somewhere, maybe the Pharaoh under his breath.
And the mummy lifted up, suspended, and drifted toward the door.
‘Why,’ cried the sheriff, tears in his eyes.
‘I think he might just –fly!’
‘I’d better follow and bring him back,’ said the colonel.
‘Dothat!’ said the sheriff.
The mummy was gone. The colonel ran. The door slammed.
‘Oh, dear.’ The sheriff lifted and shook the bottle. ‘Empty.’
They steamed to a halt out front of Charlie’s house.
‘Your folks ever go up in your attic, boy?’
‘Too small. They poke me up to rummage.’
‘Good. Hoist our ancient Egyptian friend out of the back seat there,
don’t weigh much, twenty pounds at the most, you carried him fine,
Charlie. Oh, that was a sight. You running out of the post office,
making the mummy walk. You shoulda seen the sheriff’s face!’
‘I hope he don’t get in trouble because of this.’
‘Oh, he’ll bump his head and make up a fine story. Can’t very well admit
he saw the mummy go for a walk, can he? He’ll think of something,
organize a posse, you’ll see. But right now, son, get our ancient friend
here up, hide him good, visit him weekly. Feed him night talk. Then,
thirty, forty years from now—’
‘What?’ asked Charlie.
‘In a bad year so brimmed up with boredom it drips out your ears, when
the town’s long forgotten this first arrival and departure, on a
morning, I say, when you lie in bed and don’t want to get up, don’t even
want to twitch your ears or blink, you’re so damned bored.… Well,
onthatmorning, Charlie, you just climb up in your rummage-sale attic and
shake this mummy out of bed, toss him in a cornfield and watch new
hellfire mobs break loose. Life starts over that hour, that day, for
you, the town, everyone. Now grab, git, and hide, boy!’
‘I hate for the night to be over,’ said Charlie, very quietly. ‘Can’t we
go around a few blocks and finish off some lemonade on your porch? And
havehimcome, too.’
‘Lemonade it is.’ Colonel Stonesteel banged his heel on the car-floor.
The car exploded into life. ‘For the lost king and the Pharaoh’s son!’
It was late on Labor Day evening, and the two of them sat on the
colonel’s front porch again, rocking up a fair breeze, lemonades in
hand, ice in mouth, sucking the sweet savor of the night’s incredible
adventures.
‘Boy,’ said Charlie. ‘I can just see tomorrow’sClarionheadlines:
PRICELESS MUMMY KIDNAPPED. RAMESES-TUT VANISHES. GREAT FIND GONE. REWARD
OFFERED. SHERIFF NONPLUSSED. BLACKMAIL EXPECTED.’
‘Talk on, boy. Youdohave a way with words.’
‘Learned from you, colonel. Now it’s your turn.’
‘What do you want me to say, boy?’
‘About the mummy. What he really is. What he’s truly made of. Where he
came from. What’s hemean …?’
‘Why, boy, you were there, you helped, yousaw—’
Charles looked at the old man steadily.
‘No.’ A long breath. ‘Tell me, colonel.’
The old man rose to stand in the shadows between the two rocking chairs.
He reached out to touch their ancient harvest-tobacco
dried-up-Nile-River-bottom old-time masterpiece, which leaned against
the porch slattings.
The last Labor Day fireworks were dying in the sky. Their light died in
the lapis lazuli eyes of the mummy, which watched Colonel Stonesteel,
even as did the boy, waiting.
‘You want to know who hetrulywas, once upon a time?’
The colonel gathered a handful of dust in his lungs and softly let it
forth.
‘He was everyone, no one, someone.’ A quiet pause. ‘You. Me.’
‘Go on,’ whispered Charlie.
Continue, said the mummy’s eyes.
‘He was, he is,’ murmured the colonel, ‘a bundle of old Sunday comic
pages stashed in the attic to spontaneously combust from all those
forgotten notions and stuffs. He’s a stand of papyrus left in an autumn
field long before Moses, a papier-mâché tumbleweed blown out of time,
this way long-gone dusk, that way at come-again dawn … maybe a nightmare
scrap of nicotine/dogtail flag up a pole at high noon, promising
something, everything … a chart-map of Siam, Blue River Nile source, hot
desert dust-devil, all the confetti of lost trolley transfers, dried-up
yellow crosscountry road maps petering off in sand dunes, journey
aborted, wild jaunts yet to night-dream and commence. His body?… Mmmm …
made of … all the crushed flowers from brand-new weddings, dreadful old
funerals, ticker-tapes unraveled from gone-off-forever parades to Far
Rockaway, punched tickets for sleepless Egyptian Pharaoh midnight
trains. Written promises, worthless stocks, crumpled deeds. Circus
posters – see there? Part of his paper-wrapped ribcage? Posters torn off
seedbarns in North Storm, Ohio, shuttled south toward Fulfillment,
Texas, or Promised Land, Calif-orn-I-aye! Commencement proclamations,
wedding notices, birth announcements … all things that were once need,
hope, first nickel in the pocket, framed dollar on the café wall.
Wallpaper scorched by the burning look, the blueprint etched there by
the hot eyes of boys, girls, failed old men, time-orphaned women,
saying: Tomorrow! Yes!Itwill happen! Tomorrow! Everything that died so
many nights and was born again, glory human spirit, so many rare new
daybreaks! All the dumb strange shadows you ever thought, boy, or I ever
inked out inside my head at three A.M. All, crushed, stashed, and now
shaped into one form under our hands and here in our gaze. That, that is
what old King Pharaoh Seventh Dynasty Holy Dust Himselfis.’
‘Wow,’ whispered Charlie.
The colonel sat back down to travel again in his rocker, eyes shut,
smiling.
‘Colonel.’ Charlie gazed off into the future. ‘What if, even in my old
age, I don’t everneedmy own particular mummy?’
‘Eh?’
‘What if I have a life chock-full of things, never bored, find out what
I want to do,doit, make every day count, every night swell, sleep tight,
wake up yelling, laugh lots, grow old still running fast, whatthen,
colonel?’
‘Why then, boy, you’ll be one of God’s luckiest people!’
‘For you see, colonel,’ Charlie looked at him with pure round,
unblinking eyes, ‘I made up my mind. I’m going to be the greatest writer
that ever lived.’
The colonel braked his rocker and searched the innocent fire in that
small face.
‘Lord, Iseeit. Yes. Youwill! Well then, Charles, when you are very old,
you must find some lad, not as lucky as you, to give Osiris-Ra to. Your
life may be full, but others, lost on the road, will need our Egyptian
friend. Agreed? Agreed.’
The last fireworks were gone, the last fire balloons were sailing out
among the gentle stars. Cars and people were driving or walking home,
some fathers or mothers carrying their tired and already sleeping
children. As the quiet parade passed Colonel Stonesteel’s porch, some
folks glanced in and waved at the old man and the boy and the tall
dim-shadowed servant who stood between. The night was over forever.
Charlie said:
‘Say some more, colonel.’
‘No. I’m shut. Listen to what he has to say now. Let him tell your
future, Charlie. Let him start you on stories. Ready …?’
A wind came up and blew in the dry papyrus and sifted the ancient
wrappings and trembled the curious hands and softly twitched the lips of
their old/new four-thousand-year night-time visitor, whispering.
‘What’s he saying, Charles?’
Charlie shut his eyes, waited, listened, nodded, let a single tear slide
down his cheek, and at last said:
‘Everything. Just everything. Everything I always wanted tohear.’

