                                  
                                 The Witch Door
                                      1995

     It  was  a pounding on a door, a furious, frantic, insistent pounding, born
of  hysteria  and  fear  and  a great desire to be heard, to be freed, to be let
loose,  to  escape.  It  was  a  wrenching  at  hidden paneling, it was a hollow
knocking, a rapping, a testing, a clawing! It was a scratching at hollow boards,
a  ripping  at bedded nails; it was a muffled closet shouting and demanding, far
away, and a call to be noticed, followed by a silence.
     The  silence was the most empty and terrible of all. Robert and Martha Webb
sat up in bed.
     "Did you hear it?"
     "Yes, again."
     "Downstairs."
     Now  whoever  it  was  who had pounded and rapped and made his fingers raw,
drawn  blood  with  his  fever  and  quest  to  be free, had drawn into silence,
listening himself to see if his terror and drumming had summoned any help.
     The winter night lay through the house with a falling-snow silence, silence
snowing  into  every  room,  drifting over tables and floors, and banking up the
stairwell.
     Then the pounding started again. And then:
     A sound of soft crying.
     "Downstairs."
     "Someone in the house."
     "Lotte, do you think? The front door's unlocked."
     "She'd have knocked. Can't be Lotte."
     "She's the only one it _could_ be. She _phoned."_
     They  both  glanced  at  the phone. If you lifted the receiver, you heard a
winter stillness. The phones were dead. They had died days ago with the riots in
the  nearest  towns  and  cities.  Now, in the receiver, you heard only your own
heart-beat.  "Can  you  put  me up?" Lone had cried from six hundred miles away.
"Just overnight?"
     But  before  they  could  answer her, the phone had filled itself with long
miles of silence.
     "Lotte  _is_  coming.  She  sounded  hysterical. That _might_ be her," said
Martha Webb.
     "No,'' said Robert. "I heard that crying other nights, too. Dear God."
     They  lay  in  the  cold  room  in this farmhouse back in the Massachusetts
wilderness,  back  from  the main roads, away from the towns, near a bleak river
and  a  black  forest.  It was the frozen middle of December. The white smell of
snow cut the air.
     They  arose.  With  an  oil lamp lit, they sat on the edge of the bed as if
dangling their legs over a precipice.
     "There's no one downstairs, there _can't_ be."
     "Whoever it is sounds frightened."
     "We're  _all_  frightened, damn it. That's why we came out here, to be away
from  cities,  riots,  all  that  damned foolishness. No more wiretaps, arrests,
taxes,  neurotics.  Now  when  we find it at last, people call and upset us. And
tonight _this,_ Christ!" He glanced at his wife. "You afraid?"
     "I  don't  know. I don't believe in ghosts. This is 1999; I'm sane. Or like
to _think_ I am. Where's your gun?"
     "We  won't  need  it. Don't ask me why, but we won't." They picked up their
oil lamps. In another month the small power plant would be finished in the white
barns  behind  the house and there'd be power to spare, but now they haunted the
farm, coming and going with dim lamps or candles.
     They stood at the stairwell, both thirty-three, both immensely practical.
     The crying, the sadness, and the plea came from below in the winter rooms.
     "She sounds so damned sad," said Robert. "God, I'm sorry for her, but don't
even know who it _is._ Come on."
     They went downstairs.
     As  if  hearing  their  footsteps, the crying grew louder. There was a dull
thudding against a hidden panel somewhere.
     "The _Witch_ Door!" said Martha Webb at last.
     "Can't be."
     _"Is."_
       They stood in the long hall looking at that place under the stairs, where
the  panels  trembled  faintly.  But  now  the  cries faded, as if the crier was
exhausted,  or  something had diverted her, or perhaps their voices had startled
her  and  she  was listening for them to speak again. Now the winter-night house
was  silent  and  the  man  and wife waited with the oil lamps quietly fuming in
their hands.
     Robert  Webb  stepped  to  the  Witch  Door and touched it, probing for the
hidden button, the secret spring. "There can't be anyone in there," he said. "My
God,  we've _been_ here six months, and that's just a cubby. Isn't that what the
Realtor  said when he sold the place? No one could hide in there and us not know
it. We-"
     "Listen!"
     They listened.
     Nothing.
     "She's gone, it's gone, whatever it was, hell, that door hasn't been opened
in  our  lifetime.  Everyone's  forgotten where the spring is that unlocks it. I
don't  think there _is_ a door, only a loose panel, and rats' nests, that's all.
The  walls, scratching. Why not?" He turned to look at his wife, who was staring
at the hidden place.
     "Silly,"  she said. "Good Lord, rats don't cry. That was a voice, asking to
be saved. Lotte, I thought. But now I know it wasn't she, but someone else in as
much trouble."
     Martha  Webb reached out and trembled her fingertips along the beveled edge
of ancient maple. _"Can't_ we open it?"
     "With a crowbar and hammer, tomorrow."
     "Oh, Robert!"
     "Don't 'Oh, Robert' me. I'm tired."
     "You _can't_ leave her in there to-"
     "She's  quiet  now.  Christ,  I'm exhausted. I'll come down at the crack of
dawn and knock the damned thing apart, okay?"
     "All right," she said, and tears came to her eyes.
     "Women,"  said  Robert  Webb. "Oh, my God, you and Lotte, Lotte and you. If
she _is_ coming here, if she makes it, I'll have a houseful of lunatics!"
     "Lotte's _fine!"_
       "Sure,  but  she  should  keep  her mouth shut. It doesn't pay now to say
you're   Socialist,  Democrat,  Libertarian,  Pro-Life  Abortionist,  Sinn  Fein
Fascist,  Commie,  any  damn thing. The towns are bombed out. People are looking
for scapegoats and Lotte has to shoot from the hip, get herself smeared and now,
hell, on the run."
     "They'll  jail  her  if  they  catch her. Or kill her, yes, kill her. We're
lucky  to  be  here  with  our  own  food. Thank God we planned ahead, we saw it
coming,  the starvation, the massacres. We helped ourselves. Now we help Lone if
she makes it through."
     Without answering, he turned to the stairs. "I'm dead on my feet. I'm tired
of  saving  anyone.  Even  Lotte. But hell, if she comes through the front door,
she's saved."
     They  went up the stairs taking the lamps, advancing in an ever-moving aura
of  trembling  white  glow.  The  house was as silent as snow falling. "God," he
whispered. "Damn, I don't _like_ women crying like that."
     It  sounded  like the whole world crying, he thought. The whole world dying
and  needing  help  and lonely, but what can you _do?_ Live in a farm like this?
Far  off  the  main highway where people don't pass, away from all the stupidity
and death? What can you _do?_
       They  left one of the lamps lit and drew the covers over their bodies and
lay, listening to the wind hit the house and creak the beams and parquetry.
     A  moment  later  there was a cry from downstairs, a splintering crash, the
sound  of  a  door  flung wide, a bursting out of air, footsteps rapping all the
rooms,  a  sobbing,  almost  an exultation, then the front door banged open, the
winter wind blowing wildly in, footsteps across the front porch and gone.
     "There!" cried Martha. _"Yes!"_
       With  the  lamp  they  were down the stairs swiftly. Wind smothered their
faces  as  they  turned  now  toward  the  Witch Door, opened wide, still on its
hinges,  then  toward  the  front  door  where  they cast their light out upon a
snowing winter darkness and saw nothing but white and hills, no moon, and in the
lamplight  the soft drift and moth-flicker of snowflakes falling from the sky to
the mattressed yard.
     "Gone," she whispered.
     "Who?"
     "We'll never know, unless she comes back."
     "She won't. Look."
     They  moved  the  lamplight  toward the white earth and the tiny footprints
going off, across the softness, toward the dark forest.
     "It _was_ a woman, then. But... _why?"_
     "God  knows.  Why anything, now in this crazy world?" They stood looking at
the  footprints  a long while until, shivering, they moved back through the hall
to the open Witch Door. They poked the lamp into this hollow under the stairs.
     "Lord, it's just a cell, hardly a closet, and look..."
       Inside  stood  a  small  rocking chair, a braided rug, a used candle in a
copper  holder,  and  an old, worn Bible. The place smelled of must and moss and
dead flowers.
     "Is this where they used to hide people?"
     "Yes.  A  long  time  back  they  hid  people called witches. Trials, witch
trials. They hung or burned some."
     "Yes, yes," they both murmured, staring into the incredibly small cell.
     "And  the witches hid here while the hunters searched the house and gave up
and left?"
     "Yes, oh, my God, yes," he whispered.
     "Rob
     ''Yes?"
     She  bent  forward.  Her face was pale and she could not look away from the
small, worn rocking chair and the faded Bible.
     "Rob. How old? This house, how old?"
     "Maybe three hundred years.
     _"That_ old?"
     "Why?"
     "Crazy. Stupid . .
     "Crazy?"
     "Houses,  old  like  this.  All  the _years._ And more years and more after
that.  God,  _feel!_  If  you  put  your hand in, yes? Would you feel it change,
silly,  and  what if I sat in that rocking chair and shut the door, _what?_ That
woman . .. how long was she _in_ there? How'd she get there? From way, way back.
Wouldn't it be _strange?"_
     ''Bull!''
     "But  if you wanted to run away badly enough, wished for it, prayed for it,
and  people  ran  after  you,  and someone hid you in a place like this, a witch
behind a door, and heard the searchers run through the house, closer and closer,
wouldn't  you  _want_  to  get away? Anywhere? To another place? Why not another
time?  And  then,  in  a  house  like  this, a house so old nobody knows, if you
_wanted_ and _asked_ for it enough, couldn't you run to another year! Maybe"-she
paused-"here... ?"
     "No, no," he muttered. _"Really_ stupid!"
     But  still,  some  quiet  motion  within the closeted space caused both, at
almost  the  same  instant,  to  hold  their hands out on the air, curious, like
people  testing  invisible  waters.  The  air  seemed  to  move one way and then
another,  now  warm,  now  cold,  with a pulsation of light and a sudden turning
toward  dark.  All  this they thought but could not say. There was weather here,
now  a  quick  touch  of  summer  and then a winter cold, which could not be, of
course,  but  there  it was. Passing along their fingertips, but unseen by their
eyes,  a  stream  of  shadows  and sun ran as invisible as time itself, clear as
crystal,  but  clouded  by a shifting dark. Both felt if they thrust their hands
deep,  they  might  be  drawn in to drown in a mighty storm of seasons within an
incredibly small space. All this, too, they thought or almost felt but could not
say.
     They  seized  their frozen but sunburned hands back, to stare down and hold
them against the panic in their breasts.
     "Damn,"  whispered  Robert Webb. "Oh, damn!" He backed off and went to open
the  front  door  again  and  look at the snowing night where the footprints had
almost vanished.
     "No" he said. "No, no."
     Just then the yellow flash of headlights on the road braked in front of the
house.
     "Lotte!" cried Martha Webb. "It _must_ be! Lotte!" The car lights went out.
They ran to meet the running woman half up the front yard.
     "Lotte!"
     The woman, wild-eyed, hair windblown, threw herself at them.
     "Martha,  Bob!  God,  I  thought  I'd  _never_  find  you!  Lost! I'm being
followed, let's get inside. Oh, I didn't mean to get you up in the middle of the
night, it's good to _see_ you! Jesus! Hide the car! Here are the keys!"
     Robert Webb ran to drive the car behind the house. When he came back around
he saw that the heavy snowfall was already covering the tracks.
     Then  the  three  of them were inside the house, talking, holding onto each
other. Robert Webb kept glancing at the front door.
     "I  can't  thank  you," cried Lotte, huddled in a chair. "You're at risk! I
won't stay long, a few hours until it's safe. Then ..
     "Stay as long as you want."
     "No.  They'll  _follow!_  In  the  cities, the fires, the murders, everyone
starving, I stole gas. Do you have _more?_ Enough to get me to Phil Merdith's in
Greenborough? I-"
     "Lotte," said Robert Webb.
     "Yes?" Lotte stopped, breathless.
     "Did you see anyone on your way up here? A woman? Running on the road?"
     "What?  I  drove  so  fast!  A _woman?_ Yes! I almost hit her. Then she was
gone! Why?"
     ''Well . .
     "She's not _dangerous?"_
     "No, no."
     "It _is_ all right, my _being_ here?"
     "Yes, fine, fine. Sit back. We'll fix some coffee-"
     "Wait!  I'll check!" And before they could stop her, Lotte ran to the front
door,  opened  it  a  crack, and peered out. They stood with her and saw distant
headlights  flourished over a low hill and gone into a valley. "They're coming,"
whispered Lotte. "They might search here. God, where can I hide?"
     Martha and Robert glanced at each other.
     No,   no,   thought  Robert  Webb.  God,  no!  Preposterous,  unimaginable,
fantastic,  so  damned coincidental the mind raves at it, crows, hoots, guffaws!
No, none of _this!_ Get oft' circumstance! Get away with your goings and comings
on not neat, or too neat, schedules. Come back, Lotte, in ten years, five years,
maybe a year, a month, a week, and ask to hide. Even tomorrow show up! But don't
come  with  coincidence  in  each hand like idiot children and ask, only half an
hour  after  one terror, one miracle, to test our disbelief! I'm not, after all,
Charles Dickens, to blink and let this pass.
     "What's wrong?" said Lotte.
     "I-" said Robert.
     "No place to hide me?"
     "Yes," he said. "We've a place."
     "Well?"
     "Here." He turned slowly away, stunned.
     They walked down the hall to the half-open paneling.
     "This?" Lotte said. "Secret? Did you-7"
     "No'  it's been here since the house was built long ago." Lotte touched and
moved  the door on its hinges. "Does _it_ work? Will they know where to look and
_find_ it?"
     "No.  It's  beautifully  made. Shut, you can't tell it's there." Outside in
the  winter  night,  cars  rushed,  their beams flashing up the road, across the
house windows.
     Lotte peered into the Witch Door as one peers down a deep, lonely well.
     A filtering of dust moved about her. The small rocking chair trembled.
     Moving in silently, Lotte touched the half-burned candle.
     "Why, it's still _warm!"_
       Martha and Robert said nothing. They held to the Witch Door, smelling the
odor of warm tallow.
     Lotte stood rigidly in the little space, bowing her head beneath the beamed
ceiling.
     A  horn blew in the snowing night. Lotte took a deep breath and said, "Shut
the door."
     They shut the Witch Door. There was no way to tell that a door was there.
     They blew out the lamp and stood in the cold, dark house, waiting.
     The  cars  rushed  down  the  road,  their  noise  loud,  and  their yellow
headlights  bright  in  the falling snow. The wind stirred the footprints in the
yard,  one pair going out, another coming in, and the tracks of Lotte's car fast
vanishing, and at last gone.
     "Thank God," whispered Martha.
     The  cars,  honking,  whipped  around  the  last bend and down the hill and
stopped,  waiting,  looking in at the dark house. Then, at last, they started up
away into the snow and the hills.
     Soon their lights were gone and their sound gone with them.
     "We were lucky," said Robert Webb.
     "But _she's_ not."
     "She?''
     "That  woman, whoever she was, ran out of here. _They'll_ find here. _Some_
body'll find her."
     "Christ, that's right."
     "And  she  has  no  I.D.,  no proof of herself. And she doesn't know what's
_happened_  to  her.  And  when  she  tells them who she is and where she _came_
from!"
     "Yes, yes."
     "God help her."
     They  looked  into the snowing night but saw nothing. Everything was still.
"You can't escape," she said. "No matter what you do, no one can escape."
     They  moved  away  from  the window and down the hall to the Witch Door and
touched it.
     "Lotte," they called.
     The  Witch  Door  did  not  tremble or move. "Lotte, you can come out now."
There  was no answer; not a breath or a whisper. Robert tapped the door. "Hey in
there." "Lotte!"
     He knocked at the paneling, his mouth agitated. "Lotte!"
     "Open it!"
     "I'm trying, damn it!"
     "Lotte, we'll get you out, wait! Everything's all _right!" _
      He beat with both fists, cursing. Then he said, "Watch
     out!"  took  a  step back, raised his leg, kicked once, twice, three times;
vicious  kicks  at  the  paneling  that  crunched  holes  and crumbled wood into
kindling. He reached in and yanked the entire paneling free. "Lotte!"
     They  leaned  together  into  the  small place under the stairs. The candle
flickered on the small table. The Bible was
     gone. The small rocking chair moved quietly back and forth, in little arcs,
and then stood still.
     "Lotte!"
     They stared at the empty room. The candle flickered.
     "Lotte," they said.
     "You don't believe .
     "I don't know. Old houses are _old..._ old..
     "You think Lotte... she...  ?"
     "I don't know, I don't know."
     "Then she's safe at least, safe! Thank God!"
     "Safe? Where's she _gone?_ You really _think_ that? A woman in new clothes,
red  lipstick,  high  heels, short skirt, perfume, plucked brows, diamond rings,
silk  stockings,  safe?  Safe!" he said, staring deep into the open frame of the
Witch Door.
     "Yes, safe. Why not?"
     He drew a deep breath.
     "A  woman  of  that  description,  lost  in a town called Salem in the year
1680?"
     He reached over and shut the Witch Door.
     They sat waiting by it for the rest of the long, cold night.