                                  
                                  The Finnegan
                                      1996

     To  say  that  I  have  been  haunted for the rest of my life by the affair
Finnegan  is  to  grossly  understate  the  events  leading  up  to  that  final
melancholy.  Only  now,  at  threescore  and ten, can I write these words for an
astonished  constabulary  who  may well run with picks and shovels to unearth my
truths or bury my lies.
     The facts are these:
     Three  children went astray and were missed. Their bodies were found in the
midst  of  Chatham  Forest and each bore no marks of criminal assassination, but
all  had  suffered  their lifeblood to be drained. Only their skin remained like
that of some discolored vineyard grapes withered by sunlight and no rain.
     From the withered detritus of these innocents rose fresh rumors of vampires
or  similar beasts with similar appetites. Such myths always pursue the facts to
stun  them  in  their  tracks.  It could only have been a tombyard beast, it was
said, that fed on and destroyed three lives and ruined three dozen more.
     The  children  were  buried in the most holy ground. Soon after, Sir Robert
Merriweather,  pretender  to the throne of Sherlock Holmes but modestly refusing
the  claim, moved through the ten dozen doors of his antique house to come forth
to  search  for  this terrible thief of life. With myself, I might add, to carry
his  brandy and bumbershoot and warn him of underbrush pitfalls in that dark and
mysterious forest.
     Sir Robert Merriweather, you say?
     Just  that. Plus the ten times ten plus twelve amazing doors in his shut-up
house.
     Were the doors used? Not one in nine. How had they appeared in Sir Robert's
old  manse?  He  had  shipped them in, as a collector of doors, from Rio, Paris,
Rome, Tokyo, and mid-America. Once collected, he had stashed them, hinged, to be
seen  from  both  sides,  on the walls of his upper and lower chambers. There he
conducted  tours of these odd portals for such antique fools as were ravished by
the  sight  of  the curiously overdone, the undersimplified, the rococo, or some
First  Empire  cast  aside by Napoleon's nephews or seized from Hermann Goering,
who  had  in  turn ransacked the Louvre. Others, pelted by Oklahoma dust storms,
were  jostled home in flatbeds cushioned by bright posters from carnivals buried
in  the windblown desolations of 1936 America. Name your least favorite door, it
was  _his._  Name  the  best  quality,  he  owned it also, hidden and safe, true
beauties behind oblivion's portals.
     I  had  come  to  see his doors, not the deaths. At his behest, which was a
command,  I  had  bought my curiosity a steamship ticket and arrived to find Sir
Robert  involved  not  with  ten  dozen  doors,  but  some  great _dark_ door. A
mysterious portal, still un-found. And beneath? A tomb.
     Sir Robert hurried the grand tour, opening and shutting panels rescued from
Peking,  long  buried  near Etna, or filched from Nantucket. But his heart, gone
sick, was not in this, what should have been delightful, tour.
     He  described  the  spring  rains  that drenched the country to make things
green,  only  to  have people to walk out in that fine weather and one week find
the  body of a boy emptied of life through two incisions in his neck, and in the
next  weeks,  the bodies of the two girls. People shouted for the police and sat
drinking in pubs, their faces long and pale, while mothers locked their children
home where fathers lectured on the dooms that lay in Chatham Forest.
     "Will  you  come with me," said Sir Robert at last, "on a very strange, sad
picnic?"
     "I will," I said.
     So  we  snapped  ourselves in weather-proofs, lugged a hamper of sandwiches
and red wine, and plunged into the forest on a drear Sunday.
     There  was  time,  as  we  moved down a hill into the dripping gloom of the
trees,  to  recall  what  the  papers  had  said  about  the vanished children's
bloodless  flesh,  the  police  thrashing  the forest ten dozen times, clueless,
while the surrounding estates slammed their doors drum-tight at sunset.
     "Rain.  Damn.  Rain!"  Sir  Robert's pale face stared up, his gray mustache
quivering over his thin mouth. He was sick and brittle and old. "Our picnic will
be _ruined!"_
     "Picnic?" I said. "Will our killer join us for eats?"
     "I pray to God he will," Sir Robert said. "Yes, pray to God he will."
     We  walked through a land that was now mists, now dim sunlight, now forest,
now open glade, until we came into a silent part of the woods, a silence made of
the  way  the trees grew wetly together and the way the green moss lay in swards
and  hillocks.  Spring  had  not yet filled the empty trees. The sun was like an
arctic disk, withdrawn, cold, and almost dead.
     "This is the place," said Sir Robert at last.
     "Where the children were found?" I inquired.
     "Their bodies empty as empty can be."
     I  looked  at  the glade and thought of the children and the people who had
stood  over  them with startled faces and the police who had come to whisper and
touch and go away, lost.
     "The murderer was never apprehended?"
     "Not this clever fellow. How observant are you?" asked Sir Robert.
     "What do you want observed?"
     "There's   the   catch.   The   police   slipped  up.  They  were  stupidly
anthropomorphic about the whole bloody mess, seeking a killer with two arms, two
legs,  a suit of clothes, and a knife. So hypnotized with their human concept of
the  killer that they overlooked one obvious unbelievable fact about this place.
_So!"_
     He gave his cane a quick light tap on the earth.
     Something happened. I stared at the ground. "Do that again," I whispered.
     "You _saw_ it?"
     "I thought I saw a small trapdoor open and shut. May I have your cane?"
     He gave me the cane. I tapped the ground. It happened again.
     "A spider!" I cried. "Gone! God, how quick!"
     "Finnegan," Sir Robert muttered.
     "What?"
     "You know the old saying: in again, out again, Finnegan. Here."
     With  his  penknife,  Sir  Robert dug in the soil to lift an entire clod of
earth, breaking off bits to show me the tunnel. The spider, in panic, leaped out
its small wafer door and fell to the ground.
     Sir  Robert handed me the tunnel. "Like gray velvet. Feel. A model builder,
that small chap. A tiny shelter, camouflaged, and him alert. He could hear a fly
walk. Then pounce out, seize, pop back, _slam_ the lid!"
     "I didn't know you loved Nature."
     "Loathe  it.  But  this  wee  chap,  there's  much we share. Doors. Hinges.
Wouldn't  consider other arachnids. But my love of portals drew me to study this
incredible  carpenter."  Sir  Robert worked the trap on its cobweb hinges. "What
craftsmanship! And it _all_  ties to the tragedies!"
     "The murdered children?"
     Sir Robert nodded. "Notice any special thing about this forest?"
     "It's too quiet."
     "Quiet!"  Sir  Robert  smiled  weakly.  "Vast  _quantities_  of silence. No
familiar  birds,  beetles,  crickets,  toads.  Not  a rustle or stir. The police
didn't  notice.  Why should they? But it was this absence of sound and motion in
the glade that prompted my wild theory about the murders."
     He toyed with the amazing structure in his hands.
     "What  would  you  say  if  you could imagine a spider _large_ enough, in a
hideout  _big_  enough,  so that a running child might hear a vacuumed sound, be
seized,  and  vanish  with a soft thud below. How say you?" Sir Robert stared at
the  trees.  "Poppycock and bilge? Yet, why _not?_ Evolution, selection, growth,
mutations, _and-pfft!"_
     Again he tapped with his cane. A trapdoor flew open, shut.
     "Finnegan," he said.
     The sky darkened.
     "Rain!"  Casting a cold gray eye at the clouds, he stretched his frail hand
to  touch  the  showers. "Damn! Arachnids _hate_ rain. And so will our huge dark
Finnegan."
     "Finnegan!" I cried irritably.
     "I _believe_ in him, yes."
     "A spider larger than a _child?!"_
     _"Twice_ as large."
     The cold wind blew a mizzle of rain over us. "Lord, I hate to leave. Quick,
before we go. _Here."_
     Sir  Robert raked away the old leaves with his cane, revealing two globular
gray-brown objects.
     "What _are_ they?" I bent. "Old cannonballs?"
     "No." He cracked the grayish globes. "Soil, through and through."
     I touched the crumbled bits.
     "Our  Finnegan  excavates,"  said Sir Robert. "To make his tunnel. With his
large rakelike chelicerae he dislodges soil, works it into a ball, carries it in
his jaws, and drops it beyond his hole."
     Sir  Robert  displayed  half a dozen pellets on his trembling palm. "Normal
balls evicted from a tiny trapdoor tunnel. Toy-size." He knocked his cane on the
huge globes at our feet. "Explain _those!"_
     I laughed. "The _children_ must've made them with mud!"
     "Nonsense!"  cried  Sir Robert irritably, glaring about at trees and earth.
"By  God,  somewhere,  our  dark beast lurks beneath his velvet lid. We might be
_standing_  on  it.  Christ,  don't  stare!  His  door  has  beveled  rims. Some
architect, this Finnegan. A genius at camouflage."
     Sir  Robert  raved  on and on, describing the dark earth, the arachnid, its
fiddling legs, its hungry mouth, as the wind roared and the trees shook.
     Suddenly, Sir Robert flung up his cane.
     "No!" he cried.
     I had no time to turn. My flesh froze, my heart stopped.
     Something snatched my spine.
     I thought I heard a huge bottle uncorked, a lid sprung. Then this monstrous
thing crawled down my back.
     "Here!" cried Sir Robert. "Now!"
     He  struck  with his cane. I fell, dead weight. He thrust the thing from my
spine. He lifted it.
     The wind had cracked the dead tree branch and knocked it onto my back.
     Weakly,  I tried to rise, shivering. "Silly," I said a dozen times. "Silly.
Damn awful silly!"
     "Silly, no. Brandy, yes!" said Sir Robert. "Brandy?"
     The sky was very black now. The rain swarmed over us.

     
     
     Door  after  door  after  door, and at last into Sir Robert's country house
study. A warm, rich room, where a fire smoldered on a drafty hearth. We devoured
our  sandwiches,  waiting  for  the  rain to cease. Sir Robert estimated that it
would  stop  by  eight  o'clock,  when,  by  moonlight, we might return, ever so
reluctantly,  to  Chatham  Forest. I remembered the fallen branch, its spidering
touch, and drank both wine and brandy.
     "The  silence  in  the  forest," said Sir Robert, finishing his meal. "What
murderer could achieve such a silence?"
     "An  insanely  clever  man  with  a  series of baited, poisoned traps, with
liberal  quantities  of  insecticide,  might  kill off every bird, every rabbit,
every insect," I said.
     "Why should he do that?"
     "To convince us that there is a large spider nearby. To perfect his act."
     "We  are  the  only ones who have noticed this silence; the police did not.
Why should a murderer go to all that trouble for nothing?"
     "Why _is_ a murderer? you might well ask."
     "I am not convinced." Sir Robert topped his food with wine. "This creature,
with  a  voracious  mouth, has cleansed the forest. With nothing left, he seized
the  children. The silence, the murders, the prevalence of trapdoor spiders, the
large earth balls, it all _fits."_
     Sir  Robert's  fingers  crawled  about  the  desktop,  quite like a washed,
manicured spider in itself. He made a cup of his frail hands, held them up.
     "At  the  bottom  of  a spider's burrow is a dustbin into which drop insect
remnants  on  which  the  spider  has  dined.  Imagine  the dustbin of our Grand
Finnegan!"
     I  imagined. I visioned a Great Legged thing fastened to its dark lid under
the  forest  and  a  child  running, singing in the half-light. A brisk insucked
whisk  of  air, the song cut short, then nothing but an empty glade and the echo
of  a  softly  dropped  lid,  and  beneath  the dark earth the spider, fiddling,
cabling, spinning the stunned child in its silently orchestrating legs.
     What  would  the  dustbin  of  such an incredible spider resemble? What the
remnants of many banquets? I shuddered.
     "Rain's  letting  up." Sir Robert nodded his approval. "Back to the forest.
I've  mapped  the  damned  place  for  weeks.  All  the bodies were found in one
half-open  glade.  That's where the assassin, if it was a man, arrives! Or where
the  unnatural  silk-spinning, earth-tunneling architect of special doors abides
his tomb."
     _"Must_ I hear all this?" I protested.
     "Listen  more."  Sir  Robert  downed  the  last  of his burgundy. "The poor
children's  prolapsed  corpses were found at thirteen-day intervals. Which means
that  every  two  weeks  our  loathsome  eight-legged hide-and-seeker must feed.
Tonight  is  the  fourteenth  night  after the last child was found, nothing but
skin.  Tonight  our  hidden  friend _must_ hunger afresh. So! Within the hour, I
shall introduce you to Finnegan the great and horrible!"
     "All of which," I said, "makes me want to drink."
     "Here  I  go."  Sir  Robert stepped through one of his Louis the Fourteenth
portals.  "To  find  the  last and final and most awful door in all my life. You
will follow."
     Damn, _yes!_ I followed.

     
     
     The  sun  had  set, the rain was gone, and the clouds cleared off to show a
cold  and  troubled  moon.  We  moved  in our own silence and the silence of the
exhausted paths and glades while Sir Robert handed me a small silver pistol.
     "Not  that  that would help. Killing an outsize arachnid is sticky. Hard to
know  where  to  fire  the  first  shot.  If you miss, there'll be no time for a
second. Damned things, large or small, move in the _instant!"_
     "Thanks." I took the weapon. "I need a drink."
     "Done." Sir Robert handed me a silver brandy flask. "Drink as needed."
     I drank. "What about you?"
     "I have my own special flask." Sir Robert lifted it. "For the right time."
     "Why wait?"
     "I  must  surprise  the  beast  and mustn't be drunk at the encounter. Four
seconds  before  the  thing grabs me, I will imbibe of this dear Napoleon stuff,
spiced with a rude surprise.
     "Surprise?"
     "Ah, wait. You'll see. So will this dark thief of life. Now, dear sir, here
we part company. I this way, you yonder. Do you mind?"
     "Mind when I'm scared gutless? What's that?"
     "Here. If I should vanish." He handed me a sealed letter. "Read it aloud to
the constabulary. It will help them locate me and Finnegan, lost and found."
     "Please,  no  details.  I  feel  like  a  damned  fool  following you while
Finnegan,  if  he  exists, is underfoot snug and warm, saying, 'Ah, those idiots
above running about, freezing. I think I'll _let_ them freeze.' "
     "One hopes not. Get away now. If we walk together, he won't jump up. Alone,
he'll  peer  out  the  merest crack, glom the scene with a huge bright eye, flip
down again, _ssst,_ and one of us gone to darkness."
     "Not me, please. Not me."
     We  walked  on  about sixty feet apart and beginning to lose one another in
the half moonlight.
     "Are you there?" called Sir Robert from half the world away in leafy dark.
     "I wish I weren't," I yelled back.
     "Onward!"  cried  Sir  Robert.  "Don't lose sight of me. Move closer. We're
near on the site. I can intuit, I almost _feel-"_
     As  a  final cloud shifted, moonlight glowed brilliantly to show Sir Robert
waving his arms about like antennae, eyes half shut, gasping with expectation.
     "Closer, closer," I heard him exhale. "Near on. Be still. Perhaps . .
     He  froze in place. There' was something in his aspect that made me want to
leap, race, and yank him off the turf he had chosen.
     "Sir Robert, oh, God!" I cried. "Run!"
     He  froze.  One  hand and arm orchestrated the air, feeling, probing, while
his  other hand delved, brought forth his silver-coated flask of brandy. He held
it  high  in  the moonlight, a toast to doom. Then, afflicted with need, he took
one, two, three, my God, _four_ incredible swigs!
     Arms  out,  balancing the wind, tilting his head back, laughing like a boy,
he swigged the last of his mysterious drink.
     "All right, Finnegan, below and beneath!" he cried. "Come _get_ me!"
     He stomped his foot.
     Cried out victorious.
     And _vanished._
     It was all over in a second.
     A  flicker, a blur, a dark bush had grown up from the earth with a whisper,
a suction, and the thud of a body dropped and a door shut.
     The glade was empty.
     "Sir Robert. Quick!"
     But there was no one to quicken.
     Not thinking that _I_ might be snatched and vanished, I lurched to the spot
where Sir Robert had drunk his wild toast.
     I  stood  staring  down  at earth and leaves with not a sound save my heart
beating while the leaves blew away to reveal only pebbles, dry grass, and earth.
     I  must  have lifted my head and bayed to the moon like a dog, then fell to
my knees, fearless, to dig for lids, for tunneled tombs where a voiceless tangle
of legs wove themselves, binding and mummifying a thing that had been my friend.
This is his final door, I thought insanely, crying the name of my friend.
     I found only his pipe, cane, and empty brandy flask, flung down when he had
escaped night, life, everything.
     Swaying up, I fired the pistol six times here into the unanswering earth, a
dumb  thing  gone stupid as I finished and staggered over his instant graveyard,
his  locked-in  tomb,  listening  for muffled screams, shrieks, cries, but heard
none.  I ran in circles, with no ammunition save my weeping shouts. I would have
stayed all night, but a downpour of leaves, a great spidering flourish of broken
branches, fell to panic and suffer my heart. I fled, still calling his name to a
silence lidded by clouds that hid the moon.
     At  his  estate, I beat on the door, wailing, yanking, until I recalled: it
opened inward, it was unlocked.
     Alone  in  the library, with only liquor to help me live, I read the letter
that Sir Robert had left behind:

     
     
     _My dear Douglas:
     I am old and have seen much but am not mad. Finnegan exists. My chemist had
provided me with a sure poison that I will mix in my brandy for our walk. I will
drink  all.  Finnegan,  not knowing me as a poisoned morsel will give me a swift
invite.  Now  you see me, now you don't. I will then be the weapon of his death,
minutes after my own. I do not think there is another outsize nightmare like him
on earth. Once gone, that's the end.
     Being old, I am immensely curious. I fear not death, for my physicians tell
me that f no accidents kill me, cancer will.
     I  thought  of giving a poisoned rabbit to our nightmare assassin. But then
I'd  never  know where he was or if he really existed. Finnegan would die unseen
in  his  monstrous  closet,  and I never the wiser. This way, for one victorious
moment,  I  will  know.  Fear for me. Envy me. Pray for me. Sorry to abandon you
without farewells. Dear friend, carry on._

     
     
     I folded the letter and wept.
     No more was ever heard of him.
     Some say Sir Robert killed himself, an actor in his own melodrama, and that
one  day we shall unearth his brooding, lost, and Gothic body and that it was he
who  killed  the  children and that his preoccupation with doors and hinges, and
more  doors,  led  him,  crazed, to study this one species of spider, and wildly
plan  and build the most amazing door in history, an insane burrow into which he
popped  to  die,  before  my  eyes,  thus  hoping  to  perpetuate the incredible
Finnegan.
     But  I  have found no burrow. I do not believe a man could construct such a
pit, even given Sir Robert's overwhelming passion for doors.
     I  can  only  ask,  would  a  man murder, draw his victims' blood, build an
earthen  vault?  For  what  motive? Create the _finest_ secret exit in all time?
Madness.  And what of those large grayish balls of earth supposedly tossed forth
from the spider's lair?
     Somewhere,  Finnegan  and Sir Robert lie clasped in a velvet-lined unmarked
crypt, deep under. Whether one is the paranoiac alter ego of the other, I cannot
say.  But the murders have ceased, the rabbits once more rush in Chatham Forest,
and  its  bushes  teem with butterflies and birds. It is another spring, and the
children run again through a loud glade, no longer silent.
     Finnegan and Sir Robert, _requiescat in peace._