                                  
                               Dorian In Excelsis
                                      1996

     Good  evening. Welcome. I see you have my invitation in your hands. Decided
to be brave, did you? Fine. Here we are Grab onto this."
     The tall, handsome stranger with the heavenly eyes and the impossibly blond
hair handed me a wineglass.
     "Clean your palate," he said.
     I took the glass and read the label on the bottle he held in his left hand.
Bordeaux, it read. St. Emilion.
     "Go on," said my host. "It's not poison. May I sit? And might you _drink?"_
     "I  might," I sipped, shut my eyes, and smiled. "You're a connoisseur. This
is the best I've had in years. But why this wine and why the invitation? What am
I doing here at Gray's Anatomy Bar and Grill?"
     My  host  sat and filled his own glass. "I am doing a favor to myself. This
is  a great night, perhaps for both of us. Greater than Christmas or Halloween."
His  lizard tongue darted into his wine to vanish back into his contentment. "We
celebrate my being honored, at last becoming-"
     He exhaled it all out:
     "Becoming," he said, "a friend to Dorian! Dorian's friend. _Me!"_
     "Ah."  I  laughed. "That explains the name of this place, then? Does Dorian
own Gray's Anatomy?"
     "More! Inspires and rules over it. And deservedly so."
     "You  make  it  sound  as if being a friend to Dorian is the most important
thing in the world."
     "No!  In  _life!_ In all of life." He rocked back and forth, drunk not from
the wine but from some inner joy. "Guess."
     "At what?"
     "How _old_  I am!"
     "You look to be twenty-nine at the most."
     "Twenty-nine. What a lovely sound. Not thirty, forty, or fifty, but-"
     I  said,  "I  hope  you're  not  going to ask what sign I was born under. I
usually  leave  when  people  ask that. I was born on the cusp, August, 1920." I
pretended to half rise. He pressed a gentle hand to my lapel.
     "No,  no,  dear  boy-you don't understand. Look here. And here." He touched
under his eyes and then around his neck. "Look for wrinkles."
     "But you have none," I said.
     "How  observant.  None.  And  that  is  why I have become this very night a
fresh, new, stunningly handsome friend to Dorian."
     "I still don't see the connection."
     "Look  at  the backs of my hands." He showed his wrists. "No liver spots. I
am _not_ turning to rust. I repeat the question, how old am I?"
     I swirled the wine in my glass and studied his reflection in the swirl.
     "Sixty?" I guessed. "Seventy?"
     "Good God!" He fell back in his chair, astonished. "How did you _know?"_
     "Word  association.  You've  been rattling on about Dorian. I know my Oscar
Wilde,  I know my Dorian Gray, which means you, sir, have a portrait of yourself
stashed in an attic aging while you yourself, drinking old wine, stay young."
     "No,  no."  The  handsome  stranger  leaned  forward.  "Not _stayed_ young.
_Became_ young. I was old, very old, and it took a year, but the clock went back
and after a year of playing at it, I _achieved_ what I set out for."
     "Twenty-nine was your target?"
     "How clever you are!"
     "And once you became twenty-nine you were fully elected as-"
     "A  Friend  to  Dorian! Bulls-eye! But there is _no_ portrait, no attic, no
_staying_ young. It's _becoming_ young again's the ticket."
     "I'm still puzzled!"
     "Child  of  my  heart,  you  might  possibly be another Friend. Come along.
Before the greatest revelation, let me show you the far end of the room and some
doors."
     He  seized  my hand. "Bring your wine. You'll need it!" He hustled me along
through  the  tables  in  a  swiftly filling room of mostly middle-aged and some
fairly  young men, and a few smoke-exhaling ladies. I jogged along, staring back
at the EXIT as if my future life were there.
     Before us stood a golden door.
     "And behind the door?" I asked.
     "What always lies behind _any_ golden door?" my host responded. _"Touch."_
     I reached out to print the door with my thumb.
     "What do you feel?" my host inquired.
     "Youngness, youth, beauty." I touched again. "All the springtimes that ever
were or ever will be."
     "Jeez, the man's a poet. Push."
     We pushed and the golden door swung soundlessly wide.
     "Is this where Dorian is?"
     "No, no, only his students, his disciples, his _almost_ Friends. Feast your
eyes."
     I  did  as  I  was told and saw, at the longest bar in the world, a line of
men,  a  lineage  of  young men, reflecting and re-reflecting each other as in a
fabled  mirror  maze,  that  illusion seen where mirrors face each other and you
find  yourself  repeated  to infinity, large, small, very small, smallest, GONE!
The young men were all staring down the long bar at us and then, as if unable to
pull  their  gaze  away,  at  themselves.  You  could almost hear their cries of
appreciation. And with each cry, they grew younger and younger and more splendid
and more beautiful...
     I  gazed  upon  a  tapestry  of beauty, a golden phalanx freshly out of the
Elysian  fields  and hills. The gates of mythology swung wide and Apollo and his
demi-Apollos glided forth, each more beautiful than the last.
     I must have gasped. I heard my host inhale as if he drank my wine.
     "Yes, _aren't_they," he said.
     "Come,"  whispered  my new friend. "Run the gauntlet. Don't linger; you may
find  tiger-tears  on  your  sleeve  and  blood rising. _Now."_And he glided, he
undulated,  me  along on his soundless tuxedo slippers, his fingers a pale touch
on my elbow, his breath a flower scent too near. I heard myself say:
     "It's  been written that H. G. Wells attracted women with his breath, which
smelled of honey. Then I learned that such breath comes with illness."
     "How clever. Do _I_ smell of hospitals and medicines?"
     "I didn't mean-"
     "Quickly. You're rare meat in the zoo. Hup, two, three!"
     "Hold  on,"  I  said,  breathless not from walking fast but from perceiving
quickly. "This man, and the next, and the one after _that-"_
     ''Yes?!"
     "My God," I said, "they're almost all the _same, look-alikes!"_
     "Bull's-eye,  _halftrue_!  And  the  next  and  the next after that, as far
behind  as we have gone, as far ahead as we might go. All twenty-nine years old,
all golden tan, all six feet tall, white of teeth, bright of eye. Each different
but beautiful, like _me!"_
     I  glanced  at  him  and  saw  what  I saw around me. Similar but different
beauties. So much youngness I was stunned.
     "Isn't it time you told me your name?"
     "Dorian."
     "But you said you were his _Friend."_
     "I _am. They_ are. But we all share his name. This chap here. And the next.
Oh, once we had commoner names. Smith and Jones. Harry and Phil. Jimmy and Jake.
But then we signed up to become Friends."
     "Is that why I was invited? To sign _up?"_
     "I saw you in a bar across town a year ago, made queries. A year later, you
look the proper age-"
     "Proper-?"
     "Well, _aren't_ you? Just leaving sixty-nine, arriving at seventy?"
     ''Well.''
     "My God! Are you _happy_ being seventy?"
     "It'll do.''
     _"Do?_  Wouldn't  you  like  to  be  _really_  happy, steal some wild oats?
_Sow_them?!"
     "That time's over."
     "It's _not._ I asked and you came, curious.
     "Curious about _what?"_
     "This."  He  bared me his neck again and flexed his pale white wrists. "And
all _those!"_ He waved at the fine faces as we passed. "Dorian's sons. Don't you
want to be gloriously wild and young like them?"
     "How can I decide?"
     "Lord,  you've  thought of it all night for years. Soon you could be _part_
of this!"
     We  had  reached  the  far end of the line of men with bronzed faces, white
teeth, and breath like H. G. Wells' scent of honey ...
     "Aren't you tempted?" he pursued. "Will you refuse-"
     "Immortality?"
     "No!  To live the next twenty years, die at ninety, and look twenty-nine in
the damn tomb! In the mirror over there-what do you see?"
     "An old goat among ten dozen fauns."
     "Yes!"
     "Where do I sign up?" I laughed.
     "Do you accept?"
     "No, I need more facts."
     "Damn! Here's the _second_ door. Get _in!"_
     He  swung wide a door, more golden than the first, shoved me, followed, and
slammed the door. I stared at darkness.
     "What's this?" I whispered.
     "Dorian's  Gym, of course. If you work out here all year, hour by hour, day
by day, you get younger."
     "That's  some  gym,"  I observed, trying to adjust my eyes to the dim areas
beyond  where  shadows tumbled, and voices rustled and whispered. "I've heard of
gyms that help_keep_ , not _make,_ you young . . . Now tell me...
     "I read your mind. For every old man that became young in there at the bar,
is there an attic portrait?"
     "Well, _is_ there?"
     "No! There's only Dorian."
     "A single person? Who grows old for _all_ of you?"
     "Touche'! Behold his gym!"
     I  gazed  off  into  a  vast high arena where a hundred shadows stirred and
moaned like a tide on a terrible shore.
     "I think it's time to leave," I said.
     "Nonsense.  Come.  No one will see you. They're all... _busy._ I am Moses,"
said  the  sweet  breath at my elbow. "And I hereby tell the Red Sea to _part!"_
And we moved along a path between two tides, each shadowed, each more terrifying
with its gasps, its cries, its slip-pages of flesh, its slapping like waves, its
repeated whispers for more, more, ah, God, more!
     I ran, but my host grabbed on. "Look right, left, now _right_ again!"
     There  must  have  been  a  hundred,  two  hundred animals, beasts, no, men
wrestling,  leaping,  falling,  rolling  in  darkness.  It  was  a sea of flesh,
undulant,  a  writhing of limbs on acres of tumbling mats, a glistening of skin,
flashes  of  teeth  where  men  climbed  ropes, spun on leather horses, or flung
themselves  up crossbars to be seized down in the tidal flux of lamentations and
muffled  cries.  I  stared across an ocean of rising and falling shapes. My ears
were scorched by their bestial moans.
     "What, my God," I exclaimed, "does it all _mean?"_
     "There. _See."_
     And  above  the  wild turbulence of flesh in a far wall was a great window,
forty  feet  wide  and  ten  feet  tall,  and  behind  that cold glass Something
watching, savoring, alert, one vast stare.
     And  over  all  there  was the suction of a great breath, a vast inhalation
which  pulled at the gymnasium air with a constant hungry and invisible need. As
the  shadows tumbled and writhed, this inhalation tugged at them and the raw air
in my nostrils. Somewhere a huge vacuum machine sucked in darkness but did _not_
exhale. There were long pauses as the shadows flailed and fell, and then another
savoring  inhalation.  It  swallowed  breath.  In,  in, always in, devouring the
sweaty air, hungering the passions.
     And  the  shadows  were pulled, _I_ was pulled, toward that vast glass eye,
that  immense  window  behind  which  a  shapeless  Something  stared to dine on
gymnasium airs.
     "Dorian?" I guessed.
     "Come meet him."
     "Yes,  but  . . ." I watched the wild, convulsive shadows. "What _are_ they
doing?"
     "Go find out. Afraid? Cowards never live. So!"
     He swung wide a third door and whether it was golden hot and alive, I could
not  feel,  for  suddenly  I lurched into a hothouse as the door slammed and was
locked by my blond young friend. _"Ready?"_
     "Lord, I must go _home!"_
     "Not until you meet," said my host, _"him."_
     He  pointed.  At  first  I  could  see nothing. The lights were dim and the
place,  like  the gymnasium, was mostly shadow. I smelled jungle greens. The air
stirred  on  my  face  with sensuous strokes. I smelled papaya and mango and the
wilted  odor  of  orchids  mixed with the salt smells of an unseen tide. But the
tide  was  there with that immense inhaled breathing that rose and was quiet and
began again.
     "I see no one," I said.
     "Let your eyes adjust. Wait."
     I waited. I watched.
     There were no chairs in the room, for there was no need of chairs.
     He  did  not sit, he did not recline, he "prolonged" himself on the largest
bed in history. The dimensions might easily have been fifteen feet by twenty. It
reminded  me of the apartment of a writer I once knew who had completely covered
his room with mattresses so that women stumbled on the sill and fell flat out on
the springs.
     So  it  was  with  this  nest,  with  Dorian, immense, a gelatinous skin, a
vitreous shape, undulant within that nest.
     And  if  Dorian  was  male  or  female, I could not guess. This was a great
pudding,  an  emperor  jellyfish,  a  monstrous  heap of sexual gelatin from the
exterior of which, on occasion, noxious gases escaped with rubbery sounds; great
lips  sibilating.  That  and  the  sough  of  that  labored  pump, that constant
inhalation,  were  the  only  sounds  within  the  chamber  as I stood, anxious,
alarmed,  but  at  last  impressed by this beached creature, cast up from a dark
landfall.  The  thing  was  a  gelatinous  cripple, an octopus without limbs, an
amphibian  stranded,  unable  to  undulate  and seep back to an ocean sewer from
which  it  had inched itself in monstrous waves and gusts of lungs and eruptions
of  corrupt  gas until now it lay, featureless, with a mere x-ray ghost of legs,
arms,  wrists,  and hands with skeletal fingers. At last I could discern, at the
far  end  of  this  flesh  peninsula,  what seemed a half-flat face with a frail
phantom  of skull beneath, an open fissure for an eye, a ravenous nostril, and a
red wound which ripped wide to surprise me as a mouth.
     And at last this thing, this Dorian, spoke.
     Or whispered, or lisped.
     And  with  each  lisp,  each sibilance, an odor of decay was expelled as if
from  a  vast  night-swamp balloon, sunk on its side, lost in fetid water as its
unsavory breath rinsed my cheeks. It expelled but one lingering syllable:
     _Yessss._
     Yes _what?_
     And then it added:
     Soooo...
     "How long . . . how long," I murmured, "has it . . . has _he_ been _here?"_
     "No  one  knows. When Victoria was Queen? When Booth emptied his makeup kit
to load his pistol? When Napoleon yellow-stained the Moscow snows? Forever's not
bad .
     What else?"
     I swallowed hard. "Is . . . is he?"
     "Dorian?  Dorian  of the attic? He of the Portrait? And somewhere along the
line  found  portraits  not  enough?  Oil,  canvas,  no  depth. The world needed
something  that could soak in, sponge the midnight rains, breakfast and lunch on
loss,  depravity's  guilt. Something to truly take in, drink, digest; a pustule,
imperial  intestine.  A  rheum  oesophagus  for  sin. A laboratory plate to take
bacterial snows. Dorian."
     The  long  archipelago  of  membranous  skin  flushed some buried tubes and
valves,  and  a  semblance  of laughter was throttled and drowned in the aqueous
gels.
     A slit widened to emit gas and again the single word:
     _Yessss ._
     "He's _welcoming_ you!" My host smiled.
     "I  know,  I know," I said impatiently. "But why? I don't even _want_ to be
here. I'm ill. Why can't we go?"
     "Because"-my host laughed-"you were _selected._
     "Selected?"
     "We've had our _eye_ on you."
     "You  mean  you've  watched,  followed,  spied  on me? Christ, who gave you
_permission?"_
     "Temper, temper. Not everyone is picked."
     "Who said I _wanted_ to be picked!?"
     "If you could _see_ yourself as _we_ see you, you'd know why."
     I  turned  to  stare  at  the  vast mound of priapic gelatin in which faint
creeks gleamed as the creature wept its lids wide in holes to let it stare. Then
all  its  apertures  sealed: the saber-cut mouth, the slitted nostrils, the cold
eyes  gummed  shut  so  that  its  skin  was faceless. The sibilance pumped with
gaseous suctions.
     _Yessss,_ it whispered.
     Lisssst, it murmured.
     "And  list  _it  is!"_  My  host pulled forth a small computer pad which he
tapped to screen my name, address, and phone.
     He glanced from the pad to reel off such items as wilted me.
     "Single," he said.
     "Married and _divorced."_
     _"Now_ single! No women in your life?"
     "I'm walking wounded."
     He tapped his pad. "Visiting strange bars."
     "I hadn't noticed."
     "Creative  blindness.  Getting  to  bed  late.  Sleeping  all day. Drinking
heavily three nights a week."
     "Twice!"
     "Going  to  the gym, look, _every day._ Workouts excessive. Prolonged steam
baths, overlong massages. Sudden interest in sports. Endless basketball, soccer,
tennis matches _every_ night, and half the noons. _That's_ hyperventilation!"
     _''My_ business!"
     "And  _ours!_  You're balanced giddily on the rim. Shove all these facts in
that one-armed bandit in your head, yank, and watch the lemons and ripe cherries
spin. Yank!"
     Jesus  God.  Yes!  Bars.  Drinks.  Late  nights.  Gyms.  Saunas.  Masseurs.
Basketball. Tennis. Soccer. Yank. Pull. _Spin!_
     "Well?"  My  host  searched  my  face, amused. "Three jackpot cherries in a
row?"
     I shuddered.
     "Circumstance. No court would convict me."
     _"This_ court _elects_ you. We tell palms to read ravenous groins. _Yes?"_
     Gas steamed up from one shriveled aperture in the restless mound. _Yessss._
     They say that men in the grip of passion, blind to their own darkness, make
love and run mad. Stunned by guilt, they find themselves beasts, having done the
very  thing  they  were  warned  _not_  to do by church, town, parents, life. In
explosive   outrage  they  turn  to  the  sinful  lure.  Seeing  her  as  unholy
provocateur,  they  kill. Women, in similar rages and guilts, overdose. Eve lies
self-slain in the Garden. Adam hangs himself with the Snake as noose.
     But  here was no passionate crime, no woman, no provocateur, only the great
mound  of  siphoning  breath  and my blond host. And only words which riddled me
with  fusillades  of arrows. Like an Oriental hedgehog, bristled with shafts, my
body exploded with No, No, No. _Echoed_ and then real:
     _"No!"_
     _Yessss,_  whispered the vapor from the mounded tissue, the skeleton buried
in ancient soups.
     	_Yessss._
     I  gasped  to see my games, steams, midnight bars, late-dawn beds: a maniac
sum.
     I rounded dark corridors to confront a stranger so pockmarked, creased, and
oiled  by  passion,  so cobwebbed and smashed by drink, that I tried to avert my
gaze. The terror gaped his mouth and reached for my hand. Stupidly, I reached to
shake his and-rapped glass! A mirror. I stared deep into my own life. I had seen
myself in shop windows, dim undersea men running in creeks. Mornings, shaving, I
saw  my  mirrored  health. But _this!_ This troglodyte trapped in amber. Myself,
snapshotted like ten dozen sexual acrobats! And who jammed this mirror at me? My
beautiful host, and that corrupt flatulence beyond.
     _"You are selected,"_ they whispered.
     _"I refuse!"_ I shrieked.
     And  whether I shrieked aloud or merely thought, a great furnace gaped. The
oceanic  mound erupted thunders of gaseous streams. My beautiful host fell back,
stunned  that  their  search  beneath  my  skin,  behind  my  mask,  had brought
revulsion.  Always  when Dorian cried, "Friend," raw gymnast teams had mobbed to
catapult  that  armless,  legless,  featureless  Sargasso  Sea.  Before they had
smothered  to  drown  in  his miasma, to arise, embrace, and wrestle in the dark
gymnasium, then run forth young to assault a world.
     And  I?  What  had  I  dared  to  do,  that quaked that membranous sac into
regurgitated whistling and broken winds?
     "Idiot!" cried my host, all teeth and fists. _"Out! Out!"_
     "Out," I cried, spun to obey, and tripped.
     I  do  not  clearly  know  what  happened  as I fell. And if it was a swift
reaction  to the holocaust erupted like vile spit and vomit from that putrescent
mound,  I cannot say. I knew no lightning shock of murder, yet knew perhaps some
summer  heat  flash of revenge. For _what?_ I thought. What are you to Dorian or
he  to you that frees the hydra behind your face, or causes the slightest twitch
of  leg,  arm,  hand, or fingernail, as the last fetid air from Dorian burned my
hair and stuffed my nostrils.
     It was over in a second.
     Something  shoved  me.  Did my secret self, insulted, give that push? I was
flung as if on wires, knocked to sprawl at Dorian.
     He gave two terrible cries, one of warning, one of despair.
     I  was  recovered  so  in  landing,  I  did  not sink my hands deep in that
poisonous yeast, into that multiflorid Man of War jelly. I swear that I touched,
raked,  scarified  him  with only one thing: the smallest fingernail of my right
hand.
     My fingernail!
     And  so this Dorian was shot and foundered. And so the mammoth with screams
collapsed. And so the nauseous balloon sank, fold on midnight fold, upon its own
boneless  sell,  fissuring  volcanic  sulfurs,  immense  rectal  airs, outgassed
whistles, and whimpers of self-pitying despair.
     "Christ!  What  have you _done!?_ Murderer! Damn you!" cried my host, riven
to stare at Dorian's exhaustions unto death.
     He  whirled  to  strike,  but  ran  to  reach the door and cry, "Lock this!
_Lock!_  Whatever happens, for God's sake, don't _open!_ Now!" The door slammed.
I ran to lock it and turn.
     Quietly, Dorian was falling away.
     He  sank down and down, out of sight. Like a great membranous tent with its
poles  removed, he vanished into the floor, down flues and vents on all sides of
his  great platform nest. Vents obviously created for such a massive disease-sac
melting  into  viral  fluid  and  sewer  gas. Even as I watched, the last of the
noxious  clot  was  sucked into the vents, and I stood abandoned in a room where
but a few minutes before an unspeakable strata of discards and half-born fetuses
had  lain  sucking  at  sins,  spoiled  bones, and souls to send forth beasts in
semblance  of  beauty.  That  perverse  royalty, that lunatic monarch, gone, all
gone. A last choke and throttle from the sewer vent underlined its death.
     My  God,  I  thought,  even now, that, all that, that terrible miasma, that
stuff  is  on  its  way  to  the sea to wash in with bland tides to lie on clean
shores where bathers come at dawn ...
     Even now ...
     I stood, eyes shut, waiting.
     For what? There had to be a next thing, yes? It came.
     There  was  a  trembling,  shivering,  and  then a quaking of the wall, but
especially the golden door behind me.
     I spun to see as well as hear.
     I  saw  the  door  shaken,  and  then  bombarded from the other side. Fists
pummeled, struck, hammered. Voices cried out and screamed and then shrieked.
     I felt a great mass ram the door to shiver, to slam it on its hinges.
     I  stared, fearful that the door might explode and let in the flood tide of
nightmare-ravening,  terrified beasts, the kennel of dying things. For now their
shrieks as they mauled and rattled to escape, to beg for mercy, were so terrible
that I clamped my fists to my ears.
     Dorian  was gone, but they remained. Shrieks. Screams. Screams. Shrieks. An
avalanche of limbs beyond the door struck and fell, yammering.
     What  must  they  look  like  now? I thought. All those bouquets. All those
beauties.
     The police will come, I thought, soon. But .
     No matter what ...
     I would not unlock that door.