                                  
                          At the End of the Ninth Year
                                      1995

     "Well,"  said  Sheila,  chewing  on  her  breakfast toast and examining her
complexion, distorted in the side of the coffee urn, "here it is the last day of
the last month of the ninth year."
     Her husband, Thomas, glanced over the rampart of _The Wall Street Journal_ 
saw nothing to fasten his regard, and sank back in place. "What?"
     "I said," said Sheila, "the ninth year's finished and you have a completely
new  wife.  Or,  to put it properly, the old wife's gone. So I don't think we're
married anymore."
     Thomas  floored  the  _Journal_    on  his as-yet-untouched scrambled eggs,
tilted his head this way and that, and said:
     "Not _married?"_
     "No,  that  was  another time, another body, another me." She buttered more
toast and munched on it philosophically.
     "Hold on!" He took a stiff jolt of coffee. "Explain."
     "Well,  dear Thomas, don't you remember reading as children and later, that
every  nine  years,  I  _think_    it  was  nine,  the  body,  churning  like  a
gene-chromosome  factory,  did  your  entire  person  over, fingernails, spleen,
ankles to elbows, belly, bum, and earlobes, molecule by molecule-"
     "Oh, get _to_ it," he grumbled. "The point, wife, the _point!"_
     "The point, dear Tom," she replied, finishing her toast, "is that with this
breakfast  I  have replenished my soul and psyche, completed the reworking of my
entire flesh, blood, and bones. This person seated across from you is _not_  the
woman you married-"
     "I have often _said_  that!"
     "Be serious."
     "Are _you?"_ he said.
     "Let  me  finish.  If the medical research is true, then at the end of nine
years  there  is not an eyebrow, eyelash, pore, dimple, or skin follicle in this
creature  here  at this celebratory breakfast that in any way is related to that
old  Sheila  Tompkins  married  at eleven a.m. of a Saturday nine years ago this
very hour. Two different women. One in bondage to a nice male creature whose jaw
jumps out like a cash register when he scans the _Journal._  The other, now that
it is one minute after the deadline hour, Born Free. So!"
     She rose swiftly and prepared to flee.
     "Wait!" He gave himself another jolt of coffee. "Where are you going?"
     Hallway to the door, she said, "Out. Perhaps away. And who knows: forever!"
     "Born free? Hogwash. Come here! Sit down!"
     She  hesitated as he assumed his lion-tamer's voice. "Dammit. You owe me an
explanation. Sit!"
     She turned slowly. "For only as long as it takes to draw a picture."
     "Draw it, then. Sit!"
     She came to stare at her plate. "I seem to have eaten everything in sight."
     He  jumped up, ran over to the side table, rummaged more omelet, and banged
it in front of her.
     "There.! Speak with your mouth full."
     She  forked  in  the  eggs.  "You  do  see  what I'm driving at, don't you,
Tomasino?"
     "Damnation! I thought you were _happy!"_
      "Yes, but not _incredibly_  happy."
     "That's for maniacs on their honeymoons!"
     "Yes, _wasn't_  it?" she remembered.
     "That was then, this is _now. Well?"_
     "I  could feel it happening all year. Lying in bed, I felt my skin prickle,
my  pores  open like ten thousand tiny mouths, my perspiration run like faucets,
my  heart  race,  my pulse sound in the oddest places, under my chin, my wrists,
the  backs of my knees, my ankles. I felt like a huge wax statue, melting. After
midnight I was afraid to turn on the bathroom light and find a stranger gone mad
in the mirror."
     "All  right, all right!" He stirred four sugars in his coffee and drank the
slops from the saucer. "Sum it _up!"_
     "Every  hour  of every night and then all day, I could feel it as if I were
out  in a storm being struck by hot August rain that washed away the old to find
a  brand-new  me.  Every drop of serum, every red and white corpuscle, every hot
flash  of  nerve ending, rewired and restrung, new marrow, new hair for combing,
new  fingerprints  even.  Don't  _look_    at  me  that  way.  Perhaps _no_  new
fingerprints.  But  all  the rest. See? Am I not a fresh-sculpted, fresh-painted
work of God's creation?"
     He searched her up and down with a razor glare.
     "I  hear  Mad Carlotta maundering," he said. "I see a woman hyperventilated
by a midlife frenzy. Why don't you just _say_  it? _Do_  you want a divorce?"
     "Not necessarily."
     "Not necessarily?" he shouted.
     "I'll just simply . . . go away."
     "Where will you go?"
     "There  must  be some place," she said vaguely, stirring her omelet to make
paths.
     "Is there another man?" he said at last, holding his utensils with fists.
     "Not quite yet.
     "Thank  God  for  small favors." He let a great breath gust out. "Now go to
your room."
     "Beg pardon?" She blinked.
     "You'll  not  be allowed out for the rest of this week. Go to your room. No
phone calls. No TV. No-"
     She was on her feet. "You sound like my father in high school!"
     "I'll be damned." He laughed quietly. "Yes! Upstairs now! No lunch for you,
my  girl. I'll put a plate by your door at suppertime. When you behave I'll give
you your car keys. Meanwhile, march! Pull out your telephone plugs and hand over
your CD player!"
     "This is outrageous," she cried. "I'm a grown woman."
     "Ingrown.  No progress. _Re-gress._  If that damn theory's true, you didn't
add on, just sank back nine years! Out you go! _Up!"_
     She ran, pale-faced, to the entry stairs, wiping tears from her eyes.
     As  she  was hallway up, he, putting his foot on the first step, pulled the
napkin from his shirt and called quietly, "Wait ..."
     She froze in place but did not look back down at him, waiting.
     "Sheila," he said at last, tears running down _his_  cheeks now.
     "Yes," she whispered.
     "I love you," he said.
     "I know," she said. "But it doesn't help."
     "Yes, it does. Listen."
     She waited, hallway up to her room.
     He  rubbed his hand over his face as if trying to massage some truth out of
it. His hand was almost frantic, searching for something hidden around his mouth
or near his eyes.
     Then it almost burst from him. "Sheila!"
     "I'm supposed to go to my room," she said.
     _"Don't!"_
     "What, then?"
     His  face began to relax, his eyes to fix on a solution, as his hand rested
on the banister leading up to where she stood with her back turned.
     "If what you say is true-"
     "It  _is,"_    she  murmured.  "Every cell, every pore, every eyelash. Nine
years-"
     "Yes, yes, I know, yes. But listen."
     He  swallowed  hard  and  that  helped him digest the solution which he now
spoke very weakly, then quietly, and then with a kind of growing certainty.
     "If what you say happened-"
     "It did," she murmured, head down.
     "Well, then," he said slowly, and then, "It happened to me, _too."_
     "What?" Her head lifted a trifle.
     "It  doesn't just happen to _one_  person, right? It happens to all people,
everyone in the world. And if that's true, well, my body has been changing along
with  _yours_  during all the last nine years. Every follicle, every fingernail,
all the dermis and epidermis or whatever. I never noticed. But it _must_  have."
     Her head was up now and her back was not slumped. He hurried on.
     "And  if  that's  true,  good Lord, then I'm new, too. The old Tom, Thomas,
Tommy, Tomasino is left behind back there with the shed snakeskin."
     Her eyes opened and she listened and he finished. "So we're both brand-new.
You're  the  new, beautiful woman I've been thinking about finding and loving in
the  last  year. And I'm that man you were heading out to search for. Isn't that
right? Isn't that true?"
     There  was  the  merest  hesitation  and then she gave the smallest, almost
imperceptible nod.
     "Mercy," he called gently.
     "That's not my name," she said.
     "It is now. New woman, new body, new name. So I picked one for you. Mercy?"
     After a moment she said, "What does that make you?"
     "Let me think." He chewed his lip and smiled. "How about Frank? Frankly, my
dear, I _do_  give a damn."
     "Frank," she murmured. "Frank and Mercy. Mercy and Frank."
     "It doesn't exactly _ring,_  but it'll do. Mercy?"
     "Yes?"
     "Will you marry me?"
     "What?''
     "I said, will you marry me. Today. An hour from now. Noon?"
     She  turned  at last to look down at him with a face all freshly tanned and
washed.
     "Oh, yes," she said.
     "And we'll run away and be maniacs again, for a little while
     "No," she said, "here is fine. Here is wonderful."
     "Come  down,  then,"  he said, holding his hand up to her. "We have another
nine  years  before another change. Come down and finish your wedding breakfast.
Mercy?"
     She came down the steps and took his hand and smiled.
     "Where's the champagne?" she said.