prose_contemporaryRayBradburyHouse DividedcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
House Divided
Small fifteen-year-old fingers plucked at the buttons on Chris' trousers
like a moth drawn to a flame. He heard whispered words in the dark room
that meant nothing, and could not be remembered a moment after they were
spoken.
Vivian's lips were so fresh that it was unbelievable. Chris had the
feeling that this was a dream. This was a pantomime carried out in the
dark, which he could not see. Vivian herself had switched out every
light. It had started as every evening like it had started. With Chris
and his brother Leo climbing upstairs with Vivian and Shirley, their
girl cousins. The girls were both blonde and smiling. Leo was sixteen
and clumsy. Chris was twelve and knew nothing of such moths darting in
the warm pantomime, or that there was a light shining in him he had
never known about, that some girl might want. Shirley was ten, going on
eleven, but very curious. Vivian was the ringleader; she was fifteen and
beginning to see the world's people.
Chris and Leo had arrived in the family car, acting properly grave,
since it was such a grave situation. They walked silently behind Mother
and Dad into the Johnsons' house on Buttrick Street, where all the other
relatives were gathered in a hushed spell of waiting. Uncle Inar sat by
the phone, looking at it, his big hands twitching all by themselves,
uneasy animals in his lap.
It was like walking into the hospital itself. Uncle Lester was very
badly off. They were waiting for news now from the hospital. Lester had
been shot in the stomach on a hunting trip and had lingered half-alive
for three days now. So they had come tonight to be together, just in
case they received the news of their Uncle Lester's passing. All three
sisters and Lester's two brothers were there, with their wives and
husbands and children.
After a proper interval of hushed speaking, Vivian had very carefully
suggested, "Mama, we'll go upstairs and tell ghost stories, so you
grown-ups can talk."
"Ghost stories," said Uncle Inar vaguely. "What a thing to tell tonight.
Ghost stories."
Vivian's mama agreed. "You can go upstairs if you're quiet. We don't
want any racket."
"Yes, ma'am," said Chris and Leo.
They left the room, walking slowly on the edge of their shoes. Nobody
noticed their going. They could have been several phantoms passing for
all the attention they got.
Upstairs, Vivian's room had a low couch against one wall, a dressing
table with pink-folded silk for a skirt, and flower pictures. There was
a green leather diary, fabulously inscribed but securely padlocked on
the table, freckles of powder on it. The room smelled sweetly soft and
nice.
They sat upon the couch, backs lined neatly against the wall, a row of
solemn ramrods, and Vivian, like always, told the first ghost story.
They turned out all but one lamp, which was very feeble, and she put her
voice low in her rounded breasts and whispered it out.
It was that ancient tale about lying abed late one night, with stars
cold in the sky, al alone in a big old house when somethingstarts
creeping slowly up the stairs to your room. Some strange and awful
visitor from some other world. And as the story advanced, slowly step by
step, step by step, your voice got more tense and more whispery and you
kept waiting and waiting for that shocking finale.
"Itcrept up to the second step, it stepped up to the third step, it came
to the fourth step … "
All four of their hearts had churned to this story a thousand times.
Now, again, a cold sweat formed on four anticipatory brows. Chris
listened, holding Vivian's hand.
"The strange sounds came on to the sixth step, and rustled to the
seventh step, and then to the eighth step … "
Chris had memorized the story, often, and told it often, but no one
could tell it quite like Vivian. She was husking it now, like a witch,
eyes half shut, body tensed against the wall.
Chris went over the story in his mind, ahead of her. "Ninth, tenth, and
eleventh steps. Twelve, thirteen, fourteen steps.Itcame to thetopof the
stairs … "
Vivian went on. "Now it's in the hall at the top of the stairs. Outside
the door. Now it's coming inside. Now it's closing the door." A pause.
"Now it's walking across your room. Now it's passing the bureau. Now
it's over your bed. Now it's standing right over you, right over your
head … "
A long pause, during which the darkness of the room got darker.
Everybody drew in their breath, waiting, waiting.
"I GOTCHA!"
Screaming, then giggling, you burst out! You let the black bat crash
into the web. You had built the web of tension and horror so completely
inside, minute by minute, step by step, around and around, like a very
dainty horrible spider weaving, and in that tumultuous climax when I
GOTCHA! flew out at you, like a sickening bat, it shattered the web down
in trembling apprehension and laughter. You had to laugh to cover up
your old old fear. You shrieked and giggled, all four of you. You
hollered and shook the couch and held onto each other. Oh that familiar
old story! You rocked back and forth, shivering, breathing fast. Funny
how it still scared you after the hundredth telling.
The giggling subsided quickly. Footsteps, real ones, were hurrying up
the steps to Vivian's room. By the sound of them Chris knew it was
Auntie. The door opened.
"Vivian," cried Auntie. "I told you about noise! Don't you have any
respect!"
"All right, Mama. We're sorry."
"I'm sorry, Auntie," said Chris, meaning it. "We just forgot ourselves.
We got scared."
"Vivian, you keep them quiet," directed Auntie, her scowl softening.
"And if I hear you again you'll all come downstairs."
"We'll be good," said Leo, quietly, earnestly.
"Well, all right, then."
"Has the hospital called?" asked Shirley.
"No," said Auntie, her face changing, remembering. "We expect to hear
soon."
Auntie went downstairs. It took another five minutes to get back into
the spell of storytelling.
"Who'll tell a story now?" asked Shirley.
"Tell another one, Vivian," said Leo. "Tell the one about the butter
with the evil fungus in it."
"Oh, I tell thateverytime," said Vivian.
"I'll tell one," said Chris. "Anewone."
"Swell," said Vivian. "But let's turn out the other light first. It's
too light in here."
She bounced up, switched out the last light. She came back through the
utter dark and you could smell her coming and feel her beside you, Chris
realized. Her hand grabbed his, rightly. "Go on," she said.
"Well … " Chris wound his story up on a spool, getting it ready in his
mind. "Well, once upon a time—"
"Oh, we heardthatone before!" they all laughed. The laughter came back
from the unseen wall of the room. Chris cleared his throat and started
again.
"Well, once upon a time there was a black castle in the woods—"
He had his audience immediately. A castle was a darn nice thing to start
with. It wasn't a bad story he had in mind, and he would have told it
all the way through, taking fifteen minutes or more to hang it out on a
line in the dark bedroom air. But Vivian's fingers were like an
impatient spider inside his palm, and as the story progressed he became
more aware of her than of the story people.
"—an old witch lived in this black castle—"
Vivian's lips kissed him on the cheek. It was like all her kisses. It
was like kisses before bodies were invented. Bodies are invented around
about the age of twelve or thirteen. Before that there are only sweet
lips and sweet kisses. There is a sweet something about such kisses you
never find again after someone puts a body under your head.
Chris didn't have a body yet. Just his face. And, like every time Vivian
had ever kissed him, he responded. After all, it was fun and it was as
good as eating and sleeping and playing all kinds of games. Her lips
were like a subtle sugar, and nothing else. For the past four years
since he was eight, every time he met Vivian and that was usually once
every month, because she lived on the far side of town, there would be
ghost stories and kisses and subtle sugar.
"—well, this witch in this castle—"
She kissed him on the lips, momentarily crumbling the castle. About ten
seconds later he had to build it up again.
"—this witch in this castle had a beautiful young daughter named Helga.
Helga lived in a dungeon and was treated very poorly by her evil old
mother. She was very pretty and—"
The lips returned. This time for a longer stay.
"Go on with the story," said Leo.
"Yeah, hurry up," said Shirley, perturbed.
"—Ah," said Chris, breaking away a little, his breath a bit funny. "—One
day the girl escaped from the dungeon and ran out into the woods, and
the witch shouted after her—"
From there on the story got slower and slower, and wandered off in
aimless, vague, and blundering directions. Vivian pressed close to him,
kissing and breathing on his cheek as he told the halting tale. Then,
very slowly, and with an architect's wonderful ability, she began to
build his body for him! The Lord said ribs and there were ribs. The Lord
said stomach and there was stomach! The Lord said legs and there were
legs! The Lord said something else and there was something else!
It was funny finding his body under him so suddenly. For twelve years it
had never been there. It was a pendulum under a clock, that body, and
now Vivian was setting it in motion, touching, urging, rocking it to and
fro, until it swung in dizzy warm arcs under the machinery of the head.
The clock was now running. A clock cannot run until the pendulum moves.
The clock can be whole, ready, and intact and healthy, but until that
pendulum is thrust into motion there is nothing but machinery without
use.
"—and the girl ran out into the woods—"
"Hurry up, hurry up, Chris!" criticized Leo.
It was like the story of the thing coming up the stairs, one by one, one
by one. This whole evening, here, now, in the dark. But—different.
Vivian's fingers deftly plucked at the belt buckle and drew the metal
tongue out, loosening it open.
Now she's at the first button.
Now she's at the second button.
Solikethat old story. But this was arealstory.
"—so this girl ran into the woods—"
"You said that before, Chris," said Leo.
Now she's at the third button.
Now she's moved down to the fourth button, oh God, and now to the fifth
button, and now—
The same words that ended thatotherstory, thevery same two words,but
this time shouted passionately, inside, silently, silently, to yourself!
The two words!
The same two words used at the end of the story about the thing coming
up the stairs. The same two words at the end!
Chris' voice didn't belong to him anymore:
"—and she ran into something, there was something, there was, well,
anyway, this, she … well, she tried … er, someone chased her … or …
well, she ran, anyway, and she came, down she went and she ran and then,
and then, she—"
Vivian moved against him. Her lips sealed up that story inside him and
wouldn't let it out. The castle fell thundering for the last time into
ruin, in a burst of blazing flame, and there was nothing in the world
but this newly invented body of his and the fact that a girl's body is
not so much land, like the hills of Wisconsin, pretty to look at. Here
was all the beauty and singing and firelight and warmth in the world.
Here was the meaning of all change and all movement and all adjustment.
Far away in the dim hushed lands below a phone rang. It was so faint it
was like one of those voices crying in a forgotten dungeon. A phone rang
and Chris could hear nothing.
It seemed there was a faint, halfhearted criticism from Leo and Shirley,
and then a few minutes later, Chris realized that Leo and Shirley were
clumsily kissing one another, and nothing else, just clumsily adjusting
faces to one another. The room was silent. The stories were told and all
of space engulfed the room.
It was so strange. Chris could only lie there and let Vivian tell him
all of it with this dark, unbelievable pantomime. You are not told all
of your life of things like this, he thought. You are not told at all.
Maybe it is too good to tell, too strange and wonderful to give words
about.
Footsteps came up the stairs. Very slow, very sad footsteps this time.
Very slow and soft.
"Quick!" whispered Vivian. She pulled away, smoothing her dress. Like a
blind man, fingerless, Chris fumbled with his belt buckle and buttons.
"Quick!" whispered Vivian.
She flicked the light on and the world shocked Chris with its unreality.
Blank walls staring, wide and senseless after the dark; lovely, soft,
moving, and secretive dark. And as the footsteps advanced up the stairs,
the four of them were once again solemn ramrods against the wall, and
Vivian was retelling her story:
"—now he's at the top stair—"
The door opened. Auntie stood there, tears on her face. That was enough
in itself to tell, to give the message.
"We just received a call from the hospital," she said. "Your Uncle
Lester passed away a few minutes ago."
They sat there.
"You'd better come downstairs," said Auntie.
They arose slowly. Chris felt drunk and unsteady and warm. He waited for
Auntie to go out and the others to follow. He came last of all, down
into the hushed land of weeping and solemn tightened faces.
As he descended the last step he couldn't help but feel a strange thing
moving in his mind. Oh, Uncle Lester, they've taken your body away from
you, and I've gotmine,and it isn't fair! Oh, it isn't fair, because this
is sogood!
In a few minutes they would go home. The silent house would hold their
weeping a few days, the radio would be snapped off for a week, and
laughter would come and be throttled in birth.
He began to cry.
Mother looked at him. Uncle Inar looked at him and some of the others
looked at him. Vivian, too. And Leo, so big and solemn standing there.
Chris was crying and everybody looked.
But only Vivian knew that he was crying for joy, a warm good crying of a
child who has found treasure buried deep and warm in his very body.
"Oh, Chris," said Mother, and came to comfort him. "There, there."

