prose_contemporaryRayBradburyThunder in the MorningcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Thunder in the Morning
At first it was like a storm, far away, a touch of thunder, a kind of
wind and a stirring. The streets had been emptied by the courthouse
clock. People had looked at the great white clock face hours ago, folded
their newspapers, got up from the porch swings, hooked themselves into
their summer night houses, put out the lights, and settled into cool
beds. All this the clock had done, just standing above the courthouse
green. Now there was not a thing on the street. Overhead street lights,
casting down illumination, made shines upon the asphalt. On occasion a
leaf would break loose from a tree and clatter down. The night was so
dark you could not see the stars. Why this was so there was no way of
telling. Except that everyone's eyes were closed and that way no stars
were seen, that's how dark the night was. Oh, here and there, behind a
window screen, if one peered into a dark room, one might see a red point
of light, nothing else; some man sitting up to feed his insomnia with
nicotine, rocking in a slow rocker in the dark room. You might hear a
small cough or someone turn under the sheets. But on the street there
was not even a policeman swinging along with his club pointed to the
earth in one hand.
From far away the small thunder began. First it was far across town. You
could hear it across the ravine, going along the street over there,
three blocks away across the deep blackness. It took a direction, it
made square cuts, this sound of thunder, then it crossed over the ravine
on the Washington Street bridge, under the owl light, and turned a
corner and—there it was, at the head of the street!
And with a whiskering, brushing, sucking noise down the street between
the houses and trees came the thundering metal cleaning machine of Mr.
Britt. It was a tornado, funneling, driving, whispering, murmuring,
feeling of the street ahead of it with big whirl-around brushes like
sewer lids with rotary brushes under them, spinning, with a big
rolling-pin brush turning under all the scattered trivia of the world's
men, the ticket stubs from that show at the Elite tonight, and the
wrapper from a chewing gum stick that now rested on top of a bureau in
one of the houses, a small chewed cannonball of tasteless elasticity,
and the candy wrapper from a bar now hidden and folded into the small
accordion innards of a boy high in a cupola house in a magic room. All
these things, streetcar transfers to Chessman Park, to Live Oak
Mortuary, to North Chicago, to Zion City, giveaway handbills on hairdos
at that new chromium shop on Central. All these were whiskered up by the
immense moving mustache of the machine, and on top of the machine, like
a great god, in his leather-metal saddle, sat Mr. Roland Britt, age
thirty-seven, the strange age between yesterday and tomorrow, and he, in
his way, was a duplicate of the machine upon which he rode, with his
proud hands on the steering wheel. He had a little curly mustache over
his mouth, and little curly hairs that seemed to rotate upon his scalp
under the passing lamps, and a little sucking nose that was continually
astonished with the world, sucking it all in and blowing it out the
astonished mouth. And he had hands that were always taking things and
never giving at all. He and the machine, very much the same. They hadn't
begun that way. Britt had neverstartedto be like the machine. But after
you rode it awhile it got up through your rump and spread through your
system until your digestion roiled and your heart spun like a small pink
top in you. But, on the other hand, neither had the machine intended
being like Britt. Machines change also, and become like their masters,
in imperceptible ways.
The machine was gentler than it used to be under an Irishman named
Reilly. They sailed down the midnight streets together, through little
streams of water ahead of them to dampen the trivia before combing it
into its gullet. It was like a whale, with a mouth full of bristle,
swimming in the moonlight seas, slaking in ticket minnows and
gum-wrapper minnows, feeding and feeding in the silvery school of
confetti that lived in the shallows of the asphalt river. Mr. Britt felt
like a Greek god, even with his concave chest, bringing gentle April
showers with him with the sprinklers, cleansing the world of dropped
sin.
Halfway up Elm Road, whiskers bristling, great mustache hungrily eating
of the street, Mr. Britt, in a fit of sport, swerved his great storm
machine from one side of the street to the other, just so he could suck
up a rat.
"Got him!"
Mr. Britt had seen the large running gray thing, leprous and horrible,
skittering across under a lamp flare. Whisk! And the foul rodent was now
inside the machine, being digested by smothering tides of paper and
autumn leaf.
He went on down the lonely rivers of night, bringing and taking his
storm with him, leaving fresh-whisked and wetted marks behind him.
"Me and my magical broomstick," he thought. "Me a male witch riding
under the autumn moon. A good witch. The good witch of the East; wasn't
that it, from the old Oz book when I was six with whooping cough in
bed?"
He passed over innumerable hopscotch squares which had been made by
children drunk with happiness, they were so crooked. He sucked up red
playbills and yellow pencils and dimes and sometimes quarters.
"What was that?"
He turned upon his seat and looked behind.
The street was empty. Dark trees whirled past, swishing down branches to
tap his brow, swiftly, swiftly. But in the midst of the stiff thunder he
had thought he heard a cry for help, a kind of violent screaming.
He looked in all directions.
"No, nothing."
He rode on upon the whirl-away brooms.
"What!"
This time he almost fell from his saddle the cry was so apparent. He
looked at the trees to see if some man might be up one, yelling. He
looked at the pale streetlights, all bleached out with so many years of
shining. He looked at the asphalt, still warm from the heat of the day.
The cry came again.
They were on the edge of the ravine. Mr. Britt stopped his machine. The
bristles still spun about. He stopped one rotary broom, then the other.
The silence was very loud.
"Get me out of here!"
Mr. Britt stared back at the big metal storage tank of the machine.
There was a man inside the machine.
"What did you say?" It was a ridiculous thing to ask, but Mr. Britt
asked it.
"Get me out of here, help, help!" said the man inside the machine.
"What happened?" asked Mr. Britt, staring.
"You picked me up in your machine!" cried the man.
"I what?"
"You fool; don't stand there talking, let me out, I'll suffocate to
death!"
"But you couldn't possibly have gotten into the machine," said Mr.
Britt. He stood first on one foot, then on another. He was very cold,
suddenly. "A thing as big as a man couldn't fit in up through the vent,
and anyway, the whiskers would have prevented you from behind taken in,
and anyway I don't remember seeing you. When did this happen?"
There was a silence from the machine.
"When did this happen?" demanded Mr. Britt.
Still no answer. Mr. Britt tried to think back. The streets had been
entirely empty. There had been nothing but leaves and gum-wrappers.
There had been no man, anywhere. Mr. Britt was a thoroughly clear-eyed
man. He wouldn't miss a pedestrian if one fell.
Still the machine remained strangely silent. "Are you there?" said Mr.
Britt.
"I'm here," said the man inside, reluctantly. "And I'm suffocating."
"Answer me, when did you get inside the machine?" said Britt.
"A while ago," said the man.
"Why didn't you scream out then?"
"I was knocked unconscious," said the man, but there was a quality to
his voice, a hesitation, a vagueness, a slowness. The man was lying. It
came to Mr. Britt as a shock. "Open up the top," said the inside man.
"For God's sake, don't stand there like a fool talking, of all the
ridiculous inanities, a street cleaner at midnight talking to a man
inside his machine, what would people think." He paused to cough
violently and spit and sputter. "I'm choking to death, do you want to go
up for manslaughter?"
But Mr. Britt was not listening. He was down on his knees looking at the
metal equipment, at the brushes under the machine. No, it was quite
impossible. That opening was only a foot across, under there, no man
could possibly be poked up into it. And anyway he hadn't been going
fast. And anyway the rotary brushes would have bounced a man ahead of
the machine. And anyway, he hadn'tseena man!
He got to his feet. He noticed for the first time that the top of his
forehead was all perspiration. He wiped it off. His hands were
trembling. He could hardly stand up.
"Open up, and I'll give you a hundred dollars," said the man inside the
machine.
"Why should you be bribing me to let you out?" said Mr. Britt. "When it
is only natural that I should let you outfree,after all, if I picked you
up I should let you out, shouldn't I? And yet, all of a sudden, you
start offering me money, as if I didn'tintendto let you out, as if you
knew that I might know a reason fornotletting you out. Why is that?"
"I'm dying," coughed the man, "and you debate. God, God, man!" There was
a fierce wrestling and a pounding inside. "This place in here is full of
dirt and leaves and paper. I can'tmove!"
Mr. Britt stood there. "It isnot possible," he said, clearly and
firmly,atlast, "that a man could be in my machine. I know my machine.
You do not belong in there. I did not ask you to be in there. It is your
responsibility."
"Bend closer … "
"What?"
"Listen!"
He put his ear to the warm metal.
"I am here," whispered the high voice, the sweet high fading voice. "I
am in here and I wear no clothes."
"What!"
He felt his hands jerk, his fingers twitch in on themselves. He felt his
eyes squeeze up almost to blind him.
"I am in here and I have no clothes," said the voice. And after a long
while, "Don't you want to see me? Don't you? Don't you want to see me?
I'm in here now. I'm waiting … "
He stood by the side of the great machine for a full ten seconds. The
echo of his breathing jumped off the metal a foot from his face.
"Did you hear what I said?" whispered the voice.
He nodded.
"Well then, open the lid. Let me out. It's late. Late at night. Everyone
asleep. Dark. We'll be alone … "
He listened to his heart beating.
"Well?" said the voice.
He swallowed.
"What are you waiting for?" said the voice, lasciviously.
The sweat rolled down his face.
There was no answer. The fierce breathing that had been in the machine
for a while now suddenly stopped. The thrashing stopped.
Mr. Britt leaned forward, put his ear to the machine.
He could hear nothing now but a kind of soft inner squeaking under the
lid. And a sound like one hand, cut off from the body perhaps, moving,
struggling by itself. It sounded like a small thing moving.
"I climbed in to sleep," said the man.
"Oh, now youarelying," said Mr. Britt.
He climbed up on his silent machine and sat in the leather saddle. He
put his foot down to start the motor.
"What are you doing?" the voice shouted from under the lid suddenly.
There was a dull stir. There was a sound as of a large body again. The
heavy breathing returned. It was so sudden it made Mr. Britt almost fall
from his perch. He looked back at the lid.
"No, no, I won't let you out," he said.
"Why?" cried the failing voice.
"Because," said Mr. Britt, "I have my work to do." He started the
machine and the whisking thunder of the brushes and the roar of the
motor drowned out the screams and shouts of the captured man. Looking
ahead, eyes wet, hands hard on the wheel, Mr. Britt took his machine
brooming down the silent avenues of the night town, for five minutes,
ten minutes, half an hour, an hour, two hours more, sweeping and
scouring and never stopping, sucking in tickets and combs and dropped
soup-can labels.
At four in the morning, three hours later, he drew up before the vast
rubbish heap that slid down the hill in a strange avalanche to the dark
ravine. He backed the machine up to the edge of the avalanche and for a
moment cut the motor.
There was not the slightest sound from inside the machine.
He waited, but there was nothing but the beat of his heart in his
wrists.
He flipped a lever. The entire cargo of branches and dust and paper and
tickets and labels and leaves fell back and piled in a neat pile upon
the edge of the ravine. He waited until everything had slid out upon the
ground. Then he flipped the lever, slamming the lid shut, looked back
once at the silent mound of rubbish, and drove off down the street.
He lived only three houses from the ravine. He drove his machine up
before his house, parked, and went in to bed. He lay in the quiet room,
not able to sleep, from time to time getting up and going to look out
the window at the ravine. Once he put his hand on the doorknob, half
opened the door, shut it, and went back to bed. But he could not sleep.
It was only at seven in the morning as he was brewing some coffee, when
he heard the sound, that he knew any relief. It was the sound of young
Jim Smith, the thirteen-year-old boy, who lived across the ravine. Young
Jim came whistling down the street, on his way to the lake to fish.
Every morning he came along in mists, whistling, and always he stopped
to rummage through the rubbish left by Mr. Britt to seek dimes and
quarters and orange bottle caps to pin to his shirtfront. Mr. Britt
moved the window curtains aside to peer out into the early dawn mists to
see little Jim Smith walk jauntily by carrying a fish pole over one
shoulder, and on the end of the line at the top of the fish pole,
swinging back and forth like a gray pendulum in the mists, was a dead
rat.
Mr. Britt drank his coffee, crept back in bed, and slept the sleep of
the victorious and innocent.

