prose_contemporaryRayBradburyThat Bird that Comes out of the
ClockcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
That Bird that Comes out of the Clock
"You remember people by the things they do," said Mrs. Coles, "rather
than by how their face looks or what their tongues say, while they're
doing what they do. Now, if you ask me, this new woman across the street
and down two houses, Kit Random, that her name? She is, to put it
mildly, a woman of action."
Everybody on the porch looked.
There was Kit Random with a flower in her hand, in the garden. There she
was drawing the shade in the upstairs window. There fanning herself in
the cool dark doorway of her front porch. There making mosquito-delicate
etchings under a lemon-colored hurricane lamp at night. There throwing
clay on a potter's wheel early mornings, singing in a loud clear-water
voice. There shoving dozens of ashtrays into a kiln she had built of
bricks. And again you saw her baking pies for God knows who in her empty
house and setting them to cool in windowsills so men on the far side of
the street crossed over, noses lifted, passing. Then, when the sun set,
she swung in a great hairy hemp swing she had tied to the vast oak in
her backyard. About nine at night, carrying a crank phonograph like the
white Victrola dog in her hands, she'd come out, crank up the machine,
put on a record, and swing in the giant child's swing, being a poor
butterfly or a red red robin hop hop hoppingalong.
"Yes," said Mrs. Tiece. "She's either a very shrewd woman up to her
feminine tricks or—" And here she debated a moment. "She's that little
bird that comes out of the clock … that little bird that comes out of
the clock … "
All along the street, women tapped their heads with knowing forefingers
and looked over her fence, like women peering over a cliff, ready to
scream at how high up they were, but all they saw was the nine o'clock
backyard, as dim as a cavern full of sprouting leaves, starred with
flowers, the phonograph hissing and clearing its throat before launching
itself down the grooves of "June Night" or "Poor Butterfly." And there,
with the regularity of an unseen, but nevertheless ticking pendulum,
back and forth, one arm up to cushion her pink little pillow of cheek,
sighing quietly to herself, was Kit Random, swinging in her swing, in
rhythm to the things the phonograph said were poor about the butterfly
or nice about the June night.
"Where's she from?"
"No one knows."
"What's she doing here?"
"No one knows."
"How long's she going to stay?"
"Go askher!"
The facts were simple enough. The house had been unrented for a year,
and then it was rented. One April afternoon a large moving van drove up
and two men ran in and out, like Keystone Cops, the nearest thing to
collision,but always skidding around each other witha fast-action
routine of clocks, lamps, chairs, tables, and urns. In what seemed a
minute they had driven away. The house was left alone, unoccupied. Mrs.
Coles had walked by it four times and peered in, and only seen that the
moving men had hung the pictures, spread the rugs, adjusted the
furniture, and made everything womanly and neat before they had come
running out to go away. There was the nest, waiting for the bird.
And promptly at seven o'clock, just after supper, when everyone could
see her, up drove Kit Random in a yellow taxicab, and moved into the
waiting house, alone.
"Where's Mr. Random?" asked everyone. "There isn't any."
"Divorced, that's what she is, divorced. Or maybe her husband dead. A
widow, that's better. Poor thing." But there was Kit Random smiling at
every window and every porch, on her way to buy T-bone steaks, tomato
soup, and dishwater soap, not looking tired, not looking sad, not
looking alone, but looking as if a company of clowns lived with her by
day, and a handsome film gentleman with a waxed mustache by night.
"But no one ever comesnearher place. At first I thought, well … " Mrs.
Coles hesitated. "A woman living alone. Oh,youknow. But there hasn't
even been an iceman close. So there's only one thing to figure: as
someone said, she's that bird that comes out of the clock. Four times an
hour," she added.
At that very moment, Miss Kit Random called to the ladies, now her voice
up in the soft green trees, now up in the blue sky on the opposite side
of the yard. "Ladies?"
Their heads twisted. Their ears prickled.
"Ladies," called Miss Kit Random, in flight. "I've come to get me a man.
That'sit,ladies!"
All the ladies backed off to their houses.
It was the next afternoon that they found Mr. Tiece over in Miss Kit
Random's front yard playing marbles. Mrs. Tiece put up with it for about
two minutes and thirty-five seconds and then came across the street,
almost on roller skates.
"Well, what're wedoing?" she demanded of the two hunched-down figures.
"Just a moment." A marble spun bright under Henry Tiece's thumb. Other
marbles spat against each other and clacked away.
"Looks like you won," said Kit Random. "You're darned good at mibs,
Hank."
"It's been years." Mr. Tiece glanced uneasily at his wife's ankle. She
had veins like runners of light blue ink on her legs. It looked like the
map of Illinois. Desplaines River here, Mississippi there. He scanned up
as far as Rock Island when his wife said:
"Isn't it a little strange playing marbles?"
"Strangething?" Mr. Tiece dusted himself off. "Iwon!"
"What you going to do with them marbles?"
"It's not what Idowith them, it's victory thatcounts."
Mrs. Tiece glared at them as if they were toadstools. "Thanks for giving
Henry a game."
"Anytime, Clara, anytime," said Kit Random.
"I'll just leave these with you." Henry handed over the marbles hastily.
"No room at my place."
"I want you to cut the grass," said Mrs. Tiece.
He and Mrs. Tiece sort of walked across the street, he not looking at
her, she keeping up so he walked faster, she increasing her pace, he
increasing his until they almost leaped up the porch steps. He ran to
the door first, she tailed after. The door-slam was such that birds
abandoned their nests three houses down.
The next incident occurred exactly an hour later. Mr. Tiece was out
mowing the lawn, his eyes fixed to the rotating machine and each of one
hundred clover blossoms, all with tiny heads like Mrs. Tiece. He cut
furiously east, west, north, south, perspiring and wiping his brow as
Mrs. Tiece shouted, "Don't miss the outer drive! And down the middle,
you missed a ridge. Watch that stone, you'll ruin the cutter!"
Exactly at two o'clock two trucks drove up in front of Miss Kit Random's
house and a couple of laborers began tossing dirt out of Miss Random's
lawn. By four o'clock they poured a solid sheet of cement all over Miss
Random's yard.
At five o'clock, the truck drove off, taking Miss Kit Random's lawn with
it, at which point Miss Kit Random waved over to Mr. Tiece. "Won't have
to mow this lawn again for a couple years I guess!" She laughed.
Mr. Tiece started to laugh back when he sensed someone hidden inside the
dark screen door. Mr. Tiece ducked inside. This time, with the
door-slam, two potted geraniums fell off the porch rail.
"The nerve of that woman."
"Did it on purpose."
"Trying to make us look like slave drivers. Putting cement over her
lawn. Giving Mr. Tiece ideas. Well, we're not cementingourlawn, he'll
cut it every week, or my name isn't Clara Moon Tiece!"
The three ladies snorted over their knitting.
"Seems like some sort of plot to me," said Mrs. Coles. "Look at her
backyard, a jungle, nothing in its right place."
"Tell us about the marble game again, Clara."
"Good grief. There he was down on his knees, both laughing. I—wait a
minute. Youhearsomething?"
It was twilight, just after supper, and the three women on Mrs. Coles'
porch right next door. "That Clock Woman's out in her backyard again,
laughing."
"Swinging in her swing?"
"Listen. Shh!"
"I haven't done this inyears!" a man's voice laughed. "Always wanted to,
but folks think you're crazy! Hey!"
"Who's that?" cried Mrs. Coles.
The three women clapped their hands to their thumping chests and lurched
to the far end of the porch, panicked excursioners on a sinking ship.
"Here you go!" cried Kit Random, giving a push.
And there in her backyard going up in the green leaves one way, then
down and swooping up on the other, in the twilight air was a laughing
man.
"Don't that sound a bit like your Mr. Coles?" one of the ladies
wondered.
"The idea!"
"Oh, Fanny."
"Theidea!"
"Oh, Fanny, go to sleep," said Mr. Coles in bed. The room was warm and
dark. She sat like a great lump of ice cream glowing in the dim room at
eleven o'clock.
"Ought to be run out of town."
"Oh, for God's sake." He punched his pillow. "It was just a backyard
swing, haven't swung in years. Big damn swing, plenty hefty to ride a
man. You left me to finish the dishes so you could go out and blather
with those hens, I went to toss out the garbage and there she was
swinging in the swing and I said how nice it looked and she said did I
want to try? So, by God, I just climbed over to pump myself up for a
ride."
"And cackling like an idiot rooster."
"Not cackling, damn it, but laughing. I wasn't pinching her behind, was
I?" He punched his pillow twice more and rolled over.
In his sleep she heard him mumble, "Best damn swing I ever swung," which
set her off into a new fit of weeping.
It remained only for Mr. Clements to jump off the cliff the next
afternoon. Mrs. Clements found him blowing bubbles on Miss Kit Random's
back garden wall, discussing the formation, clarity, and coloration of
same with her. Her phonograph was warbling an old tune from World War I
sung by the Knickerbocker Quartet titled "The Worst Is Yet to Come."
Mrs. Clements acted out the song's words by grabbing Mr. Clements by the
ear and lugging him off.
"That woman's yard," said Mrs. Coles, Mrs. Clements, and Mrs. Tiece,
"is, as of this hour, day, and minute, forbidden territory."
"Yes, dear," said Mr. Coles, Mr. Clements, and Mr. Tiece,
"You are not to say good morning or good night, Nurse, to her," said
Mrs. Coles, Mrs. Clements, and Mrs. Tiece.
"Of course not, dear," said the husbands behind their newspapers.
"Youhearme?"
"Yes, sweetheart," came the chorus. From then on Mr. Coles, Mr.
Clements, and Mr. Tiece could be seen mowing lawns, fixing lights,
trimming hedges, painting doors, cleaning windows, washing dishes,
digging bulbs, watering trees, fertilizing flowers, rushing to work,
rushing back, bending, flexing, running, pausing, reaching, busy at a
thousand and one tasks with a thousand and one perspirations.
Whereas in Kit Random's clocks had stopped, flowers died or went insane
with abundance. Doorknobs fell off if you tapped them, trees shed their
leaves in mid-summer for lack of water; paint flaked from doors, and the
electric light-system, burnt out, was replaced with candles rammed in
wine jugs: a paradise of neglect, a beautiful chaos.
Somewhere along the line Mrs. Coles, Mrs. Clements and Mrs. Tiece were
stunned at the pure unadulterated nerve of Kit Random shoving notes in
their mailboxes during the night, inviting them to come by at four next
day for poisoned tea.
They absolutely refused.
Andwent.
Kit Random poured them all the orange pekoe which was her favorite and
then sat back, smiling.
"It was nice of you ladies to come," she said.
The ladies nodded grimly.
"There's a lot for us to talk about," she added.
The ladies waited stone-cold, leaning toward the door.
"I feel you don't understand me at all," said Kit Random. "I feel I must
explain everything."
They waited.
"I'm a maiden lady with a private income."
"Lookssuspiciouslyprivate to me," observed Mrs. Tiece.
"Suspiciously," echoed Mrs. Cole.
Mrs. Clements was about to toss her teabag in the cup when Kit Random
uncorked a laugh.
"I can see no matter what I say you'll add sugar lumps and stir your
spoons so loud I can't be heard."
"Try us," said Mrs. Tiece.
Kit Random reached over to pick up a shiny brass tube and twist it.
"What'sthat?" asked all three at once and then covered their mouths as
if embarrassed not one of them had said anything original.
"One of them toy kaleidoscopes." Kit Random shut one eye to squint
through the odd-colored shards. "Right now I'm examining your gizzards.
Know whatI find?"
"How could we possibly care?" cried Mrs. Clements. The others nodded at
her snappy retort.
"I see a solid potato." Kit Random fixed the device to X-ray Mrs. Tiece,
then moved to the others. "A rutabaga and a nice round turnip. No
innards, stomach, spleen, or heart. I've listened. No pulse, just solid
flesh, fit to burst your corsets. And your tongues? Not connected to
your cerebral cortex … "
"Our cerebralwhat?" cried Mrs. Tiece, offended.
"Cortex.Not as off-color as it sounds. And I've made a brave decision.
Don't get up."
The three women squirmed in their chairs and Kit Random said:
"I'm going to take your husbands, one by one. I'm going to, in the words
of the old song, steal their hearts away. Or what's there if you left
any on the plate. I've decided that flimsy-whimsy as I am, I'll be a
darn sight better midnight or high-noon companion than all of you in a
bunch. Don't speak, don't leave. I'm almost done. There's nothing you
can do to stop me. Oh, yes, one thing. Love these fine men. But I don't
think it crossed your minds, it's so long ago. Look at their faces. See
how they crush their straw hats down hard over their ears and grind
their teeth in their sleep. Heck, I can hear it way overhere! And make
fists when they walk, with no one to hit. So stand back, don't even try
to interfere. And how will I do it? With cribbage and dead man's poker,
and miniature golf in my garden, I'll pull flowers to sink par-three
holes. Then there's blackjack, dominoes, checkers, chess, beer and ice
cream, hot dogs noons, hamburgers midnights, phonograph moonlight
dancing, fresh beds, clean linens, singing in the shower allowed, litter
all week, clean up on Sundays, grow a mustache or beard, go barefoot at
croquet. When the beer stops, gin stays. Hold on! Sit!" Kit Random
lectured on:
"I can see what you think, you got faces like sieves. No, I'm not the
Hoor of Babylon, nor the Tart from Le Petit Trianon, which,
incidentally, isnota movie-house. I am a traveling Jungle Gym, first
cousin to a sideshow, never a beauty, almost a freak. But one day years
back, I decided not to makeoneman sad but ahandfulhappy! I found I was
trying to win all the time, which is an error beyond most women's
imagination. If you make a man lose all the time, hell, he'll go play
golf or handball and loseright.At least he can add itup! So I started
out, two years in Placerville, three in Tallahassee and Kankakee until I
ran out of steam or my rolling stock rusted. What was my great secret?
Not playing Par-cheesi, or Uncle Wiggily says jump back three hops to
the henhouse, no. It waslosing.Don't yousee? I learned how to cheat and
lose. Menlikethat. They know what you're up to, sure, but pretend not to
notice and the more you lose the more they love. Next thing you know you
got 'em bound head and foot with just plain old self-destruction
pinochle or I'm-dead-send-flowers hopscotch. You can get a man to jump
rope if you convince him he's the greatest jumper since the Indian rope
trick. So you go on losing and find you've won all along as the men tip
their hat to you at breakfast, put down the stock-market quotes andtalk!
"Stop fidgeting! I'm almost out of gas. Will you get your halfway loved
ones back? Mebbe. Mebbe not. A year from now I'll check to see if you've
watched and learned from my show-and-tell. I'll give you the loan of
those lost but now found souls and once a year after that bus back
through to see if you're losing proper in order to learn to laugh.
Meanwhile, there's nothing you can do, starting this very second. Now,
consider I've just fired off a gun. Go home. Bake pies. Make meatballs.
But it won't work. The pies will fall flat and the meatballs? Dead on
arrival. Because you arm-wrestle them to the table and spoil men's
appetites. And don't lock your doors. Let the poor beasts run. Like
you've excused."
"We've just begun to fight!" cried all three and then, confused at their
echoes, almost fell down the porch stairs.
Well, that was the true end. There was no war, not even a battle or half
a skirmish. Every time the ladies glanced around they found empty rooms
and quietly shut on tiptoes front doors.
But what really scalded the cat and killed the dog was when three
strange men showed up half-seen in the twilight one late afternoon and
caused the wives to pull back, double-lock their doors, and peer through
their lace curtains.
"Okay, open up!" the three men cried.
And hearing voices from today's breakfast, the wives unlocked the doors
to squint out.
"Henry Tiece?"
"Robert Joe Clements, what—?"
"William Ralph Cole, is thatyou?"
"Who the hell do youthinkit is!"
Their wives stood back to watch the almost hairless wonders pass.
"My God," said Mrs. Tiece.
"What?" said Mrs. Clements.
"What have you done to your hair?"
"Nothing," said all three husbands. "Shedid."
The wives circled their relatives by marriage.
"I didn't recognize you," gasped Mrs. Tiece.
"You weren'tsupposedto!"
And so said all the rest.
Adding, "How youlikeit?"
"It's not the man I married," they said.
"Damn tootin'!"
And at last, almost in chorus, though in separate houses:
"You going to change yournameto fit thehaircut?"
The last night of the month, Mr. Tiece was found in his upper-stairs
bedroom packing a grip. Mrs. Tiece clutched a doorknob and held on.
"Where you going?"
"Business."
"Where?"
"A ways."
"Going to be gone long?"
"Hard to say," he said, packing a shirt.
"Two days?" she asked.
"Maybe."
"Three days?"
"Where's my blue necktie? The one with the white mice on it."
"I never did like that necktie."
"Would you mind finding the blue necktie with the white mice on it for
me?"
She found it.
"Thank you." He knotted it, watching himself in the mirror. He brushed
his hair and grimaced to see if he had brushed his teeth.
"Fourdays?" she asked.
"In all probability," he said.
"Aweekthen?" She smiled wildly.
"You can almost bet on it," he said, examining his fingernails.
"Eat good meals now, not just quick sandwiches."
"I promise."
"Get plenty of sleep!"
"I'll get plenty of sleep."
"And be sure to phone every night. Have you got your stomach pills with
you?"
"Won't need the stomach pills."
"You'vealwaysneeded the stomach pills." She ran to fetch them. "Now, you
just take these stomach pills."
He took and put them in his pocket. He picked up his two suitcases.
"And be sure and call me every night," she said.
He went downstairs with her after.
"And don't sit in any draughts."
He kissed her on the brow, opened the front door, went out, shut the
door.
At almost the same instant, so it couldn't have been coincidence, Mr.
Cole and Mr. Clements plunged, blind with life, off their front porches,
risking broken legs or ankles to be free, and raced out to mid-street
where they all but collided with Mr. Tiece.
They glanced at each other's faces and luggage and in reverberative
echoes cried:
"Where're you going?"
"What'sthat?"
"My suitcase."
"My valise."
"My overnight case!"
"Do you realize this is the first time we've met in the middle of the
street since Halloween twenty years ago?"
"Hell, this fs Halloween!"
"Yeah! For what? Trick or treat?"
"Let's go see!"
And unerringly, with no chart, map, or menu, they turned with military
abruptness and headlong sparked Kit Random's yardwide cement with their
heels.
In the next week the sounds that abounded in Kit Random's abode might as
well have been a saloon bowling alley. In just a handful of days, three
various husbands visited at nine, ten, then ten after midnight, all with
smiles like fake celluloid teeth hammered in place. The various wives
checked their breaths for liquid sustenance but inhaled only tart doses
of medicinal mint; the men wisely gargled mid-street before charging up
to confront their fortress Europas.
As for the disdained and affronted wives, what culinary battlements did
they rear up? What counterattacks ensued? And if small battles, or
skirmishes, were fought, did victories follow?
The problem was that the husbands backing off and then headlong racing
off let all of the hot air out of their houses. Only cold air remained,
with three ladies delivered out of ice floes, refrigerated in their
corsets, stony of glance and smile that in delivering victuals to the
table caused frost to gather on the silverware. Hot roast beef became
tough icebox leftovers two minutes from the oven. As the husbands
glanced sheepishly up from their now more infrequent meals, they were
greeted with displays of glass eyes like those in the optician's
downtown window at midnight, and smiles that echoed fine porcelain when
they opened and shut to let out what should have been laughter but was
pure death rattle.
And then at last a night came when three dinners were laid on three
tables by candlelight and no one came home and the candles snuffed out
all by themselves, while across the way the sound of horseshoes clanking
the stake or, if you really listened close, taffy being pulled, or Al
Jolson singing, "Hard-hearted Hannah, the vamp of Savannah, I don't mean
New Orleans," made the three wives count the cutlery, sharpen the
knives, and drink Lydia Pinkham's Female Remedy long before the sun was
over the yardarm.
But the last straw that broke the camel herd was the men ducking through
a whirlaround garden sprinkler one untimely hot autumn night and, seeing
their wives in a nearby window, they yelled, "Come onin,the
water'sfine!"
All three ladies gave the window a grand slam.
Which knockedfiveflowerpots off rails, skedaddled six cats, and had ten
dogs howling at no-moon-in-the-sky halfway to dawn.

