prose_contemporaryRayBradburyVirgin ResusitascutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Virgin Resusitas
She sounded crazy with joy on the phone. I had to calm her down.
"Helen," I said, "take it easy. What's going on?"
"The greatest news. You must come over, now, right now."
"This is Thursday, Helen. I don't usually see you on Thursdays. Tuesdays
were always it."
"It can't wait, it's too wonderful."
"Can't you tell me over the phone?"
"It's too personal. I hate saying personal things on the phone. Are
youthatbusy?"
"No, I just finished up some letters."
"Well then, come and celebrate with me."
"This had better be good," I said.
"Wait till you hear. Run."
I hung up slowly and walked slowly to put on my coat and reach for my
courage. There was a feeling of doom waiting outside my door. I plowed
through it, made it to my car, and drove through a self-imposed silence,
with an occasional curse, to Helen's apartment across town. I hesitated
at knocking on her door, but it sprang open, surprising me. The look on
Helen's face was so wild I thought she had come off her hinges.
"Don't just stand there," she cried. "Come in."
"It's not Tuesday, Helen."
"And never will beagain!" she laughed.
My stomach turned to lead. I let her pull me by the elbow, lead me in,
sit me down, then she whirled through the room finding wine and filling
glasses. She held one out to me. I only stared at it.
"Drink," she said.
"I have a feeling it won't do any good."
"Look at me!I'mdrinking! It's a celebration!"
"Every time you've ever used that word, part of the continent falls off
into space. Here goes. What am I celebrating?"
I sipped and she touched my glass, indicating I should finish it so it
could be refilled.
"Sit down, Helen. You make me nervous standing there."
"Well." She finished her glass and refilled both and sat down with a
great exhalation of joy. "You'll never guess."
"I'm trying hard not to."
"Hold on to your hat. I've joined the Church."
"You—what church?" I stammered.
"Good grief! There's onlyone!"
"You have a lot of Mormon friends, and a few Lutherans on the side … "
"My God," she cried. "Catholic, of course."
"Since when have you liked Catholics? I thought you were raised in an
Orange family, family from Cork,laughedat the Pope!"
"Silly. That was then, this is now. I am certified."
"Give me that bottle." I downed my second wine and refilled and shook my
head. "Now, give me that again. Slowly."
"I've just come from Father Reilly's down the street."
"who—?"
"He's the head priest at St. Ignatius. He's been preparing me, you know,
instruction, the last month or so."
I fell back in my chair and peered into my empty glass. "Isthatwhy I
didn't see you last week?"
She nodded vigorously, beaming.
"Or the week before or the week beforethat?"
Again a wild nodding agreement, plus a burst of laughter.
"This Father Kelly—"
"Reilly."
"Reilly, Father. Where did you meet him?"
"I didn't exactly meet him." She glanced at the ceiling. I looked up to
see what was there. She saw me looking and glanced back down.
"Well, bumped into him, then," I inquired.
"I—well, hell. I made anappointment."
"A fallen-away-long-time-ago Cork-energizedBaptistmaid?"
"Don't get in an uproar."
"This is not an uproar. It's a former lover trying to comprehend … "
"You'renota former lover!"
She reached out to touch my shoulder. I looked at her hand and it fell
away.
"What am I, then? Analmostformer?"
"Don'tsaythat."
"Maybe I should letyousay it. I can see it in your mouth."
She licked her lips as if to erase the look.
"How long ago did you meet, bump, make an appointment with Reilly?"
"FatherReilly. I dunno."
"Yes, you do. An appointment like that is a day that will live in
infamy, or that's how I see it."
"Don't jump to conclusions."
"No jumps. Just hopping mad. Orwillbe if you don't come clean."
"Is this supposed to be my second confession of the day?" She blinked.
"My God," I said, feeling an invisible stomach punch. "So that's it! You
came plunging out of the confessional an hour ago and the first person
you called with the lunatic news—"
"I didn'tplungeout!"
"No, I suppose not. How long were you cooped up in there?"
"Not long."
"How long?"
"Half an hour. An hour."
"Is Reilly, Father Reilly taking a nap now? Hemust.How many dozen years
of sin did you unload? Did he slip a word in edgewise? Was God
mentioned?"
"Don't joke."
"Did thatsoundlike a joke? So you trapped him for an hour, did you? I
bet he's chugalugging the altar wine right now."
"Stop it!" she cried, and there were tears in her eyes. "I call you with
good news and you spoil it."
"How long ago did you make this appointment with Reilly,Father,that is?
Your first appointment, for instruction. It must take weeks or months.
He does most of the talking, right, at the start?"
"Most."
"I'd just like to know the date is all. Is that asking too much?"
"January fifteenth, a Tuesday. Four o'clock."
I figured swiftly, sending my mind back. "Ah, yes," I said, and closed
my eyes.
"Ah, yes, what?" She leaned forward.
"That was the last Tuesday, the final time you asked me to marry you."
"Was it?"
"Asked me to leave my wife and kids and marry you, yes."
"I don't recall."
"Yes, you do. And you recall my answer. No. Just like the dozen other
times. No. So you picked up the phone and called Reilly."
"It wasn't all that quick."
"No? Did you wait half an hour, forty-five minutes?"
She lowered her eyes. "An hour, maybe two."
"Let's say an hour and a half, split the difference, and he had the time
and you went over. A glad hand for the Baptist. Jesus, Mary, and Moses.
Give me that."
I grabbed the wine back and did away with my third glass.
"Shoot," I said, looking up at her.
"That's all," she said, simply.
"You mean you brought me all the way over here just to tell me you are a
practicing Catholic and have unloaded fifteen years of accumulated
guilt?"
"Well—"
"I'm waiting for the other shoe to drop."
"Shoe?"
"That glass slipper I slipped on your foot three years back, the one
that fit so perfectly. When it drops it'll break. I'll be on my feet
till midnight picking up the pieces."
"You're not going to cry, are you?" She leaned forward, peering into my
face.
"Yes, no. I haven't decided. If I did, would you put me over your
shoulder, like you always do, and burp me? You always did that and made
me well. Now what?"
"You said it all."
"How come I thought I was waiting for you to say it? Say it."
"The priest said—"
"I don't want to hear what the priest said. Don't blame him. What
doyousay?"
"The priest said," she went on, as if not hearing me, "since I am now a
member of his flock, that from now on I mustn't have anything to do with
married men."
"What about unmarried men, what did he say about those?"
"We only talked 'married.' "
"Now we've almost got it. What you are saying is that … " I figured
swiftly, counting back. "Is that the Tuesday before the Tuesday before
last was our last tossing-the-blanket pillow fight?"
"I guess so," she said, miserably.
"Youguessso?"
"Yes," she said.
"And I'm not to see you again?"
"We can have lunch—"
"Lunch, after all those midnight banquets and
delicatessen-appetite-inducing brunches and made-in-heaven snacks?"
"Don't exaggerate."
"Exaggerate? Hell, I've lived inside a tornado for three incredible
years and never touched ground. There wasn't a hair of my body that
didn't throw sparks if you touched me. I no sooner got out your door
with the sun going down every Tuesday than I wanted to charge back in
and rip the paper off the walls, crying your name. Exaggerate?
Exaggerate! Call the madhouse. Rent me a room!"
"You'll get over it," she said, lamely.
"Around about next July, maybe August. By Halloween I'll be a basket
case … So from now on, Helen, you'll be seeing this Reilly, this father,
this priest?"
"I don't like you putting it that way."
"He'll be instructing you every Tuesday afternoon, right as rain, on the
nose? Well, will he orwon'the?"
"Yes."
"My God!" I got up and walked around, talking to the walls. "What a plot
for a book, a movie, a TV sitcom. Woman, lacking courage, no guts,
figures amazingly clever way to ditch her boyfriend. Can't just say,
Out, go, be gone. No. Can't say, It's over, it was nice but it's over.
No, sir. So she takes instruction and gets religion and uses the
religion to call a halt and regain her virginity."
"That's not the way it was."
"You mean to say you just happened to get religion and once you were
inoculated it suddenly struck you to call the Goodwill to come get me?"
"I never—"
"Yes, you did. And it'saperfect out. There's no way around it. I'm
trapped. My hands are tied. If I forced you to love me now, you'd be
sinning against Reilly's good advice. Lord, what a situation!" I sat
down again. "Did you mention my name?"
"Not yourname,no … "
"But you did talk about me, right? Hours and hours?"
"Ten minutes, maybe fifteen."
"How I was good at this and that and you couldn't bear to live without
me?"
"I'm living without you now and free as a bird!"
"I can tell by that fake laugh."
"It's not fake. You just don't want tohearit."
"Continue."
"What?"
"Go on with your grocery list."
"That's all."
She laced and unlaced her fingers.
"Well, one other thing … "
"What?"
She took out a tissue and blew her nose.
"Every time we made love, it hurt."
"What?" I cried, stunned.
"It did," she said, not looking at me. "From the start. Always."
"You mean to say," I gasped, "that every time we took a trip to the moon
on gossamer wings, it waspainful?"
"Yes."
"And all those shouts and cries of joy were cover-ups for your
discomfort?" "Yes."
"All thoseyears,all thosehours,why didn't youtellme?"
"I didn't want to make you unhappy."
"Good God!" I cried.
And then, "I don't believe you."
"It's true."
"I don't believe you," I said, fighting to control my breath. "It was
too wonderful, it was too great, it was—no, no, you couldn't have lied
each time, every time." I stopped and stared at her. "You're making this
up to tie it in with this Father Reilly thing. That's it, isn't it?"
"Honest to God—"
"Watch it. You're certified now! That'sblasphemy!"
"Just 'honest' then. No lie."
I lapsed back into hot confusion.
There was a long silence.
"We could still have lunch," she said. "Someday."
"No thanks. I couldn't stand it. To see you and have to sit across from
you and not touch, oh, Lord! Where's my hat? Was Iwearingone?"
I put my hand on the doorknob.
"Where are you going?" she cried.
I shook my head, eyes shut. "I don't know. Yes, I do. To join the
Unitarian Church!"
"What?"
"Unitarians.Youknow."
"But you can't dothat!"
"Why?"
"Because—"
"Because?"
"They never mention God or Jesus. They're embarrassed if you talk about
them."
"Right."
"Which means, when I see youIwouldn't be able to mention God or Jesus."
"Right."
"Youwouldn'tjoin them!"
"No? You made the first move. Now it's mine. Checkmate."
I turned the doorknob and said:
"I'll call you next Tuesday, a last time. But if I do, don't ask me to
marry you."
"Don't call," she said.
"Oh, love that I still dearly love," I said, "goodbye."
I went out and shut the door. Quietly.

