                                  
                        No News, or What Killed the Dog?
                                      1994

     It was a day of holocausts, cataclysms, tornadoes, earth-quakes, blackouts,
mass  murders,  eruptions, and miscellaneous dooms, at the peak of which the sun
swallowed the earth and the stars vanished.
     But  to  put  it simply, the most respected member of the Bentley family up
and died.
     Dog was his name, and dog he was.
     The  Bentleys,  arising  late  Saturday morning, found Dog stretched on the
kitchen  floor,  his  head  toward  Mecca,  his paws neatly folded, his tail not
a-thump but silent for the first time in twenty years.
     Twenty  years!  My  God,  everyone  thought, could it really have been that
long? And now, without permission, Dog was cold and gone.
     Susan, the younger daughter, woke everyone yelling:
     "Something's wrong with Dog. Quick!"
     Without  bothering  to  don  his bathrobe, Roger Bentley, in his underwear,
hurried out to look at that quiet beast on the
     kitchen  tiles.  His wife, Ruth, followed, and then their son Skip, twelve.
The  rest  of the family, married and flown, Rodney and Sal, would arrive later.
Each in turn would say the same thing:
     "No! Dog was _forever."_
     Dog  said nothing, but lay there like World War II, freshly finished, and a
devastation.
     Tears  poured  down  Susan's  cheeks, then down Ruth Bentley's, followed in
good order by tears from Father and, at last, when it had sunk in, Skip.
     Instinctively,  they made a ring around Dog, kneeling to the floor to touch
him,  as  if  this might suddenly make him sit up, smile as he always did at his
food,  bark,  and  beat  them  to  the  door. But their touching did nothing but
increase their tears.
     But  at  last  they  rose, hugged each other, and went blindly in search of
breakfast,  in  the  midst  of  which Ruth Bentley said, stunned, "We can't just
leave him _there."_
     Roger Bentley picked Dog up, gently, and moved him out on the patio, in the
shade, by the pool.
     "What do we do next?"
     "I  don't know," said Roger Bentley. "This is the first death in the family
in years and-" He stopped, snorted, and shook his head. "I mean-"
     "You  meant  exactly  what  you  said,"  said  Ruth Bentley. "If Dog wasn't
family, he was nothing. God, I loved him."
     A fresh burst of tears ensued, during which Roger Bentley brought a blanket
to put over Dog, but Susan stopped him.
     "No,  no.1  want to see him. I won't be able to see him ever again. He's so
beautiful. He's _so - old."_
     They  all  carried  their  breakfasts  out  on the patio to sit around Dog,
somehow feeling they couldn't ignore him by eating inside.
     Roger  Bentley  telephoned  his  other  children, whose response, after the
first tears, was the same: they'd be right over. Wait.
     When  the  other  children  arrived, first Rodney, twenty-one, and then the
older daughter, Sal, twenty-four, a fresh storm of grief shook everyone and then
they sat silently for a moment, watching Dog for a miracle.
     "What are your plans?" asked Rodney at last.
     "I  know  this  is  silly,"  said Roger Bentley after an embarrassed pause.
"After all, he's only a dog-"
     _"Only!?"_ cried everyone instantly.
     Roger  had to back off. "Look, he deserves the Taj Mahal. What he'll get is
the Orion Pet Cemetery over in Burbank."
     "Pet Cemetery!?" cried everyone, but each in a different way.
     "My God," said Rodney, "that's silly!"
     "What's  so  _silly_  about it?" Skip's face reddened and his lip trembled.
"Dog, why, Dog was a pearl of. . . rare _price._
     "Yeah!" added Susan.
     "Well,  pardon  me."  Roger  Bentley  turned  away to look at the pool, the
bushes,  the  sky.  "I  suppose I could call those trash people who pick up dead
bodies-"
     "Trash people?" exclaimed Ruth Bentley.
     "Dead bodies?" said Susan. "Dog isn't a _dead body!"_
     "What _is_ he, then?" asked Skip bleakly.
     They  all  stared  at  Dog lying quietly there by the pool. "He's," blurted
Susan at last, "he's . . . he's my _love!"_ Before the crying could start again,
Roger  Bentley  picked  up the patio telephone, dialed the Pet Cemetery, talked,
and put the phone down.
     "Two hundred dollars," he informed everyone. "Not bad."
     "For _Dog?"_ said Skip. "Not enough!"
     "Are you really serious about this?" asked Ruth Bentley.
     "Yeah,"  said  Roger. "I've made fun of those places all my life. But, now,
seeing  as  how  we'll  never be able to visit Dog again-" He let a moment pass.
"They'll come take Dog at noon. Services tomorrow."
     "Services!"  Snorting,  Rodney stalked to the rim of the pool and waved his
arms. "You won't get me to _that!"_
     Everyone  stared. Rodney turned at last and let his shoulders slump. "Hell,
I'll be there."
     "Dog  would  never  forgive you if you didn't." Susan snuffed and wiped her
nose.
     But  Roger Bentley had heard none of this. Staring at Dog, then his family,
and up to the sky, he shut his eyes and exhaled a great whisper:
     "Oh,  my  God!"  he said, eyes shut. "Do you realize that this is the first
terrible  thing  that's  happened to our family? Have we ever been sick, gone to
the hospital? Been in an accident?"
     He waited.
     "No," said everyone.
     "Gosh," said Skip.
     "Gosh, indeed! You sure as hell notice accidents, sickness, hospitals."
     "Maybe,"  said  Susan,  and  had  to stop and wait because her voice broke.
"Maybe Dog died just to _make_ us notice how lucky we are."
     "Lucky?!"  Roger Bentley opened his eyes and turned. "Yes! You know what we
_are-"_
     "The  science  fiction  generation,"  offered  Rodney, lighting a cigarette
casually.
     "What?"
     "You  rave  on  about  that,  your  school  lectures, or during dinner. Can
openers?  Science fiction. Automobiles. Radio, TV, films. Everything! So science
fiction!"
     "Well,  dammit, they are!" cried Roger Bentley and went to stare at Dog, as
if  the  answers were there amongst the last departing fleas. "Hell, not so long
ago  there  were  no  cars, can openers, TV. Someone had to dream them. Start of
lecture.  Someone  had  to  build  them.  Mid-lecture. So science fiction dreams
became finished science fact. Lecture _finis!"_
      _"I bet!"_ Rodney applauded politely.
     Roger Bentley could only sink under the weight of his son's irony to stroke
the dear dead beast.
     "Sorry.  Dog  bit  me. Can't help myself. Thousands of years, all we did is
die. Now, that time's over. In sum: science fiction."
     "Bull." Rodney laughed. "Stop reading that junk, Dad."
     "Junk?"  Roger  touched Dog's muzzle. "Sure. But how about Lister, Pasteur,
Salk? Hated death. Jumped to stop it. That's all science fiction was ever about.
Hating the way things are, wanting to make things different. Junk?!"
     "Ancient history, Pop."
     "Ancient?" Roger Bentley fixed his son with a terrible eye. "Christ. When I
was born in 1920, if you wanted to visit your family on Sundays you-"
     "Went to the _graveyard?"_ said Rodney.
     "Yes.  My brother and sister died when I was seven. Half of my family gone!
Tell  me,  dear children, how many of _your_ friends died while you were growing
up. In grammar school? High school?"
     He included the family in his gaze, and waited.
     "None," said Rodney at last.
     "None! You hear that? None! Christ. Six of my best friends died by the time
I was ten! Wait! I just remembered!"
     Roger  Bentley  hurried  to rummage in a hall closet and brought out an old
78-rpm record into the sunlight, blowing off the dust. He squinted at the label:
     "No News, Or What Killed The Dog?"
     Everyone came to look at the ancient disc.
     "Hey, how old _is_ that?"
     "Heard it a hundred times when I was a kid in the twenties," said Roger.
     "No News, Or What Killed The Dog?" Sal glanced at her father's face.
     "This gets played at Dog's funeral," he said.
     "You're not _serious?"_ said Ruth Bentley.
     Just then the doorbell rang.
     "That can't be the Pet Cemetery people come to take Dog-?"
     "No!" cried Susan. "Not so _soon!"_
     Instinctively, the family formed a wall between Dog and the doorbell sound,
holding off eternity.
     Then they cried, one more time.
     
     The strange and wonderful thing about the funeral was how many people came.
     "I didn't know Dog had so many friends," Susan blubbered.
     "He freeloaded all around town," said Rodney.
     "Speak kindly of the dead."
     "Well,  he did, dammit., Otherwise why is Bill Johnson here, or Gert Skall,
or Jim across the street?"
     "Dog," said Roger Bentley, "I sure wish you could see this."
     "He _does."_ Susan's eyes welled over. "Wherever he is."
     "Good old Sue," whispered Rodney, "who cries at telephone books-"
     "Shut up!" cried Susan.
     "Hush, both of you."
     And  Roger  Bentley moved, eyes down, toward the front of the small funeral
parlor  where Dog was laid out, head on paws, in a box that was neither too rich
nor too simple but just right.
     Roger  Bentley  placed a steel needle down on the black record which turned
on  top of a flake-painted portable phonograph. The needle scratched and hissed.
All the neighbors leaned forward.
     "No  funeral  oration,"  said  Roger  quickly. "Just _this . ._ And a voice
spoke  on a day long ago and told a story about a man who returned from vacation
to ask friends what had happened while he was gone.
     It  seemed  that  nothing  whatsoever  had  happened.  Oh,  just one thing.
Everyone wondered what had killed the dog.
     The  dog?  asked  the  vacationer. My _dog_ died? Yes, and maybe it was the
burned horseflesh did it. Burned _horseflesh!?_ cried the vacationer. Well, said
his  informant, when the barn burned, the horseflesh caught fire, so the dog ate
the burned horseflesh, died.
     The  barn!?  cried the vacationer. How did it catch fire? Well, sparks from
the  house  blew  over,  torched  the barn, burned the horseflesh, dog ate them,
died.
     Sparks from the _house!?_ shouted the vacationer. How-?
     It was the curtains in the house, caught fire.
     Curtains? Burned!?
     From the candles around the coffin.
     _Coffin!?_
       Your  aunt's  funeral  coffin,  candles  there caught the curtains, house
burned,  sparks  from  the  house  flew  over, burned down the barn, dog ate the
burned horseflesh-In sum: no news, or what killed the dog!
     The record hissed and stopped.
     In  the  silence, there was a little quiet laughter, even though the record
had been about dogs and people dying.
     _"Now,_ do we get the lecture?" said Rodney.
     "No, a sermon."
     Roger  Bentley  put  his  hands  on the pulpit to stare for long moments at
notes he hadn't made.
     "I  don't  know  if we're here for Dog or ourselves. Both, I suppose. We're
the nothing-ever-happened-to-us people. Today is a first. Not that I want a rush
of doom or disease. God forbid. Death, come slowly, please."
     He  turned  the  phonograph  record round and round in his hands, trying to
read the words under the grooves.
     "No news. Except the aunt's funeral candles catch the curtains, sparks fly,
and  the  dog  goes  west. In _our_ lives, just the opposite. No news for years.
Good livers, healthy hearts, good times. So-what's it all _about?"_
      Roger Bentley glanced at Rodney, who was checking his wristwatch.
     "Someday  we  must  die, also." Roger Bentley hurried on. "Hard to believe.
We're  spoiled.  But  Susan  was right. Dog died to tell us this, gently, and we
_must_  believe.  And  at the same time celebrate. What? The fact that we're the
start  of an amazing, dumbfounding history of survival that will only get better
as the centuries pass. You may argue that the next war will take us all. Maybe.
     "I  can only say I think you will grow to be old, _very_ old people. Ninety
years  from now, most people will have cured hearts, stopped cancers, and jumped
life  cycles.  A lot of sadness will have gone out of the world, thank God. Will
this  be  easy  to  do? No. Will we do it? Yes. Not in all countries, right off.
But, finally, in most.
     "As I said yesterday, fifty years ago, if you wanted to
     visit  your  aunts,  uncles, grandparents, brothers, sisters, the graveyard
was it. Death was _all_ the talk. You _had_ to talk it. Time's up, Rodney?"
     Rodney signaled his father he had one last minute.
     Roger Bentley wound it down:
     "Sure,  kids  still  die.  But not millions. Old folks? Wind up in Sun City
instead of marble Orchard."
     The father surveyed his family, bright-eyed, in the pews.
     "God, look at you! Then look back. A thousand centuries of absolute terror,
absolute  grief.  How  parents stayed sane to raise their kids when half of them
died, damned if I know. Yet with broken hearts, they did. While millions died of
flu or the Plague.
     "So here we are in a new time that we can't see because we stand in the eye
of the hurricane, where everything's calm.
     "I'll  shut  up  now, with a last word for Dog. Because we loved him, we've
done  this  almost silly thing, this service, but now suddenly we're not ashamed
or  sorry we bought him a plot or had me speak. We may never come visit him, who
can  say?  But he has a place. Dog, old boy, bless you. Now, everyone, blow your
nose."
     Everyone blew his nose.
     "Dad," said Rodney suddenly, "could-we hear the record again?"
     Everyone looked at Rodney, surprised.
     "Just," said Roger Bentley, "what I was going to suggest."
     He put the needle on the record. It hissed.
     About  a  minute  in,  when the sparks from the house flew over to burn the
barn  and  torch  the horseflesh and kill the dog, there was a sound at the back
doorway to the small parlor.
     Everyone turned.
     A  strange  man  stood in the door holding a small wicker basket from which
came familiar, small yapping sounds.
     And  even  as  the  flames  from  the  candles around the coffin caught the
curtains and the last sparks blew on the wind
     The whole family, drawn out into the sunlight, gathered around the stranger
with  the wicker basket, waiting for Father to arrive to throw back the coverlet
on the small carrier so they could all dip their hands in.
     That  moment,  as Susan said later, was like reading the telephone book one
more time.