prose_contemporaryRayBradburyRemember Me?cutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Remember Me?
"Remember me? Of course, surely youdo!"
His hand extended, the stranger waited.
"Why, yes," I said. "You're—"
I, stopped and searched around for help. We were in middle-street in
Florence, Italy, at high noon. He had been rushing one way, I the other,
and almost collided. Now he waited to hear his name off my lips.
Panicking, I rummaged my brain which ran on empty.
"You're—" I said again.
He seized my hand as if fearing I might bolt and run. His face was a
sunburst. Heknewme! Shouldn't I return the honor? There's a good dog, he
thought,speak!
"I'm Harry!" he cried.
"Harry … ?"
"Stadler!" he barked with a laugh. "Your butcher!"
"Jesus, of course. Harry, you old son of a bitch!" I pumped his hand
with relief.
He almost danced with joy. "Thatson of a bitch, yes! Nine thousand miles
from home. No wonder you didn't know me! Hey, we'll get killed out here.
I'm at the Grand Hotel. The lobby parquetry floor, amazing! Dinner
tonight? Florentine steaks—listen to your butcher, eh? Seven tonight!
Yes!"
I opened my mouth to suck and blow out in a great refusal, but—
"Tonight!" he cried.
He spun about and ran, almost plowed under by a bumblebee motorbike. At
the far curb he yelled:
"Harry Stadler!"
"Leonard Douglas," I shouted, inanely.
"I know." He waved and vanished in the mob. "I know … "
My God! I thought, staring at my massaged and abandoned hand.
Whowasthat?
My butcher.
Now I saw him at his counter grinding hamburger, a tiny white toy-boat
cap capsizing on his thin blond hair, Germanic, imperturbable, his
cheeks all pork sausage as he pounded a steak into submission.
My butcher,yes!
"Jesus!" I muttered for the rest of the day. "Christ! What made me
accept? Why in hell did heask? We don't evenknoweach other, except when
he says, That's five bucks sixty, and I say, So long! Hell!"
I rang his hotel room every half hour all afternoon. No answer.
"Will you leave a message, sir?"
"No thanks."
Coward, I thought. Leave a message: sick. Leave a message: died!
I stared at the phone, helpless. Of course I hadn't recognized him.
Whoever recognizes anyone away from their counter, desk, car, piano, or
wherever someone stands, sits, sells, speaks, provides, or dispenses?
The mechanic free of his grease-monkey jumpsuit, the lawyer devoid of
his pinstripes and wearing a fiery hibiscus sport shirt, the club woman
released from her corset and crammed in an explosive bikini—all, all
unfamiliar, strange, easily insulted if unrecognized! We all expect that
no matter where we go or dress, we will be instantly recognized. Like
disguised MacArthurs we stride ashore in far countries crying: "Ihave
returned!"
But does anyonegivea damn? This butcher, now—minus his cap, without the
blood-fingerprinted smock, without the fan whirling above his head to
drive off flies, without bright knives, sharp tenterhooks, whirled
bologna slicers, mounds of pink flesh or spreads of marbled beef, he was
the masked avenger.
Besides, travel had freshened him. Travel does that. Two weeks of
luscious foods, rare wines, long sleeps, wondrous architectures and a
man wakes ten years younger to hate going home to be old.
Myself? I was at the absolute peak of losing years in gaining miles. My
butcher and I had become quasi-teenagers reborn to collide in Florentine
traffic to gibber and paw each other's memories.
"Damn it to hell!" I jabbed his number on the touch-phone, viciously.
Five o'clock: silence. Six: no answer. Seven: the same. Christ!
"Stop!" I yelled out the window.
All of Florence's church bells sounded, sealing my doom.
Bang! Someone slammed a door, on their way out.
Me.
When we met at five minutes after seven, we were like two angry lovers
who hadn't seen each other for days and now rushed in a turmoil of
self-pity toward a supper with killed appetites.
Eat and run, no, eat and flee, was in our faces as we swayed in
mid-lobby, at the last moment seized each other's hands. Might we
arm-wrestle? From somewhere crept false smiles and tepid laughter.
"Leonard Douglas," he cried, "you old son of a bitch!"
He stopped, red-faced. Butchers, after all, do not swear at old
customers!
"I mean," he said, "comeon!"
He shoved me into the elevator and babbled all the way up to the
penthouse restaurant.
"What a coincidence. Middle of the street. Fine food here. Here's our
floor. Out!"
We sat to dine.
"Wine for me." The butcher eyed the wine list, like an old friend.
"Here's a swell one. 1970, St. Emilion. Yes?"
"Thanks. A very dry vodka martini."
My butcher scowled.
"But," I said, quickly, "Iwillhave some wine, of course!"
I ordered salad to start. He scowled again.
"The salad and the martini will ruin your taste for the wine. Beg
pardon."
"Well then," I said, hastily, "the salad,later."
We ordered our steaks, his rare, mine well-done.
"Sorry," said my butcher, "but youshouldtreat your meat more kindly."
"Not like St. Joan, eh?" I said, and laughed.
"That's a good one. Not like St. Joan."
At which moment the wine arrived to be uncorked. I offered my glass
quickly and, glad that my martini had been delayed, or might never come,
made the next minute easier by sniffing, whirling, and sipping the St.
Emilion. My butcher watched, as a cat might watch a rather strange dog.
I swallowed the merest sip, eyes closed, and nodded.
The stranger across the table also sipped and nodded.
A he.
We stared at the twilight horizon of Florence.
"Well … " I said, frantic for conversation " … what do you think of
Florence's art?"
"Paintings make me nervous," he admitted. "What Ireallylike is walking
around. Italian women! I'd like to ice-pack and ship them home!"
"Er, yes … " I cleared my throat. "But Giotto … ?"
"Giotto bores me. Sorry. He's too soon in art history for me. Stick
figures. Masaccio's better. Raphael's best. AndRubens! I have a
butcher's taste for flesh."
"Rubens?"
"Rubens!" Harry Stadler forked some neat little salami slices, popped
them in his mouth, and chewed opinions. "Rubens! All bosom and bum, big
cumulus clouds of pink flesh, eh? You can feel the heart beating like a
kettledrum in a ton of that stuff. Every woman a bed; throw yourself on
them, sink from sight. To hell with the boy David, all that cold white
marble and no fig leaf! No, no, I like color, life, and meat that covers
the bone. You're noteating!"
"Watch." I ate my bloody salami and pink bologna and my dead white
provolone, wondering if I should ask his opinion of the cold white
colorless cheeses of the world.
The headwaiter delivered our steaks.
Stadler's was so rare you could run blood tests on it. Mine resembled a
withered black man's head left to smoke and char my plate.
My butcher growled at my burnt offering.
"My God," he cried, "they treated Joan of Arc better than that! Will you
puff it or chew it?"
"But yours," I laughed, "is stillbreathing!"
My steak sounded like crunched autumn leaves, every time I chewed.
Stadler, like W. C. Fields, hacked his way through a wall of living
flesh, dragging his canoe behind him.
He killed his dinner. I buried mine.
We ate swiftly. All too soon, in a shared panic, we sensed that we must
talk once more.
We ate in a terrible silence like an old married couple, angry at lost
arguments, the reasons for which were also lost, leaving irritability
and muted rage.
We buttered bread to fill the silence. We ordered coffee, which filled
more time and at last settled back, watching that other stranger across
a snowfield of linen, napery, and silver. Then, abomination of
abominations, I heard myself say:
"When we get home, we must have dinner some night to talk about our time
here, yes? Florence, the weather, the paintings."
"Yes." He downed his drink. "No/"
"What?"
"No," he said, simply. "Let's face it, Leonard, when we were home we had
nothing in common. Even here we have nothing except time, distance, and
travel to share. We have no talk, no interests. Hell, it's a shame, but
there it is. This whole thing was impulsive, for the best, or at the
worst, mysterious reasons. You're alone, I'm alone in a strange city at
noon, and here tonight. But we're like a couple of gravediggers who meet
and try to shake hands, but their ectoplasm falls right through each
other, hmm? We've kidded ourselves all day."
I sat there stunned. I shut my eyes, felt as if I might be angry, then
gave a great gusting exhalation.
"You're the most honest man I've ever known."
"I hate being honest and realistic." Then he laughed. "I tried to call
you all afternoon."
"I tried to callyou!"
"Iwanted to cancel dinner."
"Me, too!"
"I never got through."
"I missedyou."
"My God!"
"Jesus Christ!"
We both began to laugh, threw our heads back, and almost fell from our
chairs.
"This isrich!"
"It most certainlyis!"Isaid, imitating Oliver Hardy's way of speaking.
"God, order another bottle of champagne!"
"Waiter!"
We hardly stopped laughing as the waiter poured the second bottle.
"Well, we haveonething in common," said Harry
Stadler.
"What's that?"
"This whole cockamamie silly stupid wonderful day, starting at noon,
ending here. We'll tell this story to friends the rest of our lives. How
I invited you, and you fell in with it not wanting to, and how we both
tried to call it off before it started, and how we both came to dinner
hating it, and how we blurted it out, silly, silly, and how suddenly—"
He stopped. His eyes watered and his voice softened. "How suddenly it
wasn't so silly anymore. But okay. Suddenly we liked each other in our
foolishness. And if we don't try to make the rest of the evening too
long, it won't be so bad, after all."
I tapped my champagne glass to his. The tenderness had reached me, too,
along with the stupid and silly.
"We won't ever have any dinners back home."
"No."
"And we don't have to be afraid of long talks about nothing."
"Just the weather for a few seconds, now and then."
"And we won't meet socially."
"Here's to that."
"But suddenly it's a nice night, old Leonard Douglas, customer of mine."
"Here's to Harry Stadler." I raised my glass. "Wherever he goes from
here."
"Bless me. Bless you."
We drank and simply sat there for another five minutes, warm and
comfortable as old friends who had suddenly found that a long long time
ago we had loved the same beautiful librarian who had touched our books
and touched our cheeks. But the memory was fading.
"It's going to rain." I arose with my wallet.
Stadler stared until I put the wallet back in my jacket.
"Thanks and good night."
"Thanks to you," he said, "I'm not so lonely now, no matter what."
I gulped the rest of my wine, gasped with pleasure, ruffled Stadler's
hair with a quick hand, and ran.
At the door I turned. He saw this and shouted across the room.
"Rememberme?"
I pretended to pause, scratch my head, cudgel my memory. Then I pointed
at him and cried:
"The butcher!"
He lifted his drink.
"Yes!" he called. "The butcher!"
I hurried downstairs and across the parquetry floor which was too
beautiful to walk on, and out into a storm.
I walked in the rain for a long while, face up.
Hell, I thought, I don't feel so lonelymyself!
Then, soaked through, and laughing, I ducked and ran all the way back to
my hotel.

