prose_contemporaryRayBradburyPater CaninuscutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Pater Caninus
Young Father Kelly edged his way into Father Gilman’s office, stopped,
turned, and looked as if he might go back out, and then turned back
again.
Father Gilman looked up from his papers and said, ‘Father Kelly, is
there a problem?’
‘I’m not quite sure,’ said Father Kelly.
Father Gilman said, ‘Well, are you coming or going? Please, come in, and
sit.’
Father Kelly slowly inched back in and at last sat and looked at the
older man.
‘Well?’ said Father Gilman.
‘Well,’ said Father Kelly. ‘This is all very silly and very strange, and
maybe I shouldn’t bring it up at all.’
Here he stopped. Father Gilman waited.
‘It has to do with that dog, Father.’
‘What dog?’
‘You know, the one here in the hospital. Every Tuesday and Thursday
there’s that dog with the red bandanna that makes the rounds with Father
Riordan, patrolling the first and second floors–around, up, down, in and
out. The patients love that dog. It makes them happy.’
‘Ah, yes, I know the dog you mean,’ said Father Gilman. ‘What a gift it
is to have animals like that in the hospital. But what is troubling you
about this particular dog?’
‘Well,’ said Father Kelly. ‘Do you have a few minutes to come watch that
dog, because he’s doing something very peculiar right now.’
‘Peculiar? How?’
‘Well, Father,’ said Father Kelly, ‘the dog has come back to the
hospital twice this week already–on his own–and he’s here again now.’
‘Father Riordan isn’t with him?’
‘No, Father. That’s what I’m trying to get at. The dog is making his
rounds, all on his own, without Father Riordan telling him where to go.’
Father Gilman chuckled. ‘Is that all? Clearly, he’s just a very smart
dog. Like the horse that used to pull the milk wagon when I was a boy–it
knew exactly which houses to stop and wait at without the milkman saying
a word.’
‘No, no. He’s up to something. But, I’m not sure what, so I want you to
come see for yourself.’
Sighing, Father Gilman rose and said, ‘All right, let’s go look at this
most peculiar beast.’
‘This way, Father,’ said Father Kelly, and led him out into the hall and
up the stairs to the second floor.
‘I think he’s somewhere here now, Father,’ said Father Kelly. ‘Ah,
there.’
At which moment the dog with the red bandanna trotted out of room 17 and
moved on, without looking at them, into room 18.
They stood outside the door and watched the dog who was sitting by the
bed and seemed to be waiting.
The patient in the bed began to speak, and as Father Gilman and Father
Kelly listened, they heard the man whispering while the dog sat there
patiently.
Finally, the whispering stopped and the dog reached out a paw, touched
the bed, waited a moment, and then came trotting out to move on to the
next room.
Father Kelly looked at Father Gilman. ‘How does that strike you? What
was he doing?’
‘Good Lord,’ said Father Gilman. ‘I think the dog was—’
‘What, Father?’
‘I think the dog was taking confession.’
‘It can’t be.’
‘Yes. Can’t be, butis.’
The two priests stood there in the semidarkness, listening to the voice
of another patient whispering. They moved toward the door and looked in
the room. The dog sat there quietly as the penitent unburdened his soul.
Finally they saw the dog reach out its paw to touch the bed, then turn
and trot out of the room, hardly noticing them.
The two priests stood, riveted, and then silently followed.
At the next room the dog went to sit beside the bed. After a moment the
patient saw the dog and smiled and said in a faint voice, ‘Oh, bless
me.’
The dog sat quietly as the patient began to whisper.
They followed the dog along the hall, from room to room.
Along the way the young priest looked at the older one and noticed that
Father Gilman’s face was beginning to contort and grow very red indeed,
until the veins stood out on his brow.
Finally the dog finished its rounds and started down the stairs.
The two priests followed.
When they got to the hospital doors, the dog was starting out into the
twilight; there was no one there to greet it or lead it away.
At which moment Father Gilman suddenly exploded and cried out: ‘You! You
there! Dog! Don’t come back, you hear?! Come back and I’ll call
damnation, hell, brimstone, and fire down on your head. You hear me,
dog?! Go on, get out, go!’
The dog, startled, spun in a circle and bounded away.
The old priest stood there, his breathing heavy, eyes shut, and his face
crimson.
Young Father Kelly gazed off into the dark.
Finally he gasped, ‘Father, what have you done?!’
‘Damnation,’ said the older priest. ‘That sinful, terrible, horrible
beast!’
‘Horrible, Father?’ said Father Kelly. ‘Didn’t you hear what was said?’
‘I heard,’ said Father Gilman. ‘Taking it on himself to forgive, to
offer penance, to hear the pleas of those poor patients!’
‘But, Father,’ cried Father Kelly. ‘Isn’t that whatwedo?’
‘And that’s our business,’ gasped Father Gilman. ‘Our business alone.’
‘Is that true, Father? Aren’t others like us?’ said Father Kelly. ‘I
mean, in a good marriage, isn’t pillow talk in the middle of the night a
kind of confession? Isn’t that the way young couples forgive and go on?
Isn’t that somehow like us?’
‘Pillow talk!’ cried Father Gilman. ‘Pillow talk and dogs and sinful
beasts!’
‘Father, he may not come back!’
‘Good riddance. I’ll not have such things in my hospital!’
‘My God, sir, didn’t you see? He’s a golden retriever. What a name.
After an hour of listening to your penitents, to ask and forgive,
wouldn’t you love to hear me call you that?’
‘Golden retriever?’
‘Yes. Think about it, Father,’ said the young priest. ‘Enough. Come.
Let’s go back and see if that beast, as you call him, has done any
harm.’
Father Kelly went back into the hospital. Moments later, the older
priest followed. They walked along the hall and looked in the rooms at
the patients in their beds. A peculiar sound of silence hung over the
place.
In one room they saw a look of strange peace.
In another room they heard whispering. Father Gilman thought he caught
the name Mary, though he could not be sure.
And so they roamed among the quiet rooms on this special night and as
the older priest walked along he felt his skins fall away–a skin of
ignorance, a layer of contempt, and then a subdermis of neglect–so that
when he arrived back at his office he felt as if he had shed an
invisible flesh.
Father Kelly said good night and left.
The old priest sat and covered his eyes, leaning against the desk.
After a few moments of silence, he heard a sound and looked up.
In the doorway the dog stood, waiting there quietly; it had come back on
its own. The dog hardly breathed and did not whimper or bark or sigh. It
came forward, very quietly, and sat across the desk from the priest.
The priest looked into that golden face and the dog looked back.
Finally the old priest said, ‘Bless me, what do I call you? I can think
of nothing. But bless me, please, for I have sinned.’
The priest then spoke of his arrogance and the sin of pride and all the
other sins he had committed that day.
And the dog, sitting there, listened.

