antiqueRayBradburyNow and ForeverundRayBradburycalibre
0.8.6522.8.20123081b697-4728-4186-b952-c5e92132f5651.0
NOW AND FOREVER
SOMEWHERE A BAND IS PLAYING
&
LEVIATHAN ’99
RAY BRADBURY
Contents
“Somewhere”: Introduction to Somewhere a Band Is Playing
Somewhere a Band Is Playing
“Radio Dream”: Introduction to Leviathan ’99
Leviathan ’99
About the Author
Other Books by Ray Bradbury
Credits
Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher
SOMEWHERE A BAND IS PLAYING
“SOMEWHERE”
Some stories—be they short stories, novellas, or novels—you may realize,
are written as a result of a single, immediate, clear impulse. Others
ricochet off various events over a lifetime and come together much later
to make a whole.
When I was six years old my father, who had an urge to travel, took our
family by train to Tucson, Arizona, for a year, where we lived in a
burgeoning environment; for me, it was exhilarating. The town was very
small and it was still growing. There’s nothing more exciting than to be
part of the evolution of a place. I felt a sense of freedom there and I
made many wonderful friends.
A year later, we moved back to Waukegan, Illinois, where I had been born
and spent the first years of my life. But we returned to Tucson when I
was twelve, and this time I experienced an even greater sense of
exhilaration because we lived out on the edge of town and I walked to
school every day, through the desert, past all the fantastic varieties
of cacti, encountering lizards, spiders and, on occasion, snakes, on my
way to seventh grade; that was the year I began to write.
Then, much later, when I lived in Ireland for almost a year, writing the
screenplay of Moby Dick for John Huston, I encountered the works of
Stephen Leacock, the Canadian humorist. Among them was a charming little
book titled Sunshine Sketches of a Little Town.
I was so taken with the book that I tried to get MGM to make a motion
picture of it. I typed up a few preliminary pages to show the studio how
I envisioned the book as a film. When MGM’s interest failed, I was left
with the beginning of a screenplay that had the feeling of a small town.
But at the same time I couldn’t help but remember the Tucson I had known
and loved when I was six and when I was twelve, and began to write my
own screenplay and short story about a town somewhere in the desert.
During those same years I kept encountering Katharine Hepburn, either in
person or on the screen, and I was terribly attracted by the fact that
she remained so youthful in appearance through the years.
Sometime in 1956, when she was in her late forties, she made the film
Summertime. This caused me somehow to put her at the center of a story
for which I had no title yet, but Somewhere a Band Is Playing was
obviously evolving.
Some thirty years ago I saw a film called The Wind and the Lion,
starring Sean Connery and with a fabulous score by Jerry Goldsmith. I
was so taken with the score that I sat down, played it, and wrote a long
poem based on the enchanting music.
This became another element of Somewhere a Band Is Playing as I
progressed through the beginnings of a story which I had not yet fully
comprehended, but it seemed as if finally all the elements were coming
together: the year I spent in Tucson, age six, the year I spent there
when I was twelve, the various encounters with Katharine Hepburn,
including her magical appearance in Summertime, and my long poem based
on the score of The Wind and the Lion. All of these ran together and
inspired me to begin a long prologue to the novella that ultimately
followed.
Today, looking back, I realize how fortunate I am to have collected such
elements, to have held them ready, and then put them together to make
this final product, Somewhere a Band Is Playing. I have been fortunate
to have many “helpers” along the way. One of those, in the case of this
story, is my dear friend Anne Hardin, who has offered me strong
encouragement over the past few years to see this novella published. For
that she shares in the dedication of this work.
Of course, I had hoped to finish the novella, over the years, in order
to have it ready in time for Katharine Hepburn, no matter how old she
got, to play the lead in a theater or film adaptation. Katie waited
patiently, but the years passed, she became tired, and finally left this
world. I cannot help but feel she deserves the dedication I have placed
on this story.
 
SOMEWHERE A BAND IS PLAYING…
for Anne Hardin and Katharine Hepburn,
 with love
CHAPTER 1
There was a desert prairie filled with wind and sun and sagebrush and a
silence that grew sweetly up in wildflowers. There was a rail track laid
across this silence and now the rail track shuddered.
Soon a dark train charged out of the east with fire and steam and
thundered through the station. On its way it slowed at a platform
littered with confetti, the tatters of ancient tickets punched by
transient conductors.
The locomotive slowed just enough for one piece of luggage to catapult
out, and a young man in a summer dishrag suit to leap after and land
running as the train, with a roar, charged on as if the station did not
exist, nor the luggage, nor its owner who now stopped his jolting run to
stare around as the dust settled around him and, in the distance, the
dim outlines of small houses were revealed.
“Damn,” he whispered. “There is something here, after all.”
More dust blew away, revealing more roofs, spires, and trees.
“Why?” he whispered. “Why did I come here?”
He answered himself even more quietly, “Because.”
CHAPTER 2
Because.
In his half-sleep last night he had felt something writing on the
insides of his eyelids.
Without opening his eyes he read the words as they scrolled:
Somewhere a band is playing,
Playing the strangest tunes,
Of sunflower seeds and sailors
Who tide with the strangest moons.
Somewhere a drummer simmers
And trembles with times forlorn,
Remembering days of summer
In futures yet unborn.
“Hold on,” he heard himself say.
He opened his eyes and the writing stopped.
He half-raised his head from the pillow and then, thinking better of it,
lay back down.
With his eyes closed the writing began again on the inside of his lids.
Futures so far they are ancient
And filled with Egyptian dust,
That smell of the tomb and the lilac,
And seed that is spent from lust,
And peach that is hung on a tree branch
Far out in the sky from one’s reach,
There mummies as lovely as lobsters
Remember old futures and teach.
For a moment he felt his eyes tremble and shut tight, as if to change
the lines or make them fade.
Then, as he watched in the darkness, they formed again in the inner
twilight of his head, and the words were these:
And children sit by on the stone floor
And draw out their lives in the sands,
Remembering deaths that won’t happen
In futures unseen in far lands.
Somewhere a band is playing
Where the moon never sets in the sky
And nobody sleeps in the summer
And nobody puts down to die;
And Time then just goes on forever
And hearts then continue to beat
To the sound of the old moon-drum drumming
And the glide of Eternity’s feet;
“Too much,” he heard himself whisper. “Too much. I can’t. Is this the
way poems happen? And where does it come from? Is it done?” he wondered.
And not sure, he put his head back down and closed his eyes and there
were these words:
Somewhere the old people wander
And linger themselves into noon
And sleep in the wheat fields yonder
To rise as fresh children with moon.
Somewhere the children, old, maunder
And know what it is to be dead
And turn in their weeping to ponder
Oblivious filed ’neath their bed.
And sit at the long dining table
Where Life makes a banquet of flesh,
Where dis-able makes itself able
And spoiled puts on new masks of fresh.
Somewhere a band is playing
Oh listen, oh listen, that tune!
If you learn it you’ll dance on forever
In June…
And yet June…
And more…June…
And Death will be dumb and not clever
And Death will lie silent forever
In June and June and more June.
The darkness now was complete. The twilight was quiet.
He opened his eyes fully and lay staring at the ceiling in disbelief. He
turned in the bed and picked up a picture postcard lying on the
nightstand, and stared at the image.
At last he said, half aloud, “Am I happy?”
And responded to himself, “I am not happy.”
Very slowly he got out of bed, dressed, went downstairs, walked to the
train station, bought a ticket and took the first train heading west.
CHAPTER 3
Because.
Well, now, he thought, as he peered down the tracks. This place isn’t on
the map. But when the train slowed, I jumped, because…
He turned and saw a wind-battered sign over the flimsy station that
seemed about to sink under tides of sand: SUMMERTON, ARIZONA.
“Yes, sir,” said a voice.
The traveler dropped his gaze to find a man of some middle years with
fair hair and clear eyes seated on the porch of the ramshackle station,
leaning back in shadow. An assortment of hats hung above him, which
read: TICKET SELLER, BAGGAGE MASTER, SWITCHMAN, NIGHT WATCHMAN, TAXI.
Upon his head was a cap with the word STATIONMASTER stitched on its bill
in bright red thread.
“What’ll it be,” the middle-aged man said, looking at the stranger
steadily. “A ticket on the next train? Or a taxi two blocks over to the
Egyptian View Arms?”
“God, I don’t know.” The younger man wiped his brow and blinked in all
directions. “I just got here. Jumped off. Don’t know why.”
“Don’t argue with impulse,” said the stationmaster. “With luck you miss
the frying pan and hit a nice cool lake on a hot day. So, what’ll it
be?”
The older man waited.
“Taxi, two blocks, to the Egyptian View Arms,” said the young man,
quickly. “Yes!”
“Fine, given the fact that there are no Egyptians to view, nor a Nile
Delta. And Cairo, Illinois, is a thousand miles east. But I suppose
we’ve got plenty of arms.”
The old man rose, pulled the STATIONMASTER cap from his head, and
replaced it with the TAXI cap. He bent to take the small suitcase when
the young man said, “You’re not just going to leave—?”
“The station? It’ll mind itself. The tracks aren’t going nowhere,
there’s nothing to be purloined within, and it’ll be some few days
before another train takes us by surprise. Come on.” He hoisted the bag
and shuffled out of the gloom and around the corner.
Behind the station was no taxi. Instead, a rather handsome large white
horse stood, patiently waiting. And behind the horse was a small upright
wagon with the words KELLY’S BAKERY, Fresh Bread, painted on its side.
The taxi driver beckoned and the young man climbed into the wagon and
settled himself in the warm shadow. The stranger inhaled.
“Ain’t that a rare fine smell?” said the taxi driver. “Just delivered
five dozen loaves!”
“That,” said the young man, “is the perfume of Eden on the first morn.”
The older man raised his eyebrows. “Well, now,” he wondered, “what’s a
newspaper writer with aspirations to be a novelist doing in Summerton,
Arizona?”
“Because,” said the young man.
“Because?” said the older man. “That’s one of the finest reasons in the
world. Leaves lots of room for decisions.” He climbed up onto the
driver’s seat, looked with gentle eyes at the waiting horse and made a
soft clicking noise with his tongue and said, “Claude.”
And the horse, hearing his name, carried them away into Summerton,
Arizona.
CHAPTER 4
The air was hot as the bakery wagon moved and then, as they reached the
shadows of trees, the air began to cool.
The young man leaned forward.
“How did you guess?”
“What?” said the driver.
“That I’m a writer,” said the young man.
The taxi driver glanced at the passing trees and nodded.
“Your tongue improves your words on their way out. Keep talking.”
“I’ve heard rumors about Summerton.”
“Lots of folks hear, few arrive.”
“I heard your town’s another time and place, vanishing maybe. Surviving,
I hope.”
“Let me see your good eye,” said the driver.
The reporter turned and looked straight on at him.
The driver nodded again.
“Nope, not yet jaundiced. I think you see what you look at, tell what
you feel. Welcome. Name’s Culpepper. Elias.”
“Mr. Culpepper.” The young man touched the older man’s shoulder. “James
Cardiff.”
“Lord,” said Culpepper. “Aren’t we a pair? Culpepper and Cardiff. Could
be genteel lawyers, architects, printers. Names like that don’t come in
tandems. Culpepper and, now, Cardiff.”
And Claude the horse trotted a little more quickly through the shadows
of trees.
The horse rambled through town, Elias Culpepper pointing right and left,
chatting up a storm.
“There’s the envelope factory. All our mail starts there. There’s the
steam works, once made steam, I forget what for. And right now, passing
Culpepper Summerton News. If there’s news once a month, we print it!
Four pages in large, easy-to-read type. So you see, you and I are, in a
way, in the same business. You don’t, of course, also rein horses and
punch rail tickets.”
“I most certainly don’t,” said James Cardiff, and they both laughed
quietly.
“And,” said Elias Culpepper, as Claude rounded a curve into a lane where
elms and oaks and maples fused the center and wove the sky in green and
blue colors, a fine thatchwork above and below, “this is New Sunrise
Way. Best families live here. That’s the Ribtrees’, there’s the
Townways’. And—”
“My God,” said James Cardiff. “Those front lawns. Look, Mr. Culpepper!”
And they drove by fence after fence, where crowds of sunflowers lifted
huge round clock faces to time the sun, to open with the dawn and close
with the dusk, a hundred in this patch under an elm, two hundred in the
next yard, and five hundred beyond.
Every curb was lined with the tall green stalks ending in vast dark
faces and yellow fringes.
“It’s like a crowd watching a parade,” said James Cardiff.
“Come to think,” said Elias Culpepper.
He gave a genteel wave of his hand.
“Now, Mr. Cardiff. You’re the first reporter’s visited in years.
Nothing’s happened here since 1903, the year of the Small Flood. Or
1902, if you want the Big One. Mr. Cardiff, what would a reporter be
wanting with a town like this where nothing happens by the hour?”
“Something might,” said Cardiff, uneasily.
He raised his gaze and looked at the town all around. You’re here, he
thought, but maybe you won’t be. I know, but won’t tell. It’s a terrible
truth that may wipe you away. My mind is open, but my mouth is shut. The
future is uncertain and unsure.
Mr. Culpepper pulled a stick of spearmint gum from his shirt pocket,
peeled its wrapper, popped it in his mouth, and chewed.
“You know something I don’t know, Mr. Cardiff?”
“Maybe,” said Cardiff, “you know things about Summerton you haven’t told
me.”
“Then I hope we both fess up soon.”
And with that, Elias Culpepper reined Claude gently into the graveled
driveway of the sunflower yard of a private home with a sign above the
porch: EGYPTIAN VIEW ARMS. BOARDING.
And he had not lied.
No Nile River was in sight.
CHAPTER 5
At which moment an old-fashioned ice wagon with a full dark cavern mouth
of frost entered the yard, led by a horse in dire need of his Antarctic
cargo. Cardiff could taste the ice, from thirty summers long gone.
“Just in time,” said the iceman. “Hot day. Go grab.” He nodded toward
the rear of his wagon.
Cardiff, on pure instinct, jumped down from the bread wagon and went
straight to the back of the ice wagon, and felt his ten-year-old hand
reach in and grab a sharp icicle. He stepped back and rubbed it on his
brow. His other hand instinctively took a handkerchief from his pocket
to wrap the ice. Sucking it, he moved away.
“How’s it taste?” he heard Culpepper say.
Cardiff gave the ice another lick.
“Linen.”
Only then did he glance back at the street.
It was such a street as could not be believed. There was not a roof on
any house that had not been freshly tarred and lathed or tiled. Not a
porch swing that did not hang straight. Not a window that did not shine
like a mirrored shield in Valhalla halls, all gold at sunrise and
sunset, all clear running brookstream at noon. Not a bay window that did
not display books leaning against others’ quiet wits on inner library
shelves. Not a rain funnel spout without its rain barrel gathering the
seasons. Not a backyard that was not, this day, filled with carpets
being flailed so that time dusted on the wind and old patterns sprung
forth to rococo new. Not a kitchen that did not send forth promises of
hunger placated and easy evenings of contemplation on victuals contained
just south-southwest of the soul.
All, all perfect, all painted, all fresh, all new, all beautiful, a
perfect town in a perfect blend of silence and unseen hustle and flurry.
“A penny for your thoughts,” said Elias Culpepper.
Cardiff shook his head, his eyes shut, because he had seen nothing, but
imagined much.
“I can’t tell you,” said Cardiff, in a whisper.
“Try,” said Elias Culpepper.
Cardiff shook his head again, nearly suffering with inexplicable
happiness.
Peeling the handkerchief from around the ice, he put the last sliver in
his mouth and gave it a crunch as he started up the porch steps with his
back to the town, wondering what he would find next.
CHAPTER 6
James Cardiff stood in quiet amazement.
The front porch of the Egyptian View Arms was the longest he had ever
seen. It had so many white wicker rockers he stopped counting. Occupying
some of the rockers was an assortment of youngish not quite middle-aged
gentlemen, nattily dressed, with slicked-back hair, fresh out of the
shower. And interspersed among the men were late-thirties-not-yet-forty
women in summer dresses looking as if they had all been cut from the
same rose or orchid or gardenia wallpaper. The men had haircuts each
sheared by the same barber. The women wore their tresses like bright
helmets designed by some Parisian, ironed and curlicued long before
Cardiff had been born. And the assembly of rockers all tilted forward
and then back, in unison, in a quiet surf, as if the same ocean breeze
moved them all, soundless and serene.
As Cardiff put his foot on the porch landing, all the rocking stopped,
all the faces lifted, and there was a blaze of smiles and every hand
rose in a quiet wave of welcome. He nodded and the white summer wickers
refloated themselves, and a murmur of conversation began.
Looking at the long line of handsome people, he thought: Strange, so
many men home at this hour of the day. Most peculiar.
A tiny crystal bell tinkled in the dim screen doorway.
“Soup’s on,” a woman’s voice called.
In a matter of seconds, the wicker chairs emptied, as all the summer
people filed through the screen door with a hum.
He was about to follow when he stopped, turned his head and looked back.
“What?” he whispered.
Elias Culpepper was at his elbow, gently placing Cardiff’s suitcase
beside him.
“That sound,” said Cardiff. “Somewhere…”
Elias Culpepper laughed quietly. “That’s the town band rehearsing
Thursday night’s performance of the short-form Tosca. When she jumps it
only takes two minutes for her to land.”
“Tosca,” said Cardiff, and listened to the far brass music. “Somewhere…”
“Step in,” said Culpepper, who held the screen door wide for James
Cardiff.
CHAPTER 7
Inside the dim hall, Cardiff felt as if he had moved into a summer-cool
milk shed that smelled of large canisters of cream hidden away from the
sun, and iceboxes dripping their secret liquors, and bread laid out
fresh on kitchen tables, and pies cooling on windowsills.
Cardiff took another step and knew he would sleep nine hours a night
here and wake like a boy at dawn, excited that he was alive, and all the
world beginning, morn after morn, glad for his heart in his body, and
his pulse in his wrists.
He heard someone laughing. And it was himself, overwhelmed with a joy he
could not explain.
There was the merest motion from somewhere high in the house. Cardiff
looked up.
Descending the stairs, and pausing now at seeing him, was the most
beautiful woman in the world.
Somewhere, sometime, he had heard someone say: Fix the image before it
fades. So said the first cameras that trapped light and carried that
illumination to obscuras where chemicals laid out in porcelain caused
the trapped ghosts to rouse. Faces caught at noon were summoned up out
of sour baths to reestablish their eyes, their mouths, and then the
haunting flesh of beauty or arrogance, or the impatience of a child held
still. In darkness the phantoms lurked in chemicals until some gestures
surfaced them out of time into a forever that could be held in the hands
long after the warm flesh had vanished.
It was thus and so with this woman, this bright noon wonder who
descended the stairs into the cool shadow of the hall only to reemerge
in a shaft of sunlight in the dining room door. Her hand drifted to take
Cardiff’s hand, and then her wrist and arm and shoulder and at last, as
from that chemistry in an obscura room, the ghost of a face so lovely it
burst on him like a flower when the dawn causes it to widen its beauty.
Her measuring bright and summer-electric eyes shone merrily, watching
him, as if he, too, had just arisen from those miraculous tides in which
memory swims, as if to say: Remember me?
I do! he thought.
Yes? he thought he heard her say.
Yes! he cried, not speaking. I always hoped I might remember you.
Well, then, her eyes said, we shall be friends. Perhaps in another time,
we met.
“They’re waiting for us,” she said aloud.
Yes, he thought, for both of us!
And now he spoke. “Your name?”
But you already know it, her silence replied.
And it was the name of a woman dead these four thousand years and lost
in Egyptian sands, and now refreshed at noon in another desert near an
empty station and silent tracks.
“Nefertiti,” he said. “A fine name. It means the Beautiful One Is Here.”
“Ah,” she said, “you know.”
“Tutankhamen came from the tomb when I was three,” he said. “I saw his
golden mask and wanted my face to be his.”
“But it is,” she said. “You just never noticed.”
“Can I believe that?”
“Believe it and it will happen in the midst of your belief. Are you
hungry?”
Starved, he thought, staring at her.
“Before you fall,” she laughed, “come.”
And she led him in to a feasting of summer gods.
CHAPTER 8
The dining room, like the porch, was the longest one he’d ever seen.
All of the summer porch people were lined up on either side of an
incredible table, staring at Cardiff and Nef as they came through the
door.
At the far end were two chairs waiting for them and as soon as Cardiff
and Nef sat, there was a flurry of activity as utensils were raised and
platters passed.
There was an incredible salad, an amazing omelet, and a soup smooth as
velvet. From the kitchen drifted a scent that promised a dessert sweet
as ambrosia.
In the middle of his astonishment, Cardiff said, “Hold on, this is too
much. I must see.”
He rose and walked to a door at the end of the dining room, which opened
into the kitchen.
Entering the kitchen, he stared across the room at what seemed a
familiar doorway.
He knew where it led.
The pantry.
And not just any pantry, but his grandmother’s pantry, or something just
like it. How could that be?
He stepped forward and pushed the door, half-expecting that he would
find his grandmother within, lost in that special jungle where hung
leopard bananas, where doughnuts were buried in quicksands of powdered
sugar. Where apples shone in bins and peaches displayed their warm
summer cheeks. Where row on row, shelf on shelf, of condiments and
spices rose to an always-twilight ceiling.
He heard himself intoning the names that he read off the jar labels, the
monikers of Indian princes and Arabian wanderers.
Cardimon and anise and cinnamon were there, and cayenne and curry. Added
to which there were ginger and paprika and thyme and celandrine.
He could almost have sung the syllables and awakened at night to hear
himself humming the sounds all over again.
He scanned and re-scanned the shelves, took a deep breath, and turned,
looking back into the kitchen, sure he would find a familiar shape bent
over the table, preparing the last courses for the amazing lunch.
He saw a portly woman icing a buttery yellow cake with dark chocolate,
and he thought if he cried her name, his grandmother might turn and rush
to hold him.
But he said nothing and watched the woman finish the job with a
flourish, and hand the cake to a maid who carried it out into the dining
room.
He went back to join Nef, his appetite gone, having fed himself in the
pantry wilderness, which was more than enough.
Nef, he thought, gazing at her, is a woman of all women, a beauty of all
beauties. That wheat field painted again and again by Monet that became
the wheat field. That church façade similarly painted, again and again,
until it was the most perfect façade in the history of churches. That
bright apple and fabled orange by Cézanne that never fades.
“Mr. Cardiff,” he heard her say. “Sit, eat. You mustn’t keep me waiting.
I’ve been waiting too many years.”
He drew close, not able to take his eyes away from her.
“Great god,” he said. “How old are you?”
“You tell me,” she said.
“Oh, hell,” he cried. “You were born maybe twenty years ago. Thirty. Or
the day before yesterday.”
“I am all of those.”
“How?”
“I am your sister, your daughter, and someone you knew years ago back in
school, yes? I am the girl you asked to the Senior Prom but she had
promised another.”
“That’s my life. That happened. How did you guess?”
“I never guess,” she replied. “I know. The important thing is that
you’re here at last.”
“You sound as if you expected me.”
“Forever,” she said.
“But I didn’t know I was coming here until last night, in the middle of
a dream. I fixed my mind only at the last moment. I decided to write a
story…”
She laughed quietly. “How can that be? It sounds so like those unhealthy
romances written by healthy housewives. What made you choose Summerton?
Was it our name?”
“I saw a postcard someone must have picked up on their way through.”
“Oh, that would have been years ago.”
“It looked like a nice town—a friendly spot for tourists looking for a
place to relax, enjoy the desert air. But then, I looked for it on the
map. And you know what? It’s not on any map I could find.”
“Well, the train doesn’t stop here.”
“It didn’t stop today,” he admitted. “Only two things got off: me and my
suitcase.”
“You travel lightly.”
“I’m just here overnight. When the next train runs through, not
stopping, I’ll grab on.”
“No,” she said softly. “That’s not how it’s supposed to be.”
“I’ve got to go home and finish my story,” he insisted.
“Ah, yes,” she said. “And what will you say about this town that no one
can find?”
A cloud crossed the sky and the dining room windows darkened, and a
shadow fell across his face. There were two truths to tell, but he could
tell only one.
“That it’s a lovely town,” he said, lamely. “The kind that doesn’t exist
anymore. That people should remember and celebrate. But how did you know
I was coming?”
“I woke at dawn,” she said. “I heard your train from a long way off. By
noon the train was just beyond the mountains, and I heard its whistle.”
“And did you expect someone named Cardiff?”
“Cardiff?” she wondered. “There was a giant, once—”
“In all the newspapers. A fraud.”
“And,” she said. “Are you a fraud?”
He could not meet her gaze.
CHAPTER 9
When he looked up, Nef’s chair was empty. The other diners, too, had all
left the table, gone back to their rocking chairs or, perhaps, to summer
afternoon naps.
“Lord,” he murmured. “That woman, young, but how young? Old, but how
old?”
Suddenly Elias Culpepper touched his elbow.
“You want a real tour of our town? Claude needs to deliver some more
fresh-baked bread. On your feet!”
The wagon was loaded with a redolent harvest. The warm loaves had been
neatly stacked row on row within the oven-smelling wagon, thirty or
forty loaves in all, with names lettered on the wax-paper wrappings.
Beside these were waxed boxes of muffins and cakes, carefully tied with
string.
Cardiff took three immense inhalations and almost fell with the
overconsumption.
Culpepper handed him a small packet and a knife.
“What’s this?” said Cardiff.
“You won’t be a block away before the bread overcomes you. This is a
butter knife. This here is a full loaf. Don’t bring it back.”
“It’ll ruin my supper.”
“No. Enhance. Summer outside. Summer inside.”
He handed over a pad with names and addresses.
“Just in case,” said Culpepper.
“You’re sending me out on my own? How do I know where to go?”
“Don’t you worry. Claude knows the way. Never got lost yet. Right,
Claude?”
Claude looked back, neither amused nor serious, just ready.
“Just go easy on the reins. Claude’s got his own system. You just tag
along. It’s the only way to see the town without any jabber from me.
Giddap.”
Cardiff jumped aboard. Claude tugged, the wagon lurched forward.
“Hell.” He fumbled with the notebook, scanning the names and addresses.
“What’s the first stop?”
“Git!”
The bread wagon drifted away, warming the air with the heady scents of
yeast and grain.
Claude trotted as if he could hardly wait to be right.
CHAPTER 10
Claude jogged at a goodly pace for two blocks and turned sweetly to the
right.
His eyes twitched toward a front yard mailbox: Abercrombie.
Cardiff checked his list.
Abercrombie!
“Damn!”
He jumped from the wagon, loaf in hand, when a woman’s voice called,
“Thank you, Claude.”
A woman of some forty years stood at the gate to take the bread. “You,
too, of course,” she said. “Mister…?”
“Cardiff, ma’m.”
“Claude,” she called, “take good care of Mr. Cardiff. And Mr. Cardiff,
you take good care of Claude. Morning!”
And the wagon jounced along the bricks under a congress of trees that
laced themselves to lattice out the sun.
“Fillmore’s next.” Cardiff eyed the list, ready to pull on the reins
when the horse stopped at a second gate.
Cardiff popped the bread in the Fillmore mailbox and raced to catch up
with Claude, who had resumed his route without waiting for his driver.
So it went. Bramble. Jones. Williams. Isaacson. Meredith. Bread. Cake.
Bread. Muffins. Bread. Cake. Bread.
Claude turned a final corner.
And there was a school.
“Hold up, Claude!”
Cardiff alighted and walked into the schoolyard to find a teeter-totter,
its old blue paint flaking, next to an old swing-set, its splintery
wooden seats suspended from rusted iron chains.
“Well, now,” whispered Cardiff.
The school was two stories high. Its double doors were shut, and all
eight of its windows were crusted with dust.
Cardiff rattled the front doors. Locked tight.
“It’s only May,” Cardiff said to himself. “School’s not out yet.”
Claude whinnied irritably, and perhaps out of pique, began a slow glide
away from the school.
“Claude!” Cardiff put iron in it. “Stay!”
Claude stayed, drumming the bricks with both forefeet.
Cardiff turned back to the building. Carved in the lintel, above the
main door were the words: SUMMERTON GRAMMAR SCHOOL, DEDICATED JANUARY
1st, 1888.
“Eighteen eighty-eight,” Cardiff muttered. “Well, now.”
He gave one last look at the dust-caked windows and the rusted swing
chains and said, “One last go-round, Claude.”
Claude did not move.
“We’re all out of bread and names, is that it? You only take bakery
orders, nothing else?”
Even Claude’s shadow did not move.
“Well, we’ll just stand here until you do me a favor. Your new star
boarder wants to cross-section the whole blasted town. What’s it to be?
No water, no oats, without a full trot.”
Water and oats did it.
Full trot.
They sailed down Clover Avenue and up Hibiscus Way and over on to
Rosewood Place and right on Juneglade and left again on Sandalwood then
Ravine, which ran off the edge of a shallow ravine cut by ancient rains.
He stared at lawn after lawn after lawn, all of them lush, green,
perfect. No baseball bats. No baseballs. No basketball hoops. No
basketballs. No tennis rackets. No croquet mallets. No hopscotch chalk
marks on sidewalks. No tire swings on trees.
Claude trotted him back to the Egyptian View Arms, where Elias Culpepper
was waiting.
Cardiff climbed down from the bread wagon.
“Well?”
Cardiff looked back at the summer drift of green lawns and green hedges
and golden sunflowers and said, “Where are the children?”
CHAPTER 11
Mr. Culpepper did not immediately respond.
For dead ahead there was afternoon high tea, with apricot and peach
tarts and strawberry delight and coffee instead of tea and then port
instead of coffee and then there was dinner, a real humdinger, that
lasted until well after nine and then the inhabitants of the Egyptian
View Arms headed up, one by one, to their most welcome cool summer night
beds, and Cardiff sat out on the croquetless and hoopless lawn, watching
Mr. Culpepper on the porch, smoking several small bonfire pipes,
waiting.
At last Cardiff, in full brooding pace, arrived at the bottom of the
porch rail and waited.
“You were asking about no children?” said Elias Culpepper.
Cardiff nodded.
“A good reporter wouldn’t allow so much time to pass after asking such
an important question.”
“More time is passing right now,” said Cardiff, gently, climbing the
porch steps.
“So it is. Here.”
A bottle of wine and two small snifters sat on the railing.
Cardiff drained his at a jolt, and went to sit next to Elias Culpepper.
Culpepper puffed smoke. “We have,” he said, seeming to consider his
words with care, “sent all the children away to school.”
Cardiff stared. “The whole town? Every child?”
“That’s the sum. It’s a hundred miles to Phoenix in one direction. Two
hundred to Tucson. Nothing but sand and petrified forest in between. The
children need schools with proper trees. We got proper trees here, yes,
but we can’t hire teachers to teach here. We did, at one time, but they
got too lonesome. They wouldn’t come, so our children had to go.”
“If I came back in late June would I meet the kids coming home for the
summer?”
Culpepper held still, much like Claude.
“I said—”
“I heard.” Culpepper knocked the sparking ash from his pipe. “If I said
yes, would you believe me?”
Cardiff shook his head.
“You implying I’m a mile off from the truth?”
“I’m only implying,” Cardiff said, “that we are at a taffy pull. I’m
waiting to see how far you pull it.”
Culpepper smiled.
“The children aren’t coming home. They have chosen summer school in
Amherst, Providence, and Sag Harbor. One is even in Mystic Seaport.
Ain’t that a fine sound? Mystic. I sat there once in a thunderstorm
reading every other chapter of Moby-Dick.”
“The children are not coming home,” said Cardiff. “Can I guess why?”
The older man nodded, pipe in mouth, unlit.
Cardiff took out his notepad and stared at it.
“The children of this town,” he said at last, “won’t come home. Not one.
None. Never.”
He closed the notepad and continued: “The reason why the children are
never coming home is,” he swallowed hard, “there are no children.
Something happened a long time ago, God knows what, but it happened. And
this town is a town of no family homecomings. The last child left long
ago, or the last child finally grew up. And you’re one of them.”
“Is that a question?”
“No,” said Cardiff. “An answer.”
Culpepper leaned back in his chair and shut his eyes. “You,” he said,
the smoke long gone from his pipe, “are an A-1 Four Star Headline News
Reporter.”
CHAPTER 12
“I…,” said Cardiff.
“Enough,” Culpepper interrupted. “For tonight.”
He held out another glass of bright amber wine. Cardiff drank. When he
looked up, the front screen door of the Egyptian View Arms tapped shut.
Someone went upstairs. His ambiance stayed.
Cardiff refilled his glass.
“Never coming home. Never ever,” he whispered.
And went up to bed.
Sleep well, someone said somewhere in the house. But he could not sleep.
He lay, fully dressed, doing philosophical sums on the ceiling, erasing,
adding, erasing again until he sat up abruptly and looked out across the
meadow town of thousands of flowers in the midst of which houses rose
and sank only to rise again, ships on a summer sea.
I will arise and go now, thought Cardiff, but not to a bee-loud glade.
Rather, to a place of earthen silence and the sounds of death’s-head
moths on powdery wings.
He slipped down the front hall stairs barefoot and once outside, let the
screen door tap shut silently and, sitting on the lawn, put on his shoes
as the moon rose.
Good, he thought, I won’t need a flashlight.
In the middle of the street he looked back. Was there someone at the
screen door, a shadow, watching? He walked and then began to jog.
Imagine that you are Claude, he thought, his breath coming in quick
pants. Turn here, now there, now another right and—
The graveyard.
All that cold marble crushed his heart and stopped his breathing. There
was no iron fence around the burial park.
He entered silently and bent to touch the first gravestone. His fingers
brushed the name: BIANCA SHERMAN BATES
And the date: BORN, JULY 3, 1882
And below that: R.I.P.
But no date of death.
The clouds covered the moon. He moved on to the next stone.
WILLIAM HENRY CLAY
1885–
R.I.P.
And again, no mortal date.
He brushed a third gravestone and found:
HENRIETTA PARKS
August 13, 1881
Gone to God
But, Cardiff knew, she had not as yet gone to God.
The moon darkened and then took strength from itself. It shone upon a
small Grecian tomb not fifty feet away, a lodge of exquisite
architecture, a miniature Acropolis upheld by four vestal virgins, or
goddesses, beautiful maidens, wondrous women. His heart pulsed. All four
marble women seemed suddenly alive, as if the pale light had awakened
them, and they might step forth, unclad, into the tableau of named and
dateless stones.
He sucked in his breath. His heart pulsed again.
For as he watched, one of the goddesses, one of the forever-beautiful
maidens, trembled with the night chill and shifted out into the
moonlight.
He could not tell if he was terrified or delighted. After all, it was
late at night in this yard of the dead. But she? She was naked to the
weather, or almost; a mist of silk covered her breasts and plumed around
her waist as she drifted away from the other pale statues.
She moved among the stones, silent as the marble she had been but now
was not, until she stood before him with her dark hair tousled about her
small ears and her great eyes the color of lilacs. She raised her hand
tenderly and smiled.
“You,” he whispered. “What are you doing here?”
She replied quietly, “Where else should I be?”
She held out her hand and led him in silence out of the graveyard.
Looking back he saw the abandoned puzzle of names and enigma of dates.
Everyone born, he thought, but none has died. The stones are blank,
waiting for someone to date their ghosts bound for Eternity.
“Yes?” someone said. But her lips had not moved.
And you followed me, he thought, to stop me from reading the gravestones
and asking questions. And what about the absent children, never coming
home?
And as if they glided on ice, on a vast sea of moonlight, they arrived
where a crowd of sunflowers hardly stirred as they passed and their feet
were soundless, moving up the path to the porch and across the porch,
and up the stairs, one, two, three floors until they reached a tower
room where the door stood wide to reveal a bed as bright as a glacier,
its covers thrown back, all snow on a hot summer night.
Yes, she said.
He sleepwalked the rest of the way. Behind him, he saw his clothes, like
the discards of a careless child, strewn on the parquetry. He stood by
the snowbank bed and thought, One last question. The graveyard. Are
there bodies beneath the stones? Is anyone there?
But it was too late. Even as he opened his mouth to question, he tumbled
into the snow.
And he was drowning in whiteness, crying out as he inhaled the light and
then out of the rushing storm, a warmness came; he was touched and held,
but could not see what or who held him, and he relaxed, drowned.
When next he woke, he was not swimming but floating. Somehow he had
leaped from a cliff, and someone with him, unseen, as he soared up until
lightning struck, tore at him in half terror, half joy, to fall and
strike the bed with his entire body and his soul.
When he awoke again, the storm over, and the flying gone, he found a
small hand in his, and without opening his eyes he knew that she lay
beside him, her breath keeping time with his. It was not yet dawn.
She spoke.
“Was there something you wanted to ask?”
“Tomorrow,” he whispered. “I’ll ask you then.”
“Yes,” she said quietly. “Then.”
Then, for the first time, it seemed, her mouth touched his.
CHAPTER 13
He awoke to the sun pouring in through the high attic window. Questions
gathered behind his tongue.
Beside him, the bed was empty.
Gone.
Afraid of the truth? he wondered.
No, he thought, she will have left a note on the icebox door. Somehow he
knew. Go look.
The note was there.
Mr. Cardiff:
Many tourists arriving. I must welcome them.
Questions at breakfast.
Nef.
Far off, wasn’t there the merest wail of a locomotive whistle, the
softest churn of some great engine?
On the front porch, Cardiff listened, and again the faint locomotive cry
stirred beyond the horizon.
He glanced up at the top floor. Had she fled toward that sound? Had the
boarders heard, too?
He ran down to the rail station and stood in the middle of the blazing
hot iron tracks, daring the whistle to sound again. But this time,
silence.
Separate trains bringing what? he wondered.
I arrived first, he thought, the one who tries to be good.
And what comes next?
He waited, but the air remained silent and the horizon line serene, so
he walked back to the Egyptian View Arms.
There were boarders in every window, waiting. “It’s all right,” he
called. “It was nothing.”
Someone called down from above, quietly, “Are you sure?”
CHAPTER 14
Nef was not at breakfast, or lunch, or dinner.
He went to bed hungry.
CHAPTER 15
At midnight the wind blew softly in the window, whispering the curtains,
shadowing the moonlight.
There, far across town, lay the cemetery, immense white teeth scattered
on a meadow of fresh moon-silvered grass.
Four dozen stones dead, but not dead.
All lies, he thought.
And found himself halfway down the boarding house stairs, surrounded by
the exhalations of sleeping people. There was no sound save the drip of
the ice pan under the icebox in the moonlit kitchen. The house brimmed
with lemon and lilac illumination from the candied windows over the
front entrance.
He found himself on the dusty road, alone with his shadow.
He found himself at the cemetery gate.
In the middle of the graveyard, he found a shovel in his hands.
He dug until…
There was a hollow thud under the dust.
He worked swiftly, clearing away the earth, and bent to tug at the edge
of the coffin, at which moment he heard a single sound.
A footstep.
Yes! he thought wildly, happily.
She’s here again. She had to come find me, and take me home. She…
His heartbeat hammered and then slowed.
Slowly, Cardiff rose by the open grave.
Elias Culpepper stood by the iron gate, trying to figure out just what
to say to Cardiff, who was digging where no one should dig.
Cardiff let the spade fall. “Mr. Culpepper?”
Elias Culpepper responded. “Oh God, God, go on. Lift the lid. Do it!”
And when Cardiff hesitated, said, “Now!”
Cardiff bent and pulled at the coffin lid. It was neither nailed nor
locked. He swung back the lid and stared down into the coffin.
Elias Culpepper came to stand beside him.
They both stared down at…
An empty coffin.
“I suspect,” said Elias Culpepper, “you are in need of a drink.”
“Two,” said Cardiff, “would be fine.”
CHAPTER 16
They were smoking fine cigars and drinking nameless wine in the middle
of the night. Cardiff leaned back in his wicker chair, eyes tight shut.
“You been noticing things?” inquired Elias Culpepper.
“A baker’s dozen. When Claude took me on the bread and muffin tour I
couldn’t help but notice there are no signs—anywhere—for doctors. Not
one funeral parlor that I could see.”
“Must be somewhere,” said Culpepper.
“How come not in the phone book yellow pages? No doctors, no surgeons,
no mortuary offices.”
“An oversight.”
Cardiff studied his notes.
“Lord, you don’t even have a hospital in this almost ghost town!”
“We got one small one.”
Cardiff underlined an entry on his list. “An outpatient clinic thirty
feet square? Is that all that ever happens, so you don’t need a big
facility?”
“That,” said Culpepper, “would about describe it.”
“All you ever have is cut fingers, bee-stings, and the occasional
sprained ankle?”
“You’ve whittled it down fine,” said the other, “but that’s the sum.
Continue.”
“That,” said Cardiff, gazing down on the town from the high verandah,
“that tells why all the gravestones are unfinished and all the coffins
empty!”
“You only dug one up.”
“I don’t need to open more. Do I?”
Quietly, Culpepper shook his head.
“Hell, Mr. Culpepper,” said Cardiff. “I’m speechless!”
“To tell the truth,” said Culpepper, “so am I. This is the first time
anyone has ever asked what you’ve been asking. We folks have been so
busy just living, we never figured anyone would come, gather his spit,
grab a spade, and dig!”
“I apologize.”
“Now you’ll want a practical history. I’ll give it to you. Write it
down, Mr. Cardiff, write it down. Over the years, when visitors arrived,
they got bored quick, and left even quicker. We tried to look like every
other town. We put on nice false-front funerals, hearse and all, real
flowers, live organ music, but empty coffins with shut lids, just to
impress. We were going to hold a pretend funeral tomorrow, show off, so
you’d be assured we sometimes die—”
“Sometimes?!” cried Cardiff.
“Well, it has been a while. Cars occasionally run over us. Someone might
fall from a ladder.”
“No diseases, whooping cough, pneumonia?”
“We don’t whoop and we don’t cough. We wear out…slow.”
“How slow?”
“Oh, at last count, just about—”
“How slow?!”
“One hundred, two hundred years.”
“Which?”
“We figure about two hundred. It’s still too early to tell. We’ve only
been at this since 1864, ’65, Lincoln’s time.”
“All of you?”
“All.”
“Nef, too?”
“Wouldn’t lie.”
“But she’s younger than I am!”
“Your grandma, maybe.”
“My God!”
“God put us up to it. But it’s the weather, mostly. And, well now, the
wine.”
Cardiff stared at his empty glass.
“The wine makes you live to two hundred?!”
“Unless it kills you before breakfast. Finish your glass, Mr. Cardiff,
finish your glass.”
CHAPTER 17
Elias Culpepper leaned forward to scan Cardiff’s notepad.
“You got any more doubts, indecisions, or opinions?”
Cardiff mused over his notes. “There don’t seem to be any roaring
businesses in Summerton.”
“A few mice but no buffalo.”
“No travel agencies, just a train station about to sink in the dust.
Main road is mostly potholes. No one seems to leave, and very few
arrive. How in Hades do you all survive?”
“Think.” Culpepper sucked on his pipe.
“I am, dammit!”
“You heard about the lilies of the field. We toil not, neither do we
spin. Just like you. You don’t have to move, do you? On occasion, maybe,
like tonight. But mostly you travel back and forth between your ears.
Yes?”
“My God!” Cardiff cried, clutching his notepad. “Hideaways. Loners.
Recluses. By the scores of dozens. You’re writers!”
“You can say that again.”
“Writers!”
“In every room, attic, broom-closet, or basement, both sides of the
street right out to the edge of town.”
“The whole town, everybody?”
“All but a few lazy illiterates.”
“That’s unheard of.”
“You heard it now.”
“Salzburg, a town full of musicians, composers, conductors. Geneva,
chock-full of bankers, clockmakers, walking wounded ski dropouts.
Nantucket, once anyway, ships, sailors, and whale-widow wives. But this,
this!”
Cardiff jumped up and stared wildly toward the midnight town.
“Don’t listen for typewriters,” advised Culpepper. “Just quiet things.”
Pens, pencils, pads, paper, thought Cardiff. Whispers of lead or ink.
Summer quiet thoughts on summer quiet noons.
“Writers,” murmured Cardiff, spying this house or that, across the
street, “never have to get up and go. And no one knows what color you
are, by mail, or what sex, or how tall or how short. Could be a company
of midgets, a sideshow of giants. Writers. Godfrey Daniel!”
“Watch your language.”
Cardiff turned to stare down at his companion. “But they can’t all be
successful?”
“Mostly.”
“Would I know any of their names?”
“If I told you, but I won’t.”
“A beehive of talent.” Cardiff exhaled. “But how did they all wind up
here?”
“Genes, chromosomes, need. You’ve heard of those little writers’
colonies? Well, this one’s big. We’re soul mates. Similar people. Nobody
laughing at what someone else writes. No alcoholics, however, no bats
out of hell, or wild parties.”
“F. Scott Fitzgerald can’t get in?”
“Better not try.”
“Sounds boring.”
“Only if you lose your pad and pencil.”
“You one of them?”
“In my own quiet way.”
“A poet!”
“Not so loud. Someone might hear.”
“A poet,” Cardiff whispered.
“Mostly haiku. At midnight when I put on my specs and reach for my pen.
Semi-haiku, too many beats.”
“Example?”
Culpepper recited:
Oh, cat that I truly love,
Oh, hummingbird that I madly love.
What are you doing in the cat’s mouth?
Cardiff whooped with delight. “I never could write that!”
“Don’t try. Just do.”
“I’ll be damned. More!”
A pillow of snow by my warm face.
A snowdrift at my touch;
You are gone.
Culpepper quietly reloaded his pipe to cover his embarrassment.
“I don’t recite that one often. Sad.”
To break the quiet, Cardiff said: “How do you writers stay in touch with
the outside world?”
Culpepper stared off into the distance toward the empty train tracks
beyond the silent road.
“I take a truck full of manuscripts to Gila Springs once a month, so we
mail out from where we are not, bring back windfalls of checks,
snowfalls of rejections. The wheat and chaff go into our bank, with its
one teller and one president. The money waits there, in case some day we
have to move.”
Cardiff felt sweat suddenly break out all over his body.
“You got something to say, Mr. Cardiff?”
“Soon.”
“I won’t push.” Culpepper relit his pipe and recited:
A mother remembers her dead son.
Today how far might he have wandered,
My mighty hunter of dragonflies.
“That’s not mine. Wish it were. Japanese. Been around forever.”
Cardiff paced back and forth on the porch and then turned.
“Good grief, it all fits. Writing is the only activity that could
support a town like this, so far off. Like a mail order business.”
“Writing is a mail order business. Anything you want you write a check,
send it off, and before you know it, the Johnson Smith Company in
Racine, Wisconsin, sends you what you need. Seebackoscopes. Gyroscopes.
Mardi Gras masks. Orphan Annie dolls. Film clips from The Hunchback of
Notre Dame. Vanishing cards. Reappearing skeletons.”
“All that good stuff.” Cardiff smiled.
“All that good stuff.”
They laughed quietly together.
Cardiff exhaled. “So, this is a writers’ township.”
“Thinking about staying?”
“No, about leaving.”
Cardiff stopped and put his hand over his mouth as if he had said
something he shouldn’t have said.
“Now what does that mean?” Elias Culpepper almost started up from his
chair.
But before Cardiff could speak, a pale figure appeared on the lawn below
the porch and started to climb the steps.
Cardiff called her name.
By the door the daughter of Elias Culpepper spoke. “When you’re ready,
come upstairs.”
When I’m ready!? Cardiff thought wildly. When I’m ready!
The screen door shut.
“You’ll need this,” said Elias Culpepper.
He held out a last drink, which Cardiff took.
CHAPTER 18
Again, the large bed was a bank of snow on a warm summer night. She lay
on one side, looking up at the ceiling, and did not move. He sat on the
far edge, saying nothing, and at last tilted over and lay his head on
the pillow, and waited.
Finally Nef said, “It seems to me you’ve spent a lot of time in the town
graveyard since you arrived. Looking for what?”
He scanned the empty ceiling and replied.
“It seems to me you’ve been down at that train station where hardly any
trains arrive. Why?”
She did not turn, but said, “It seems both of us are looking for
something but won’t or can’t say why or what.”
“So it seems.”
Another silence. Now, at last, she looked at him.
“Which of us is going to confess?”
“You go first.”
She laughed quietly.
“My truth is bigger and more incredible than yours.”
He joined her laughter but shook his head. “Oh, no, my truth is more
terrible.”
She quickened and he felt her trembling.
“Don’t frighten me.”
“I don’t want to. But there it is. And if tell you, I’m afraid you’ll
run and I won’t ever see you again.”
“Ever?” murmured Nef.
“Ever.”
“Then,” she said, “tell me what you can, but don’t make me afraid.”
But at that moment, far away in the night world, there was a single cry
of a train, a locomotive, drawing near.
“Did you hear that? Is that the train that comes to take you away?”
There was a second cry of a whistle over the horizon.
“No,” he said, “maybe it’s the train that comes, God I hope not, with
terrible news.”
Slowly she sat up on the edge of the bed, her eyes shut. “I have to
know.”
“No,” he said. “Don’t go. Let me.”
“But first…,” she murmured.
Her hand gently pulled him over to her side of the bed.
CHAPTER 19
Sometime during the night, he sensed that he was once more alone.
He woke in a panic, at dawn, thinking, I’ve missed the train. It’s come
and gone. But, no—
He heard the locomotive whistle shrieking across the sky, moaning like a
funeral train as the sun rose over desert sands.
Did he or did he not hear a bag, similar to his own, catapult from a
not-stopping train to bang the station platform?
Did he or did he not hear someone landing like a three-hundred-pound
anvil on the platform boards?
And then Cardiff knew. He let his head fall as if chopped. “Dear God, oh
dear vengeful God!”
CHAPTER 20
They stood on the platform of the empty station, Cardiff at one end, the
tall man at the other.
“James Edward McCoy?” Cardiff said.
“Cardiff,” said McCoy, “is that you?”
Both smiled false smiles.
“What are you doing here?” said Cardiff.
“You might have known I would follow,” said James Edward McCoy. “When
you left town, I knew someone had died, and you’d gone to give him a
proper burial. So I packed my bag.”
“Why would you do that?”
“To keep you honest. I learned long ago you leaned one way, me the
other. You were always wrong, I was always right. I hate liars.”
“‘Optimists’ is the word you want.”
“No wonder I hate you. The world’s a cesspool and you keep swimming in
it, heading for shore. Dear God, where is the shore? You’ll never find
it because the shore doesn’t exist! We’re rats drowning in a sewer, but
you see lighthouses where there are none. You claim the Titanic is Mark
Twain’s steamboat. To you Svengali, Raskolnikov, and Hitler were the
Three Stooges! I feel sorry for you. So I’m here to make you honest.”
“Since when have you believed in honesty?”
“Honesty, currency, and common sense. Never play funhouse slot machines,
don’t toss red-hot pennies to the poor, or throw your landlady
downstairs. Fine futures? Hell, the future’s now, and it’s rotten. So,
just what are you up to in this jerkwater town?”
McCoy glared around the deserted station.
Cardiff said, “You’d better leave on the next train.”
“I got twenty-four hours to steal your story.” McCoy squinted at the
shut sunflowers that lined the road into town. “Lead the way. I’ll
follow and trip over the bodies.”
McCoy hoisted his bag and began to walk, and Cardiff, after a beat or
two, jogged to catch up with him.
“My editor said I’d better come back with a headline—one thousand bucks
if it’s good, three if it’s super.” As they walked, McCoy surveyed the
porch swings motionless in the early morning breeze and the high windows
that reflected no light. “You know, this feels like super.”
Cardiff trudged along, thinking: Don’t breathe. Lie low.
The town heard.
No leaf trembled. No fruit fell. Shadows of dogs lay under bushes, but
no dogs. The grass flattened like the fur on a nervous cat. All was
stillness.
Pleased with the silence he sensed he had caused, McCoy stopped where
two streets intersected, panoplied by trees. He stared at the green
architecture and mused, “I get it.” He dropped his bag, pulled a pencil
from his shirt pocket, which he licked, and began to scribble in a
notepad, pronouncing the syllables as he wrote. “Leftover town.
Stillborn, Nebraska. Remembrance, Ohio. Steamed west in 1880, lost steam
1890. End of the line 1900. Long lost.”
Cardiff suffered lockjaw.
McCoy appraised him. “I’m on the money, right? I can see it in your
face. You came to bury Caesar. I came to stir his bones. You followed
your intuition here; I came thanks to an itching hunch. You liked what
you saw and probably would have gone home and said nothing. I don’t like
what I see, past tense.” He stuck the pencil behind his ear, jammed the
notepad in his pants pocket, and reached down to heft his bag once more.
As if propelled by the sound of his own voice, he continued striding
down Summerton’s streets, proclaiming as he went, “Look at that lousy
architecture, the gimcrack scrimshaw rococo baroque shingles and
hangons. You ever see so many damn scroll-cut wooden icicles? Christ,
wouldn’t it be awful to be trapped here forever, even just two weeks
every summer? Hey, now, what’s this?” He stopped short, looked up.
The sign over the porch front read, EGYPTIAN VIEW ARMS. BOARDING.
McCoy glanced at Cardiff, who stiffened. “This has got to be your digs.
Let’s see.”
And before Cardiff could move, McCoy was up the front steps and inside
the screen door.
Cardiff caught the door before it could slam and stepped in.
Silence. The obsequies over. The dear departed gone.
Even the parlor dust did not move, if there ever had been any dust. All
the Tiffany lamps were dark and the flower vases empty. He heard McCoy
in the kitchen and went to find him.
McCoy stood in front of the icebox, which was opened wide. There was no
ice within, nor any cream or milk or butter and no drip pan under the
box to be drunk by a thirsty dog after midnight. The pantry, similarly,
displayed no leopard bananas or Ceylonese or Indian spices. A river of
quiet wind had entered the house and left with the priceless stuffs.
McCoy muttered, scribbling, “That’s enough evidence.”
“Evidence?”
“Everyone’s hiding. Everything’s stashed. When I leave—bingo!—the grass
gets cut, the icebox drips. How did they know I was coming? Now, I don’t
suppose there’s a Western Union in this no-horse town?” He spied a
telephone in the hallway, picked it up, listened. “No dial tone.” He
glanced through the screen door. “No postman in sight. I am in a big
damn isolation booth.”
McCoy ambled out to sit on the front porch glider, which squealed as if
threatening to fall. McCoy read Cardiff’s face.
“You look like a do-gooder,” he said. “You run around saving people not
worth saving. So what’s so great about this town that’s worth the
Cardiff Salvation Army? That can’t be the whole story. There’s got to be
a villain somewhere.”
Cardiff held his breath.
McCoy pulled out his pad and scowled at it.
“I think I know the name of the villain,” he muttered. “The Department
of—”
He made Cardiff wait.
“—Highways?”
Cardiff exhaled.
“Bingo,” McCoy whispered. “I see the headlines now: ACE REPORTER DEFENDS
PERFECT TOWN FROM DESTRUCTION. Small type: Highway Bureau Insists on
Pillage and Ruin. Next week: SUMMERTON SUES AND LOSES. Ace Reporter
Drowns in Gin.”
He shut his pad.
“Pretty good for an hour’s work, yep?” he said.
“Pretty,” said Cardiff.
CHAPTER 21
“This is gonna be great,” said James Edward McCoy. “I can see it now: my
byline on stories about how Summerton, Arizona, hit the rocks and sank.
Johnstown flood stand aside. San Francisco earthquake, forget it. I’ll
expose how the government destroyed the innocents and plowed their front
lawns with salt. First the New York Times, then papers in London, Paris,
Moscow, even Canada. News junkies love to read about others’
misery—here’s an entire town being strangled to death by government
greed. And I’m going to tell the world.”
“Is that all you can see in this?” said Cardiff.
“Twenty-twenty vision!”
“Look around,” said Cardiff. “It’s a town with no people. No people, no
story. Nobody cares if a town falls if there are no people in it. Your
‘story’ will run for one day, maybe. No book deal, no TV series, no film
for you. Empty town. Empty bank account.”
A scowl split McCoy’s face.
“Son of a bitch,” he murmured. “Where in hell is everyone?”
“They were never here.”
“No one’s here now, but the houses get painted, the lawns get mowed?
They were just here, have to have been. You know that and you’re lying
to me. You know what’s going on.”
“I didn’t till now.”
“And you’re not telling me? So you’re keeping the headlines to yourself
to protect this pathetic little ghost town?”
Cardiff nodded.
“Damn fool. Go on, stay poor and righteous. With you or without you I’m
going to get to the bottom of this. Gangway!”
McCoy lunged down the porch steps, onto the street. He rushed up to the
adjacent house and pulled open the door, stuck his head in, then
entered. He emerged a moment later, slammed the door, and ran on to the
next house, yanked open that screen door, jumped in, came out, his
blood-red visage quoting dark psalms. Again and again he opened and
closed the doors of half a dozen other empty houses.
Finally, McCoy returned to the front yard of the Egyptian View Arms. He
stood there, panting, muttering to himself. As his voice drifted off
into silence, a bird flew over and dropped a calling card on James
Edward McCoy’s vest.
Cardiff stared off across the meadow-desert. He imagined the shrieks of
the arriving trainloads of hustling reporters. In his mind’s eye he saw
a twister of print inhaling the town and whirling it off into nothing.
“So.” McCoy stood before him. “Where are all the people?”
“That seems to be a mystery,” said Cardiff.
“I’m sending my first story now!”
“And how will you do that? No telegraphs or telephones.”
“Holy jeez! How in hell do they live?”
“They’re aerophiles, orchids, they breathe the air. But wait. You
haven’t examined everything. Before you go off half-cocked, there’s one
place I must show you.”
CHAPTER 22
Cardiff led McCoy into the vast yard of motionless stones and flightless
angels. McCoy peered at the markers.
“Damn. There’s plenty of names, but no dates. When did they die?”
“They didn’t,” Cardiff said softly.
“Good God, lemme look closer.”
McCoy took six steps west, four steps east, and came to…
The open grave with a coffin gaping wide, and a spade tossed to one
side.
“What’s this? Funeral today?”
“I dug that,” said Cardiff. “I was looking for something.”
“Something?” McCoy kicked some dirt clods into the grave. “You know more
than you’re telling. Why are you protecting this town?”
“All I know is that I might stay on.”
“If you stay, you cannot tell these people the whole truth—that the
bulldozers are coming, and the cement mixers, the funeral directors of
progress. And if you leave, will you tell them before you go?”
Cardiff shook his head.
“Which leaves me,” said McCoy, “as guardian of their virtues?”
“God, I hope not.” Cardiff shifted by the open grave. Clods fell to drum
the coffin.
McCoy backed off, nervously staring down at the open grave and into the
empty coffin. “Hold on.” A strange look came over his face. “My God, I
bet you brought me here to stop my telephoning out, or even trying to
leave town! You…”
At this, McCoy spun, lost his footing, and fell.
“Don’t!” cried Cardiff.
McCoy fell into the coffin full-sprawled, eyes wide, to see the spade
fall, loosened by accident or thrown in murder, he never knew. The spade
struck his brow. The jolt shook the coffin lid. It slammed shut over his
stunned and now colorless eyes.
The bang of the coffin lid shook the grave and knocked down dirt
showers, smothering the box.
Cardiff stood amazed and in shock, a mile above.
Had McCoy slipped, he wondered, or was he pushed?
His foot dislodged another shower of dirt. Did he hear someone shrieking
beneath the lid? Cardiff saw his shoes kick more dirt down into silence.
With the box now hidden, he backed off, moaning, stared at the tombstone
above etched with someone else’s name, and thought, That must be
changed.
And then he turned and ran, blindly, stumbling, out of the yard.
CHAPTER 23
I have committed murder, Cardiff thought.
No, no. McCoy buried himself. Slipped, fell, and shut the lid.
Cardiff walked almost backward down the middle of the street, unable to
tear his gaze from the graveyard, as if expecting McCoy to appear, risen
like Lazarus.
When he came to the Egyptian View Arms, he staggered up the walk and
into the house, took a deep breath, and found his way to the kitchen.
Something fine was baking in the oven. A warm apricot pie lay on the
pantry sill. There was a soft whisper under the icebox, where the dog
was lapping the cool water in the summer heat. Cardiff backed off. Like
a crayfish, he thought, never forward.
At the bay window he saw, on the vast lawn behind the house, two dozen
bright blankets laid in a checkerboard with cutlery placed, empty plates
waiting, crystal pitchers of lemonade, and wine, in preparation for a
picnic. Outside he heard the soft drum of hooves.
Going out to the porch, Cardiff looked down at the curb. Claude, the
polite and most intelligent horse, stood there, by the empty bread
wagon.
Claude looked up at him.
“No bread to be delivered?” Cardiff called.
Claude stared at him with great moist brown eyes, and was silent.
“Would it be me that needs deliverance?” said Cardiff, as quiet as
possible.
He walked down and stepped into the wagon.
Yes was the answer.
Claude started up and carried him through the town.
CHAPTER 24
They were passing the graveyard.
I have committed murder, Cardiff thought.
And, impulsively, he cried, “Claude!”
Claude froze and Cardiff jumped out of the wagon and rushed into the
graveyard.
Swaying over the grave, he reached down in a terrible panic to lift the
lid.
McCoy was there, not dead but sleeping, having given up, and was now
taking a snooze.
Exhaling, Cardiff spoke down at his terrible enemy, glad that he was
alive.
“Stay there,” he said. “You don’t know it, but you’re going home.” He
dropped the lid gently, taking care to insert a twig in the gap between
top and bottom to allow for air.
He ran back to Claude, who, sensing the visit was over, started off
again at a good clop.
All around them the yards and porches were empty.
Where, Cardiff wondered, has everyone gone?
He had his answer when Claude stopped.
They stood before a large, rather handsome brick building, its entrance
flanked by two Egyptian sphinxes lying supine, half-lioness and
half-god, with faces he could almost name.
Cardiff read these words: HOPE MEMORIAL LIBRARY.
And in small letters beneath that: KNOW HOPE, ALL YE WHO ENTER HERE.
He climbed the library steps to find Elias Culpepper standing before the
great double front doors. Culpepper behaved as if he’d been expecting
the younger man, and motioned at him to sit down on the library steps.
“We’ve been waiting for you,” he said.
“We?” said Cardiff.
“The whole town, or most of it,” said Culpepper. “Where have you been?”
“The graveyard,” said Cardiff.
“You spend too much time there. Is there a problem?”
“Not anymore, if you can help me mail something home. Is there a train
expected anytime soon?”
“Should be one passing through sometime today,” said Elias Culpepper.
“Doubt it’ll stop. That hasn’t happened in…”
“Can it be stopped?”
“Could try flares.”
“I’ve got a package I want sent, if you can stop it.”
“I’ll light the flares,” said Culpepper. “Where’s this package going?”
“Home,” Cardiff said again. “Chicago.”
He wrote a name and address on a page ripped from his notepad, and
handed the piece of paper to Culpepper.
“Consider it done,” said Culpepper. He rose and said, “Now I think you
ought to go inside.”
Cardiff turned and pushed the great library doors and stepped in.
He read a sign above the front counter: CARPE DIEM. SEIZE THE DAY. It
could have also read: SEIZE A BOOK. FIND A LIFE. BIRTH A METAPHOR.
His gaze drifted to find a large part of the town’s population seated at
two dozen tables, books open, reading, and keeping the SILENCE that
other signs suggested.
As if pulled by a single string, they turned, nodded at Cardiff, and
turned back to their books.
The young woman behind the library front desk was an incredible beauty.
“My God,” he whispered. “Nef!”
She raised her hand and pointed, then beckoned for him to follow.
She walked ahead of him and she might well have had a lantern in her
hand to light the dim stacks, for her face was illumination. Wherever
she glanced, the darkness failed and a faint light touched the gold
lettering along the shelves.
The first stack was labeled: ALEXANDRIA ONE.
And the second: ALEXANDRIA TWO.
And the last: ALEXANDRIA THREE.
“Don’t say it,” he said, quietly. “Let me. The libraries at Alexandria,
five hundred or a thousand years before Christ, had three fires, maybe
more, and everything burned.”
“Yes,” Nef said. “This first stack contains all or most of the books
burned in the first fire, an accident.
“This second stack from the second burning, also an accident, has all
the lost books and destroyed texts of that terrible year.
“And the last, the third, contains all the books from the third
conflagration—a burning by mobs, the purposeful destruction of history,
art, poetry, and plays in 455 B.C.
“In 455 B.C.,” she repeated quietly.
“My God,” he said, “how were they all saved, how did they get here?”
“We brought them.”
“How?!”
“We are tomb robbers.” Nef ran her finger along the stacks. “For the
profit of the mind, the extension of the soul, whatever the soul is. We
can only try to describe the mystery. Long before Schliemann, who found
not one but twenty Troys, our ancestors played finders-keepers with the
grandest library in time, one that would never burn, would live forever
and allow those who entered to touch and scan, a chance to run after an
extra piece of existence. This building is absolute proof against fire.
In one form or another, it has traveled from Moses, Caesar, Christ, and
will continue on toward the new Apollo and the Moon that the rocket
chariot will reach.”
“But still,” he said. “Those libraries were ruined. Are these duplicates
of duplicates? The lost are found, but how?”
Nef laughed quietly. “It was a hard task. Down through the centuries, a
book here or there, a play one place, a poem another. A huge jigsaw,
fitted in pieces.”
She moved on in the comfortable twilight spilling through the library’s
tall windows, brushing her fingers over the names and titles.
“Remember when Hemingway’s wife left his novel manuscript on a train,
lost forever?”
“Did he divorce or kill her?”
“The marriage survived for a while. But that manuscript is here.”
He looked at the worn typewriter box labeled: FOOTHILLS; KILIMANJARO.
“Have you read it?”
“We’re afraid to. If it is as fine as some of his work, it would break
our hearts because it must remain lost. If it’s bad, we might feel
worse. Perhaps Papa knew it was best for it to remain lost. He wrote
another Kilimanjaro, with Snows instead.”
“How in hell did you find it?”
“The week it was lost we advertised. Which is more than Papa did. We
sent him a copy. He never replied, and the Snows was published a year
later.”
Again she moved to touch more volumes.
“Edgar Allan Poe’s final poem, rejected. Herman Melville’s last tale,
unseen.”
“How?”
“We visited their deathbeds in their last hours. The dying sometimes
speak in tongues. If you know the language of deliriums you can
transcribe their strange sad truths. We tend them like special guardians
late at night, and summon a last vital spark and listen closely and keep
their words. Why? Since we are the passengers of time, we thought it
only proper to save what might be saved on our passage to eternity, to
preserve what might be lost if neglected, and add some small bit of our
far-traveling and long life. We have guarded not only Troy and its ruins
and sifted the Egyptian sands for wise stones to put beneath our tongues
to clear our speech, but we have, like cats, inhaled the breaths of
mortals, siphoned and published their whispers. Since we have been
gifted with long lives, the least we can do is pass that gift on in
inanimate objects—novels, poems, plays—books that rouse to life when
scanned by a living eye. You must never receive a gift, ever, without
returning the gift twice over. From Jesus of Nazareth to noon tomorrow,
our baggage is the library and its silent speech. Each book is Lazarus,
yes? And you the reader, by opening the covers, bid Lazarus to come
forth. And he lives again, it lives again, the dead words warmed by your
glance.”
“I never thought…,” Cardiff said.
“Think.” She smiled. “Now,” she said, “I believe it’s time for a picnic,
to celebrate we don’t know what. But celebrate we must.”
CHAPTER 25
The picnic was spread waiting on the back lawn of the EGYPTIAN VIEW
ARMS.
“Speech!” someone called.
“I don’t know how to begin,” Cardiff said.
“At the beginning!” There was a gentle laughter.
Cardiff took a deep breath and plunged in.
“As you may know, the State Department of Highways has been measuring
string from Phoenix east and north and from Gallup north and west. The
exact measurements of a new freeway will touch latitude 89 eighty miles
west of longitude 40.”
Someone on the far side of the picnic let his sandwich fall and cried,
“My God, that’s us!”
“No!” someone else cried, and a dozen others whispered, “No!”
“That’s not possible,” someone said.
“Anything,” said Cardiff, quietly, “in government, is possible.”
“They can’t do that,” one of the ladies cried.
“But they can. No freeway in any part of your state has ever been put on
the ballot. The highway men, God listen to that, highway men, are their
own conscience.”
“And you traveled here to warn us?” said Elias Culpepper.
Cardiff blushed. “No.”
“You were going to keep it secret!?”
“I wanted to see your town. I planned nothing. I assumed you all knew.”
“We know nothing,” said Elias Culpepper. “God almighty. You might as
well say Vesuvius is threatening to erupt at our city limits!”
“I must admit,” said Cardiff, “that when I saw your faces, had
breakfast, lunch, and dinner with you, I knew I couldn’t leave and not
tell you.”
“Tell us again,” said Elias Culpepper.
Cardiff looked at Nef, who gave him the merest nod.
“The State Highway Commission…”
Lightning struck. Earthquakes shook. A comet hit the Earth. Cats leaped
off roofs. Dogs bit their tails and died.
And the picnic ground, the sweet grass, was empty.
Sweet Jesus, thought Cardiff, have I done this?
“Fool, idiot, stupid dumb idiot fool,” he muttered.
He opened his eyes and saw Nef standing on a rise of green lawn calling
over to him. “Come into the shade. You’ll die of sunstroke.”
And he went over into the shade.
CHAPTER 26
My God, Cardiff thought, even the sunflowers have turned away. He could
not see their faces, but he was certain they fixed him with a fiery
stare.
“I’m empty,” he said at last. “I’ve told all my secrets. Now, Nef, you
must give me yours.”
“Well,” she said, and began to take sandwiches out of a hamper, to cut
bread and butter it and offer it to him as she spoke.
“Everyone in this town was once somewhere else,” she said. “We came
together one by one. Long, long ago, we knocked elbows in Rome or Paris
or Athens or Dallas or Portland until, very late in time, we found out
that there was a place where we might collect. Sanctuary, Arizona, was
one of the names, but that was foolish. I imagine Summerton’s just as
foolish, but it fits. It has to do with flowers and survival. We all
grew up in Madrid or Dublin or Milwaukee, some in France or Italy. In
the very beginning, a long time ago, there were some children, but as
time passed the children got fewer. It had nothing to do with wine or
flowers, nothing to do with the environment or the families, even though
it seems to have been genetic. I guess you’d call us ‘sports.’ That’s a
scientific term for something that can’t be explained. The Darwinians
said the process was all jumps, hops, genetic leaps, with no links
between. Suddenly, members of a family whose ancestors had lived to
seventy years were living to ninety, a hundred. Others, even longer. But
the peculiar thing, of course, was that there were those of us—young men
and women—who did not much change at all, and then simply did not
change. While all our friends moved on to sickness and old age, we
strange ones stayed behind. It was one long picnic spread over the
entire North American continent and Europe. And we, the lonely ones,
were the exceptions to the rule of ‘Grow up, grow old, and certainly
die.’ For a while, we hardly noticed this peculiar longevity ourselves,
except to note that we felt fine and looked good while our friends
jumped headlong into the grave. We peculiars lingered in mid-spring with
summer always just around the corner, and autumn somewhere far down the
road, not even a rumor. Does any of this make sense?”
Cardiff nodded, fascinated with what she was saying, the flow and beauty
of her telling making it, somehow, believable.
“Most of our meetings were by chance,” she went on. “A trip on a ferry
boat, a voyage on a ship, a descent in an elevator, a collision going
through doors, a place at a table, a passing glance on a
seventeenth-century street, but somewhere in time we gave pause and
asked where we came from, what we were doing, and how old were we, and
saw the lie in each other’s faces.
“‘I am twenty, I am twenty-two, I am thirty,’ we said, at tea, or
drinking in a bar, but the truth was not there. We had been born during
Victoria’s reign, or when Lincoln was shot, or as Henry VIII laid his
queen’s head on the chopping block. It took many years for the truth to
rise, one here, two there, until our real births were revealed. ‘Good
Lord,’ we cried. ‘We are Time’s twins. You ninety-five, yes, and I one
hundred and ten.’ And we searched each other’s face, as in mirrors, and
saw soft-showered April and sun-filled May instead of raining October,
dark November, and Christmas with no lights. We wept. And when the
weeping stopped we compared long-lost childhoods and the bullies who had
tormented us for being different, and not knowing why. Friends abandoned
us when suddenly the friends were fifty and sixty and we still looked
fresh out of high school. Marriages failed and the grave shut out all
the rest. And we were left stranded in a great mausoleum that echoed
with the laughter of school chums now incinerated or, if still alive,
wielding crutches and piloting wheelchairs. Soon we found, by instinct,
that it was best to keep moving, on to new towns to take up new lives,
old souls in new bodies, lying about our past. We were not happy, then.
We became happy. How? The rumor, after centuries, of a new town reached
us. The myth held that a man on horseback crossing a great desert got
off in emptiness, built a hut, and waited for others to arrive. He
placed an ad in a magazine that extolled the young weather, fresh times,
new circumstances. It contained multitudinous hints that might be
unraveled by similar freaks in Oswego and Peoria, fellow lonely ones who
watched the fall of friends all around and heard the earth thunder on
too many coffin lids. They felt their limbs, still as limber as on
graduation day, and wondered about their desolation. They read and
reread the strange travel ad that promised a haven, a new place, as yet
unnamed. A town that was small, but growing. Only twenty-one-year-olds
need apply. Well, there, you see? Hints! No direct pronouncements. But
lonelies everywhere, from Deadfall, Dakota, and Wintershade, England,
felt the hair rise on their necks and packed their bags. Maybe, they
thought, it would be worth the time and travel. And what was once a
roadside bypass became a post office, a Pony Express standby, and then a
jerkwater train stop, where strangers scanned each other’s faces and
found yesterday’s sunrise instead of tomorrow’s midnight. They were
driven by more than birthright. They were driven by one final terrible
fact: at last, none could give or produce children.”
“It came to that?” whispered Cardiff.
“Yes, it finally happened. We lived longer but at a price. We had to be
our own children, having none. So, year by year, strangers got off the
train, one way, or rode up on horseback or walked the long walk and
never looked back. By 1900 Summerton had its crops planted, its gardens
full, its gazebos built, its social life established, and world
communications running out but not in. No radios, no TVs, no newspapers,
well, almost none. There was and is the Culpepper Summerton News, with
not much news, for no one was born and almost no one died. Occasionally
someone fell down a flight of stairs, or off a ladder, but we tend to
mend fast. No cars, so no fatalities. But we were all busy, busy raising
food, socializing, writing, dreaming. And then, of course, there were
romances. For while we could not propagate, we could still enact
passion. A perfect population, assembled from the four corners of
creation, a jigsaw beautifully fitted with no rough edges. Everyone had
a job, some wrote poems, others novels, all got published in far places,
fantasies mainly of cities beyond belief, whose readers thought the
tales mere figments of wild imagination, but we were living it. So there
it is. Here it is. Perfect weather, perfect town, perfect lives. Long
lives. Most of us shook hands with Lincoln, attended the obsequies at
Grant’s tomb, and now…”
“Now?” said Cardiff.
“You are a messenger of doom, come to destroy it all.”
“I am not the message, Nef. I do deliver it, yes.”
“I know,” said Nef, quietly. “But how I wish you could go off and come
back with some better truth.”
“If I could, so help me God, Nef, I’d gladly bring it to you.”
“Go,” she said. “Please. Find it and bring it here.”
But he could only sit on the evergreen grass of eternal summer and let
the tears run down his cheeks.
CHAPTER 27
“And now,” said Nef.
“Now?” said Cardiff.
“I must prove that I do not wish to kill the bearer of bad news. Come.”
And she led him across the lawn where the picnic blankets still lay as
after a storm, tossed and half-furled, and some few dogs had arrived
with the army ants while several cats waited for the beasts to leave,
and Nef walked among them and opened the front door of the Egyptian View
Arms and, ducking his head, blushing, Cardiff stepped in swiftly, but
she was already at the stairs and halfway up before he touched the first
riser, and then they were in her tower room and he looked and saw that
her vast bed had been stripped and the windows thrown open wide with
their wind-tossed curtains and the town clock was striking four in the
afternoon as Nef lifted her arms and a great soft bloom of sheet rose in
a summer cloud over the bed and he seized his half and with her gentled
it down in a field of white over the bed to cover its face. And they
stood back and watched the late afternoon exhale and fill the lace and
blow the curtains inward toward the bed, like a fall of never-arriving
snow, and there was a glass of lemonade on either bedside table, and his
questioning look caused her to laugh and shake her head. Only lemonade,
nothing more.
“Because,” she said, “I will inebriate you.”
It was a long fall to the bed. She arrived an eternity later. He sank
under white sheets of snow and recalled his whole life, in a whiplash of
memory.
“Say it,” he heard her cry, a long way off.
“Oh, Nef, Nef,” he cried. “I love you!”
It was twilight. The lace curtains continued to move in a white snowfall
above them. The Chinese wind crystals on the porch chimed. They lay hand
in hand, dear chums most dearly met, eyes shut, drinking the silence,
dressed only by the late sunlight and the weather, and at last she said:
“How would you like to live a few hundred years? Or,” she added,
“forever, whichever comes first.”
“Forever, I think,” he said.
“Good.” Her hand tightened on his. “Trust me?”
“Yes. No. Yes.”
“Which?”
“I’m confused,” he said. “I’m not one of your miraculous longtime
historical ‘sports.’ Can you make me one?”
“You came to us, remember.”
“But for two reasons. To see your town before it was buried under
cement. And I was carrying the news of your destruction, which you
didn’t know, and I had to tell. Two reasons.”
“Three,” she said. “There was a sense in you, as in most of us, like a
homing pigeon, a thing printed in your blood or behind your face, a
ghost in your head. And why not? A ghost of a need, just as our ghosts
moved us, let us recognize each other when we met on street corners or
in passing trains. Your third reason for coming here was as natural as
breathing. You came here looking for the right place, but you couldn’t
admit it, so you gave other reasons. You’re like us, or almost like us.
You have the inclination, the grammar printed in your genes, to let you
live to four times the age you are now. We can only encourage you with
our company and, of course, the weather, food, and wine.”
“Is the fountain of youth bottled, then?”
“No, no.” She laughed quietly. “There is no such medicine, no cure. We
only supplement what God gave you first. Some people never have colds,
never break bones, don’t get headaches, drink without getting hangovers,
climb mountains without having to stop to rest, remain passionate beyond
belief, all God-given. Our gift from Darwin’s God or God’s Darwin is
simply being part of a moveable feast of inheritance moving upstream
against death. Oh, Lord.” She laughed quietly. “How can moveable feasts
swim upstream? But you know my meaning. You refuse that dark tide that
sinks down into night. Otherwise you would not be here, listening to a
fool.”
“Beloved fool, crazed lady, beautiful lunatic,” he murmured.
“Now, let me give you the final explanation for myself and all the
friends whom you have met here. The great ‘medicine’ was finding that we
were alive and loving it. We have celebrated every day of our lives. The
celebration, the exhilaration, of worshipping the gift, has kept us
young. Does that sound impossible? By simply knowing you’re alive and
looking at the sun and enjoying the weather and speaking it every moment
of your existence, this ensures our longevity. We live every moment of
our existence to the fullest, and that is a superb medicine. In that way
we refuse the darkness. Now think of what I’ve said and tell me about
your future.”
He lay back and scanned the ceiling for answers. “Good grief!” he said.
“I don’t know. I’ve got obligations back home. Many friends. Mother and
father both still alive. A woman I’ve been almost engaged to for two
years—two years—think about it! I’ve been dragging my feet, taking
advantage, typical male. So many loose ends, knots to be tied, goodbyes
to be said. I’ve just started thinking and don’t know what to think. I
know that I love this town, these people, and you. God, I’m in the midst
of love and am afraid to fall further. It’s too much in a few days.”
She waited and saw an outline of her future on the ceiling, also. “I
will not be the cat on your chest that inhales the air you need to
breathe,” she said. “But you must decide. And I have saved one final
thing for last. If you stay you will be in many ways the center of our
existence. You will definitely be the center of mine. Because, as you
well know, there have been no children born in this town for a long,
long while.”
“And soon,” he put in at last, “the first new child must be born and
someone must be the father. Perhaps that father is me.”
“Perhaps you already are.” She placed her hands upon her stomach, as if
trying to sense a presence. “Perhaps you are.”
“That would be quite a responsibility,” he said.
“So,” she said, “I’ve put a big burden on you. I must let you go and
hope that you will return. But you must decide soon. We won’t be here
much longer, soon the town will be gone. We’re leaving.”
“Is that possible?”
“Yes. It’s happened many times before, before Summerton even existed. We
carry our homes in our heads. All across country, from Providence to
Kansas to points farther west. If we can’t save this town, we’ll burn it
and scatter the ashes. We won’t be revealed again. The bullies must
never know we exist.”
“Oh God,” he whispered. “It is a burden. Let me sleep. Sometimes in
dreams I find answers.”
“Sleep then,” she said.
“You,” he said. “Not the weather, not the genetics, you, dear Nef,” he
paused, “are my fountain of youth.”
“Let me make you young again,” she said.
And sealed his mouth with hers.
CHAPTER 28
He slept and he dreamed.
He was on the train, going east, and then suddenly he was in Chicago,
and even more suddenly, he was in front of the Art Institute and was
going up the stairs and through the corridors to stand before the great
Sunday in the Park painting.
A woman was standing by the painting and she turned and it was his
fiancée.
As he watched, she grew older, aging before his eyes, and she said to
him, “You’ve changed.”
He said, “No, I haven’t changed at all.”
“Your face is different. You’ve come to say goodbye.”
“No, just to see how you are,” he said.
“No, you’ve come to say goodbye.”
And as he watched, she grew even older and he felt very small, standing
in front of the painting and trying to think of something to say.
Quite suddenly she was gone.
He walked out of the building and there at the bottom of the stairs were
seven or eight of his friends.
As he watched, they grew older and they said the same things that she
had said.
“You’ve come to say goodbye.”
“No,” he insisted. “No, I haven’t done that.”
Then he turned and ran back into the building, a young man suddenly old
among old paintings.
And then he awoke.
CHAPTER 29
He sat for a long while listening to the wind howl in the chimney and
the rain funnels outside.
The old house creaked down into a deep swell of night then backed up and
over, out of sight of land and light.
Rats practiced graffiti on the walls and spiders played harps so high
that only the hairs inside his ears heard and quivered.
How much loss, how much gain? he wondered. How much leave, and how much
remain?
What to decide? he thought.
All right, he called into himself. What? Which?
Not a stir of dark in his head. Not an echo.
Just a whisper: Sleep.
And he slept again and put out the light behind his eyes.
He heard a locomotive whistle across his dreams.
The train was gliding, rushing in the night, taking the curves under the
moon, hitting the long straight-aways, tossing dust, scattering sparks,
laying out echoes, and he was atilt and adream and somehow the familiar
words came back in his head:
One kiss and all time’s your dominion
One touch and no death can be cold.
One night puts off graveyard opinion
One hour and you’ll never grow old.
Drink deep of the wine of forever
Drink long of eternity’s stuff
Where everyman’s learned and clever,
And two billion loves not enough.
He cried out in his dream. No! And then again, Oh God, yes.
And some final few words spelled his dreams:
Somewhere a band is playing,
Playing the strangest tunes,
Of sunflower seeds and sailors,
Who tide with the strangest moons.
He was waking now. His mouth sighed:
Somewhere a band is playing
Listen, O, listen, that tune?
Learn it and you’ll dance on forever
In June and yet June and more…June.
The train was not far off now. It was rounding some hills. The sun was
rising and he knew he had changed his mind.
He looked out at a sunrise that was bloody, a town filled with farewell
light, and a weather that was so strange he would not forget it for a
thousand days.
He saw his face in the bathroom mirror as he shaved, and the eyes looked
immensely sad.
He came down to breakfast and sat before the mound of hotcakes and did
not eat.
Nef, across from him, saw what he had seen in the mirror and sat back in
her chair.
“Have you been thinking?” she asked.
He took a deep breath. Up to this very moment he didn’t know what would
come from his mouth.
“Stay,” she said, before he could speak.
“I wish that I could.”
“Stay.”
And here she reached and took his hand.
And it was a warm hand and his own was cold. She seemed a goddess,
bending to reach into his tomb and help him out.
“Please.”
“Oh God,” he cried. “Oh Christ, let me be!” He wept inside. “You don’t
understand. I’m not made to not grow old.”
“How can you know?”
“Each of us knows. I was born to live and die at seventy. Then I will
really be filled up. The fire of life, the good stuff, goes straight up
the chimney. The sins, the sadness, whatever, stays like soot on the
chimney walls. One can gather only so much darkness. I’ve collected too
much. How do you knock the soot off the walls inside your soul?”
“With a chimney sweep,” she said. “Let me sweep and knock those walls
until you laugh. I can, if you let me.”
“I won’t allow it.”
“No,” she said, quietly. “I don’t suppose you can. Oh, God, I might cry
now. But I won’t. Goodbye.”
“I’m not going yet.”
“But I am. I can’t watch you go. Come back someday.”
“Do you think I’ll never come back?”
She nodded, eyes shut.
“I’m sorry,” he said. “It’s so hard. I don’t know if I’m ready to live a
hundred and thirty years. I wonder if anyone is or can be. It’s just,”
he said, “it sounds so…lonely. Leaving everyone behind. Coming to the
day when the last friend goes into the graveyard.”
“You’ll make new friends.”
“Yes, but there are no friends like the old ones. You can’t replace
them.”
“No. You can’t.”
She looked at the door.
“If you go, and you do decide to come back, to try and find us, don’t
wait too long.”
“Or it won’t work? I know. I’ll be too old. Must I decide before
I’m…fifty?”
“Just come back to us,” she said.
And suddenly her chair was empty.
CHAPTER 30
At the train station, there were sunflowers out on the track. Someone
had been there ahead of him and if it was Elias Culpepper, he never
knew.
The train stopped this time, and he got on and as he bought a ticket
from the conductor he asked, “Do you remember me?”
The man looked at his face intently, scowled, and looked again and said,
“Can’t say I do.”
And the train gathered steam and chugged away from the station and
Summerton, Arizona, was left behind.
CHAPTER 31
The train flew across flat corn lands, over the horizon, by the lake and
to the great turbulent city next to the lake, and he was running up the
steps of the museum and walking among paintings to sit before the
endlessly intriguing Seurat, where the Sunday strollers stood still in
an eternal park.
Now beside him sat Laura, glancing back and forth from the green park to
him, stunned and questioning.
At last she said, “What have you done to your face?”
“My face?” he said.
“It’s changed,” she said.
“I didn’t change it.”
“What is it, then?”
“Things. Things changed it.”
“Can you change it back?”
“I’ll try.”
And then, as in the dream, but now in reality, he walked down the steps
of the museum and all of his friends were waiting at the bottom of the
stairs.
There were Tom and Pete and Will and Sam and all the rest and they said,
“Let’s go out for a long dinner.”
He said, “No, I haven’t the time.”
“You’ve only just said hello,” they said.
“It’s not easy,” he said. “I’ve known you all for years. But, I’ve
changed. And now I’ve got to go.”
He looked back up and at the top of the stairs stood Laura. A single
tear rolled down her cheek as she stared at his so-familiar yet
oh-so-changed face.
He smiled, and turned away and walked down the street toward the
railroad station.
CHAPTER 32
The train came out of the east and without thinking of time or place,
glided slowly past a spot that was marked only by dust, wind, cacti, a
scatter of leaves, and a profusion of ticket-punch confetti that
celebrated on the air and settled when the train was gone.
Meanwhile, a familiar suitcase skidded to a halt on the remains of a
ramshackle station platform, a few surfboards on a tide of sand,
followed by a man in a wrinkled summer suit who tumbled out like an
acrobat, shouting with pride when he landed, swaying but intact.
“Damn, I did it!”
He picked up his flimsy suitcase and stared around at desolation, wiped
his brow, and looked toward the end of the station platform where the
mail catcher stood. He saw a white envelope in its steel holding arm and
went to pluck it from the equipment’s grasp. On the front of the
envelope he saw his name. He looked around, studying thirty thousand
acres of blowing dust, and no roads leading in or out of the desolation.
“Well,” he whispered, “I’ve returned. So…”
He opened the envelope and read:
“My dear James. So you’ve come back. You had to! A lot has happened
since you went away.”
He paused and regarded the empty desert where Summerton, Arizona, once
had stood.
He returned to the letter:
“When you read this, we will be gone. There will be nothing left but
sand and a few footprints soon to be blown away by the wind. We did not
wait for the arrival of the machines and their operators. We pulled up
our roots and vanished. Have you heard of those orchards that once
thrived near certain small California towns? As the small towns grew
into big cities, the orange trees mysteriously disappeared. And yet,
passing motorists who glance off toward the mountains will see that
somehow those orchards have drifted or blown to settle and take root in
the foothills, green and flourishing, far from the gasoline stampede.
“Well, my dear James, that is us. We are like those orchards. We’ve
heard, through the years, late in the night, the great boa constrictor,
the terrible endless snake of concrete rushing upon us, nearly
soundless, no men swearing or shouting or revving tractor and truck
engines, but just a terrible oiled hiss, the sound of reptiles
sidewinding the grass or sifting the sand, all by itself, no men
guiding, no one riding its loops and folds, a destination to itself,
mindless but drawn by body warmth, the heat of people. And so, drawn by
that warmth, as reptiles are, it came seeking to disturb our sleep,
evict us from our homes. All this we imagined in our dreams, long before
you arrived with your awful burden of news. So do not let this weigh too
heavily on your soul. We already knew this day was coming; it was only a
matter of time.
“Years back, dear James, we began to prepare for the death of our town
and the exodus of our people. We brought in hundreds of giant wooden
wheels and a plentiful supply of heavy timbers and iron fastenings to
bind them together. The wheels lay waiting on the edge of town for years
along with the timbers drying in the sun.
“And then the deadfall trumpet blew, to tell it with your humor, at the
picnic of the Apocalypse and you saw the faces before you pale with each
new revelation. Once in mid-speech I thought you might back off, break,
and run, panicked by our panic. Yet you stayed on. Finished, I thought
you might fall and die so you could not witness our deaths.
“And when you looked up we were gone.
“We knew you were sick at heart, so I gave you what medicine I had, my
attention and my pitiful words. And when you left on the noon train,
leaping on long before it stopped, we looked at all those iron and
wooden wheels beyond the city, and the platform timbers on which we
imagined our houses, barns, and orchards transported so far off that no
one would suspect this place had once known a life and now would know no
more.
“You have seen, have you not, those solitary parades, single houses
hoisted up on wooden plates and pulled like toys along the streets to
empty lots to be replanted while the old sites turned to dust? Multiply
that by three hundred homes and witness a parade of pachyderms, an
entire town gliding toward the foothills, followed by the orchard trees.
“It is all quite impossible. Yet, in times of war, think of the
preparations, the blueprints, the final accomplishments, thousands of
ships, tens of thousands of tanks and guns, more tens of thousands of
rifles, bullets, millions of iron helmets, tens of millions of shirts
and jackets. How complicated but how necessary when war shouted and we
ran. How much simpler our task to uproot a town, to run and rebirth it
with wheels.
“In time, our fevers turned into a festival of triumph instead of a
funeral march. We were forced on by the imagined thunder, the
threatening hiss, of that new road beyond the eastern range. At night we
could hear the road coming toward us full steam, rushing to catch us
before we vanished.
“Well, the purveyors of concrete and movers of earth did not catch us.
On the final day of our escape there remained, where you stand, the
ruined station surrounded by a jungle of orange and lemon trees. These
were the last to go, a beautiful excursion of softly scented orchards
that drifted, four abreast, across the desert to nourish our newly
hidden town.
“There you have it, dear James. We moved and left no pebble, no stone,
no basement larder, no graveyard tombstone. All, all, all of it was
transported.
“And when the highway arrives, what will they find?
Was there ever a Summerton, Arizona, a courthouse, a town hall, a picnic
ground, an empty school? No, never.
Look to the dust.
“I will post this letter on the station platform mail-loop in the hope
that it will reach you, if you should return. Somehow I know you will
come back. I can feel your touch on this envelope even as I sign and
seal it.
“When you finish reading this, dear friend and lover, consign it to the
weather.”
And below this was her signature: Nef.
He tore the letter in quarters and then quarters of quarters, and
quarters again, and loosed the confetti into the air.
Now, he thought, which way?
He squinted at the northern rim of desert where lay a length of low
half-green hills. He imagined the orchards.
There, he thought.
He had taken but one step when he looked back.
Like an old brown dog, his suitcase lay on the dust-blown station
platform.
No, he thought, you’re another time.
The luggage lay, waiting.
“Stay,” he said.
The luggage stayed.
He walked on.
CHAPTER 33
It was twilight when he reached the first row of orange trees.
It was deepening twilight when he saw the familiar crowds of sunflowers
in each yard and the sign, EGYPTIAN VIEW ARMS, swaying above the
verandah.
The sun was almost gone as he walked up the last sidewalk, mounted the
porch steps, stood before the screen door, and pressed the doorbell. It
chimed quietly. A slender shadow appeared on the hall stair.
“Nef,” he said at last, quietly.
“Nef,” he said, “I’m home.”
LEVIATHAN ’99
“RADIO DREAM”
In 1939, when I was nineteen, I fell in love with the radio dramas of
Norman Corwin.
I met him later, when I was twenty-seven, and he encouraged me to write
my Martian stories, thus causing The Martian Chronicles to be born.
Along through the years my dream was to one day have Norman Corwin
direct one of my radio dramas.
When I returned from my year in Ireland, after writing the screenplay
for John Huston’s Moby Dick, I was still deeply under the influence of
Herman Melville and his leviathan whale. Simultaneously I was still
under the spell of Shakespeare, who had entered my life when I was in
high school.
After I’d been home from Ireland for a while, I began to consider taking
the Melville mythology and placing it in outer space.
NBC had recently encouraged Norman Corwin and me to collaborate on a
one-hour radio drama. When I finished my first script of Leviathan ’99,
about spaceships instead of sailing ships, mad astronaut captains
instead of seafaring captains, and the blinding white comet replacing
the great white whale, I turned in the script to Norman, who then sent
it on to NBC.
At that time television was increasing in popularity, diminishing radio,
and NBC responded to my script by saying, “Can you break this down into
three-minute segments, which we can broadcast over a period of days?”
Stunned, Norman and I withdrew the script and I sent it to BBC Radio in
London, who produced it, with Christopher Lee playing the lead of the
insane captain of the spaceship Cetus.
The radio production was excellent, but of course my dream of having
something produced and directed for radio by Corwin still remained
unborn. Suffering from what I now call my “delusions of Shakespeare,” I
dared to double the length of my Leviathan ’99 script and staged it as a
play at a Samuel Goldwyn studio soundstage in the spring of 1972.
Unfortunately, adding an additional forty pages to the script destroyed
my original intent. The essential story was lost. The critics’ reviews
were unanimous in their vitriol.
In the years that followed I produced Leviathan ’99 here and there,
gradually whittling away extraneous pages in an attempt to get it back
somewhere near the original one-hour version done for radio.
Thirty years later this novella is my final effort to focus and
revitalize what began as a radio dream for Norman Corwin. Whether or not
it deserves to appear in this incarnation is for you to decide.
 
DEDICATED WITH
 GREAT ADMIRATION
to Herman Melville
CHAPTER 1
Call me Ishmael.
Ishmael? In this year 2099 when strange new ships head beyond the stars
instead of merely toward them? Attack the stars instead of fearing them?
A name like Ishmael?
Yes.
My parents flew with the first brave ones to Mars. Turned less than
brave, gone sick for Earth, they returned home. Conceived on that
journey, I was born in space.
My father knew his Bible and recalled another outcast who wandered dead
seas long years before Christ.
And I being, at that time, the only child fleshed and delivered forth in
space, how better to name me than as my father did.
And he did indeed call me…Ishmael.
Some years ago I thought I would ride all the seas of wind that roam
this world. Whenever it is a damp November in my soul, I know it is high
time to brave the skies again.
So I soared up among bird cries, bright kites, and thunderheads on a
Saturday, late summer in this year of 2099, borne upon my own jet-packet
power. I flew over and away toward Cape Kennedy in my wild journey hung
upon the air, a fledgling bird among the memories of old da Vinci’s
antique aircraft dreams. I was warmed by the real fire of great birds of
steel, and felt the floodgates of the vast and waiting universe swing
open my soul.
There were great concussions at a distance: the furnace heat of Kennedy
and its thousands of rockets, burning in towers all about. When the
fires died at last, only a simple wind whispered.
Then, quickly and calmly, I descended into town, where a river flowed
for me to walk upon, a moving sidewalk.
Shadows stirred all about me as I glided through architectural arches
and doors. Where was I going? Not to a cold metal barracks for tired
spacemen, no, but a beautiful, quietly programmed, machined Garden of
Eden. I was to attend an academy for astronauts to train for a great
voyage beyond the stars, a mission about which as of yet I knew nothing.
Such a place is a world between: part meadow for mind, part gymnasium
for flesh, and part theological seminary, reaching ever skyward in its
thoughts. For does space not have the look of a vast cathedral?
So I walked among shifting shadows and entered the reception foyer of
the school’s dormitory. I registered by pressing my hand to an identity
panel, which read my sweaty prints like some modern witch of palmistry,
and instantaneously chose my roommate for my coming mission.
There was a buzz, a hum, a bell, and a voice—female, sibilant,
mechanical—came from somewhere above: “Ishmael Hunnicut Jones;
twenty-nine years; height, five-foot-ten; eyes, blue; hair, brown; bone
frame, light. Please attend: floor one, room nine. Cubicle roommate,
Quell.”
And I repeated, “Quell.”
“Quell?” another voice cried behind me. “My God, that’s terrible.”
Yet another voice added, “God help you, Mr. Jones.”
I turned to find three astronauts of varying sizes and demeanors, all
some years older than me, facing me, holding drinks. One was held out to
me.
“Take this, Ishmael Jones,” said the first man, who was tall and thin.
“You’ll need it if you’re going upstairs to meet that monster,” he said.
“Drink up.”
“But first,” said the second, holding out his hand to stay my arm, “how
do you fly, shallow or deep?”
“Why, deep, I think,” I said. “Deep space.”
“By the timid mile or the great light-year?”
“Light-year, yes,” I thought, then said.
“You may drink with us, then.”
The third man, who had been silent to this point, spoke up. “I’m John
Redleigh. This fellow here,” with a nod toward the tall man, “is Sam
Small. And he,” indicating the remaining man, “is Jim Downs.”
And so we drank. Small declared, “We give you permission to share our
space, and also with God’s permission. Do you go to unravel a comet’s
tail?”
“I think I do.”
“Have you searched for comets before?”
“Now’s my time.”
“Well said. Look there.”
The three men turned and nodded toward a vast video screen across the
reception hall. As if aware of our regard, it pulsed to life, and
displayed an immense photo of a blinding white comet pulling planets in
its wake.
“The lovely destroyer of the universe,” said Small. “The eater of the
sun.”
“Can comets do that?” I asked.
“That, and more. Especially that one.”
Downs said, “Why, if God should manifest here, He’d come as a comet. Are
you one for jumping down the throat of such a holy presence, boy, and
dancing in its bright guts?”
“I am,” I said, reluctantly, “if it should be absolutely inescapable.”
“Then let’s drink to him, aye, men? Let’s drink to young Ishmael
Hunnicut Jones.”
At which moment I heard a faint electronic buzz, a pulse, at some
distance. I listened, and the buzz grew louder with each pulse, as if it
was coming nearer.
“That,” I said. “What’s that?”
“That?” said Redleigh. “That sound like a scourge of locusts in flight?”
I nodded.
“A scourge of locusts?” said Small. “That’s a fine way to refer to our
captain.”
“Captain?” I said. “Who is he?”
Redleigh said, “Let it be for now, Mr. Jones. You’d best get to your
room and meet up with Quell. My God, yes, go meet Quell.”
“From beyond the great Andromeda Nebula, he is,” Downs said, in a
confidential tone. “Tall, huge, immense, and…”
“A spider,” the first mate interjected.
“Yes, yes,” Downs continued. “A vast, tall, giant green spider.”
“But…,” said Small, frowning slightly at his companions, “most
benevolent. You will like him, Mr. Jones.”
And I replied, “I will?”
Redleigh said, “Get along. We’ll meet again. Go meet your spider
roommate. Good luck.”
I tipped back my glass to take a last swallow. And then I turned, eyes
shut, and said to myself, Luck. My God!
I touched a button beside a door panel that slid open, and I walked
along a dimly lit corridor till I came to room number 9. I touched the
identity pad and the door glided open wide.
But wait, I said to myself. I can’t go in. Look at my hands. Great God,
they’re shaking.
I stood there, unmoving. My roommate was inside, I knew. He had come
from a far world and was a giant spider, or so they had said. Hell, I
thought, step in.
I took three steps into the room and froze.
For in the far corner of the cubicle there was a huge shadow. Something
was there, but not there.
“It can’t be,” I whispered to myself. “It simply can’t be.”
“A spider,” something whispered from the far side of the room.
The large shadow trembled.
I flinched back into the doorway.
“And,” the whisper continued, “a shadow of a spider? No. Stand still.”
I stood still as commanded and watched as the room was illuminated and
the shadow fell away and there before me was a great figure, a creature
some seven feet tall and colored the most peculiar shade of green.
“Well,” came the whisper again.
I replied as steadily as I could. “What can I say?”
“Anything,” came the whisper.
“Once,” I replied, “I went to see Michealangelo’s David. It was tall. I
circled it.”
“And?”
“You look to be at least as big around as that great work.”
I moved forward and began to circle the creature, which didn’t move. I
was, nevertheless, trembling.
The shadows continued to melt, and the shape of the creature became more
apparent.
“Quell,” came the whisper again. “That is my name. I have come a long
way, some ten million miles and five light-years. Here on your world,
judging by your size, I’d say your god has just one half-cracked eye
awake. On our world, God jumped with a shout of creation, thus our great
height.”
And the creature stood, even taller.
I stared at the face and said, “You—your mouth hardly moves.”
The thing named Quell replied, “But my thoughts move as do yours. So,”
said the creature, “tell me, Jack, would you slay the giant?”
“I—” I stammered.
“I read the beanstalk in your mind.”
“Damn!” I cried. “Forgive me,” I said. “This is my first meeting with a
telepath.”
“Let me save you from damnation,” said my roommate. “Once more, my name
is Quell. And yours?”
“You know my name,” I said. “You read minds.”
“But out of politeness,” Quell replied, “I pretend otherwise.”
The great creature reached down with one of his appendages. I put
forward my hand, and we touched.
“Ishmael Hunnicut Jones,” I said.
“Well,” said Quell. “That name has traveled out of your Bible and into
this age of space.”
“Which is much the way you’ve come,” I said.
“Five light-years off,” said Quell. “I was in deep freeze for five whole
years, as cold as death. I slept the time away. It is good to be awake
again. Am I not strange?”
“Oh, no,” I said.
“Oh, yes,” said Quell, with something like a laugh. “If thoughts fly, I
catch them. That must be strange to you. And you must also be thinking
that I have too many eyes, too many ears, far too many fingers, greenish
skin—certainly strange. And yet I look at you and see that you have only
two eyes, two tiny ears, five little fingers on each of only two hands.
So then we are both—look at us—quite amusing. And both, finally…human.”
“Yes,” I said, seeing the truth in this. “Oh yes, that is human.”
Quell was provoked to some sort of humor, for he went on and said, “So
now, Ishmael, shall I grind your bone to make my bread, or shall we be
friends?”
I flinched, prepared to back off, but I caught myself and laughed
instead, and said, “Friends, yes friends, I think.”
And Quell repeated, “Friends.”
Later we left our cubicle and went exploring, down into the lower levels
of the immense academy.
We walked among the philosophical robots who sat silhouetted among
firefly lights to speak in tongues from ancient times.
“Plato,” I said. “Aristotle,” I went on. “Behold us. What do you see?”
And the Plato robot said, “Two terrible and fine, ugly and beautiful
children of nature.”
And Quell asked, “Ah, but what is nature?”
Socrates answered, sparks showering, “God surprising himself with odd
miracles of flesh.”
And Aristotle, a strange little plastic robot, continued: “And theirs is
nothing odder or miraculous, then.”
Quell reached out and touched my forehead with one of his long, finely
tufted finger-legs and said, “Ishmael.”
I responded warmly, and touched the downy chest of my new friend.
“Quell, from the far islands of the great Andromeda Nebula. Quell.”
“We shall study together,” said Quell.
“Listen together, learn together, explore together,” I added.
And we did indeed listen to the voice of our robot philosopher teachers,
who continued to speak in tongues various and strange during the next
days, weeks, and months of our training. No one told us where we’d be
going, what would be asked of us, or how long we would remain
Earth-bound in these vast caverns of learning.
But finally the day came that the robot instructors’ talk, their babble,
their murmurs, faded. We arrived at the lecture hall one morning and
everything was still. On the video screen were our names, and the words,
“Orders received. Report for duty.”
Quell observed, “Our studies appear to be at an end.”
“If so,” I said, “our life begins. Let us find our rocket.”
We returned to our room, where our orders were awaiting us. We collected
our gear and, donning our jet-packs, rose into the air and flew. The
clouds gave way, the birds parted, and at last we landed at the great
launching area of Cape Kennedy. We were surrounded by skyscraper
gantries, gleaming rockets, the persistent buzz of intense activity.
I stared around me, stunned by the immense size of it all.
“Look, Quell, there, and there! Rockets! At least two dozen. Listen to
the names: Apollo 149, Mercury 77, Jupiter 215. And there…”
Quell finished for me. “The Cetus 7.”
I stared at the gleaming cylinder, towering above all the other craft.
“The largest interstellar ship ever built,” I said, in awe.
Quell mused, “I wonder if, in their dreams, your Bach and Beethoven ever
built such as these?”
A voice broke our reverie. “They did, oh yes they did.”
We turned to find an old man in a faded astronaut’s suit emerging from
the shadow of a gangway. He spoke, saying simply, “Hello, friends.”
Quell must have scanned the stranger’s mind, for he replied, “We are no
friends of yours.”
The old man chuckled mirthlessly and continued. “You’re quick to judge
me, telepath. Be quicker still. Is the Cetus 7 to be your ship?”
“It is,” I replied.
The old man groaned. “Ah, you tread the rim of the Abyss. Pull back, if
you know what’s good for you.”
Quell uttered a curse from his far world and pulled at my elbow. “Let’s
go, Ishmael. No need to listen to this one’s false warnings.”
The old man pursued us. “You, young man, do you know that spaceship’s
captain?”
“Not eye to eye,” I said, turning back, curious.
“Eye to eye! My God, you’ve touched the nerve. For when you meet him, do
not look into his eyes. Be warned—he has none.”
“None?” I asked. “Blind?”
“No, stricken’s more the word. Burnt blind in space some years ago. Ah,
but you knew it,” the old man said, turning to Quell.
“No, I did not,” said Quell, tugging at my arm again. “And we’ll hear no
more from you.”
But the old man would not be silenced. “You’ve already heard it, my
friend, for you have just read the whole inside of my mind. You’ve seen.
Now tell your young friend what you’ve learned. Tell him what’s in
store.”
I shook off Quell’s hand and stood waiting.
The old astronaut came closer and spoke very clearly. “What burnt the
captain blind? Where? When? How? You may well ask. Was he a priest of
space, chasing God, and God spun and struck darkness at him in one blow?
Is your captain all in one smooth piece, or do the ragged edges show
where he was sewn back up? Does midnight still peek out through those
raw holes the doctors could not mend? Was he born an albino, or did
terror bleach him like a terrible snow?”
I turned to look at Quell to see how he was taking all this, and the
immense shadow that was Quell trembled in the sunlight but would not
give answer.
The old astronaut, triumphant, moved yet closer.
“Now hear this. Aboard that ship, far out in space, there’ll come a time
when you see land—a world on the horizon—where there is no land, find
time where there is no time; when ancient kings will reflesh their bones
and reseat their crowns. Then, oh then, ship, ship’s captain, ship’s
men, all, all will be destroyed! All save one.”
My hands were fists. I stepped toward the old man in anger, but he
backed off to finish.
“Believe me. The Cetus 7 is no fair ship. It is its captain’s. And the
captain is forever lost.” And finally he turned and started to walk
away.
“Wait,” I cried. “Hold on. What is your name?”
The old man paused, as if searching for an answer.
“Elijah. Name’s Elijah. Good morning to you, friends, morning.”
He spread his arms and, a moment later, where he had been was darkness.
Quell and I stood, abandoned, as a swift shadow passed over us, and the
voice came one more time from above, fading, “Morning, morning.”
Before either of us could say a word, there came an immense sound of
thunder as a rocket, perhaps five miles distant, took off shuddering,
filling the sky with color; the crimson and white flashes of ascension.
As the sound receded, we became aware of sudden activity around us—the
stirrings of technicians and robots and astronauts, the sounds of radios
and electronic pulses, the shadows of rockets connecting to gantries,
ready to lift into the universe.
Quell at last said, “It’s time to go. Our ship is waiting. Ishmael,
attend, we must aboard.”
And so we continued on to the Cetus 7.
CHAPTER 2
Oh, the logistics of the rocket. Computerize the billion and one
decisions. Ten thousand nursing bottles filled with super-homogenized
gunk for space children. Fresh air produced by glass-enclosed botanical
gardens. Sweat recycled into sweet water by machines.
Ring all the bells and klaxons. Flash the lights and prepare the
thunders. Men and women run.
Quell and I stood by the gantry, staring up at the giant ship. It had
been a week since our strange encounter with Elijah, seven days filled
with intense activity as the Cetus 7 crew, of which we were now members,
prepared the ship for voyage.
“Quell,” I said, “at no time in the last week, in all the rush and work,
upon or around the ship, have we seen—blind or otherwise—the prophesied
captain of our ship.”
Quell shut his yes and cocked his strange head.
“Him,” he whispered.
“What?” I urged. “What?”
Quell murmured, “He is near.” And he turned and pointed up at the
gantry. Its elevator was slowly rising and within the cage we saw a
lone, dark figure.
“There is our captain,” said Quell.
The spaceman’s chapel. I had come to say a prayer before liftoff the
next morning. Quell accompanied me, although I knew not to what god he
prayed, if any. The muted light soothed our eyes after the blinding
glare of the launching pad. Within the quiet and sacred space we stared
up at the curved panoramic ceiling and there we saw, floating, the
translucent shapes of men and women long lost in space. Soft murmurs
emanated from them, a multitudinous whispering.
“And those? Why?” said Quell.
I watched the floating shapes and said, “Memorials, images, and voices
of those who have died and are buried forever in space. Here, in the
high air of the cathedral, at dawn and at dusk, their souls are
projected, their voices broadcast, in remembrance.”
Quell and I stood and listened and watched.
One lost voice recited, “David Smith, lost near Mars, July 2050.”
Another, higher, softer, said, “Elizabeth Ball, adrift beyond Jupiter,
2087.”
And a third, sonorous, again and again, “Robert Hinkston, killed by
meteor swarm, 2063, buried in space.”
Another whisper: “Buried.”
A further sound: “Lost.”
And all the whispers at once, repeating: “In space, in space, in space.”
I took Quell’s arm and turned him toward the front of the chapel.
“There,” I said, pointing. “In the pulpit, at any moment, we will see a
man who died nearly a hundred years ago, but so remarkable a man was he
that they computerized his soul, tracked his voice, made circuitries of
his merest breath.”
At that, the lights rose to illuminate a figure that was rising behind
the pulpit.
“Father Ellery Colworth,” I murmured.
“A robot?” said Quell, quietly.
“Yes,” I said, “but more. Before us is the gentle essence of the man.”
The lights dimmed somewhat as the incredible three-dimensional duplicate
of Father Ellery Colworth began to speak.
“Is God dead?” he said. “An old question now. But once, hearing it, I
laughed and replied: Not dead, but simply sleeping until you chattering
bores shut up!”
There was a soft sound of laughter all around Quell and me, which faded
as Father Colworth continued.
“A better answer is yet another question: Are you dead? Does the blood
move in your hand, does that hand move to touch metal, does that metal
move to touch Space? Do wild thoughts of travel and migration stir your
soul? They do. Thus you live. Therefore God lives. You are the thin skin
of life upon an unsensing Earth, you are that growing edge of God which
manifests itself in hunger for Space. So much of God lies vibrantly
asleep. The very stuffs of worlds and galaxies, they know not
themselves. But here, God stirs in his sleep. You are the stirring. He
wakes, you are that wakening. God reaches for the stars. You are His
hand. Creation manifest, you go in search. He goes to find, you go to
find. Everything you touch along the way, therefore, will be holy. On
far worlds you will meet your own flesh, terrifying and strange, but
still your own. Treat it well. Beneath the shape, you share the Godhead.
“You Jonahs traveling in the belly of a new-made metal whale, you
swimmers in the far seas of deep space, blaspheme not against yourselves
or the frightening twins of yourselves you find among the stars, but ask
to understand the miracles which are Space, Time, and Life in the high
attics and lost birthing-places of Eternity. Woe to you if you do not
find all life most holy, and coming to lay yourself down cannot say, O
Father God, you waken me. I waken Thee. Immortal, together we then walk
upon the waters of deep space in the new morn which names itself:
Forever.”
The congregation—above and below—softly repeated the word, “Forever,
forever.”
There was a swell of soft music from somewhere in the heavens as Father
Ellery Colworth finished, his figure went dark, and his silhouette was
seen descending silently behind the podium.
In the long silence that came upon us I wept.
I lay awake that night in my berth aboard the Cetus 7.
Quell was already asleep. Rain patterns, simulated to aid slumber, fell
on our faces and behind us on the wall.
The voice of a clock repeated, very softly, “Tick tock, two o’clock…tick
tock, two o’clock.”
At last I spoke.
“Quell, awake?”
And his mind spoke to me silently from across the room.
“Part of my mind, yes, the rest sleeps. I dream of the old man who
warned us.”
“Elijah? Did you believe him, that our captain is blind?”
“Yes. That much is common knowledge.”
“And that he is mad?”
“That we must discover for ourselves.”
“But by that time, mightn’t it be too late, Quell?”
The soothing rain patterns continued to fall on my cheeks and the walls.
There was a faint rumble of thunder from beyond.
“Quell? What, is all of you asleep now? Good companion, lie there. Your
body the strange color of a world I will never see. Cold blood but warm
heart; your mouth silent but your mind, even in sleep, breathing
friendship.”
Quell’s voice, within my head, murmured drowsily, “Ishmael.”
“Quell, thank God for you in the days ahead.”
From all around me Quell’s voice repeated, “Ishmael…Ishmael.”
CHAPTER 3
A voice boomed over the loudspeakers. “The captain is in quarters,
prepare for countdown.”
The crew all hurried to their assigned stations, suited up and strapped
in. The great doors were shut and sealed, the gantries rolled away, the
engines fired up.
“Minus one and counting.”
We lay waiting for the fire-wind to seize and throw us at the sky.
And seize and throw it did.
Oh my God, I thought. Help me to shout, “We rise, we rise.”
But silence took us, like penitent monks, to its bosom.
For even the thundering rocket, which rips the soul on Earth, walks
silently some few miles high, treads the stars without footfall, as if
in awe of the great cathedral of space.
Free, I thought. No gravity. No gravity! Free. Oh, Quell, I find it most
pleasant to be…alive.
Safely in orbit, let out of our constraints, I asked, “And now, what do
we do?”
“Why, collect data,” said one of the crew.
“Add and subtract constellations,” said another.
“Photograph comets,” said a third. “Which means, capture God’s skeleton
in an X-ray.”
Another crew member said, “I grabbed a flash of those passing comets.
From such huge ghosts of suns, I borrow cups of energy to power our
ship. Sweet alchemy, my game, but fine fun pumps my blood. All round
lies death, but I greet even Death with, look, this grin.”
It was First Mate John Redleigh. I touched a computer screen, which
whispered his name, and I saw there his log of the first hours of our
journey: August 22, 2099. Out of sight of land, yes, out of sight of the
blessed land, which means all Earth and those we hold dear upon it. All
faces, names, souls, remembrances, streets, houses, towns, meadows,
seas—gone. All longitudes, latitudes, meridians, hours, nights, days,
all time, yes, time, too, gone. Christ, guard my soul. How lonely.
And to me Quell set free his thoughts: “Friend, I read minds, not
futures. Space is large. They say it curves. Perhaps our end is our
beginning. Our destination: far, very far, three mystery comets to be
found by us in one constellation. Chart their course and map their
routes, take their temperatures.”
“How long will we travel?” I asked.
“Ten years,” came the answer.
“My God, how boring,” I said.
“No,” said Quell, “for see how your God sends His meteors to entertain
us.”
“Meteor strike!” a voice cried. “Deck seven. All hands report!”
We ran. All ran to the sounds of bells and klaxons and worked to repair
the ship’s hull.
And at last I stood, back inside the hatch, taking off my helmet along
with the rest of the crew.
And so it went, day in, day out—our ship hurtling through space, each of
us with his assigned task, measuring, scanning, calculating, plotting a
safe course among the broken stars.
And yet, with all this happening, still, after forty days out in space,
not once did we see our captain. He stayed locked up in his cabin. But
sometimes, at three or so in the deep morning, I heard the hiss of the
elevator shaft, like a long, drawn-out sigh, and knew he was passing,
rising up from the interior living and work levels to the outermost deck
of his great ship, restricted to all but our ghost leader.
We all listened and heard.
In private, Downs said, “What does he do, up there? I hear he suits up,
goes out alone, tethered by just one line.”
Someone answered, “Fool, he plays games with meteors, reaching out as if
to catch them, even though he cannot possibly see them coming.”
And Quell added, “He shows no trust in our radar screens. Blind, he
thinks he sees clearer and beyond the human eye.”
“Sees what?” I asked. “Quell, you catch his thoughts. What?”
Quell was silent for a few moments, then said, “My mind hears, but the
captain’s mouth must speak. It is not for me to say. When he finds what
he searches for, he will let us know. He—”
Suddenly Quell put his strange hands to his face, and from far off we
heard the captain’s cry over the intercom.
“No, no!” Quell yelled, and fell to his knees. He collapsed before us,
and contorted one of his hands into a fist, eyes shut.
Quell shook his fists at the unseen stars. “Gah!” cried Quell, as if
possessed. “No more of this, no more!”
And, suddenly, all was quiet. No sound came from the intercom, and
Quell’s arm dropped to the deck. He stood, weakened, shaken by this
strange thing that had happened.
I went to my friend. “Quell,” I said. “Tell me what just happened. That
was not you, was it? That was the captain. You knew the captain’s mind,
you acted as he did, yes?”
“No,” said Quell, quietly.
“Yes,” I insisted. “You have no reason to defy the stars. It was he who
raised his fist at the universe.”
But Quell refused to respond, turning his gaze upward instead.
From First Mate John Redleigh’s log: Fifty days out. Correction: twelve
hundred hours out from Earth. Student, do your sums. Computer,
electro-psychoanalyze my soul. Thrust your finger, First Mate Redleigh,
in a computer socket. What would you find? John Redleigh, born 2050,
Reedwater, Wisconsin. Father, a maker of outboard motors. Mother, a
baker of children, a dozen in all, of which the plainest of plain bread
is old John Redleigh. Old, I say. Old when I was ten, long gone in
senility by thirteen. Married a fine plain woman at twenty-two; filled
the nursery by twenty-five. Read occasional books, thought occasional
thoughts. Ah, God, Redleigh, haven’t you more to put in this damn
machine? Are you so stale, flat, unbumped, untouched, unscarred,
unmoved? Have you no nightmare dreams, secret murders, drugs, or drink
in your soul? Is your heart missing, the pulse spent? Did you give over
when you were thirty, or were you ever more than a dry biscuit, an
unbuttered bun, flat wine? Pleasantly sensual, but never passionate. A
good husband, fair friend, far traveler, without worry, coming and going
so quietly that God himself never noticed. And when you die, Redleigh,
will even one horn sound? Will one hand flutter, one soul cry, one tear
drop, one door slam? What’s your sum? Let’s finish it. There, there it
is: zero. Did my secret self put those ciphers there? Feed zero, get
zero? So I, John Redleigh, sum myself.
“You there,” said Redleigh, as I passed him outside the door to the
captain’s cabin.
“Sir,” I said.
“Don’t jump. What are you doing here? Shouldn’t you be on the
quarterdeck?”
“Well, sir,” I said, nodding at the captain’s door. “Six days. Isn’t
that a long time for the captain to be shut in? I can’t help but
wonder…Is he all right? I have an urge to knock upon his door.”
Redleigh regarded me for a moment, then said, “Well, then…”
I stepped quietly to the door and rapped upon it lightly.
“No, no,” said Redleigh. “Let me show you.”
And he stepped up and knocked hard on the door with his fist.
He waited a moment, then knocked again.
I said, “Does he never answer, then?”
“If he knew that God Himself were out here, he might venture forth for a
chat. But you or me? No.”
Suddenly there was the sound of a bell, a klaxon, and from the intercom
a voice spoke: “Hear this! Captain’s inspection. All hands assemble,
main deck. All hands, Captain’s inspection.”
And we turned and ran.
All gathered, five hundred strong, on the main deck.
“In line!” called Redleigh, from the head of the assembly. “He’s coming,
the captain is coming. Tenshun!”
There was a faint hum, a touch of electrical sound, which wavered like a
swarm of insects.
The door to the main deck hissed open, and the captain was there. He
stepped forward three steady, slow paces and stopped.
He was tall, well proportioned, and his uniform was completely white.
The great shock of his hair was almost white, with faint traces of gray.
Over his eyes he wore a set of opaque radar-vision glasses, in which
danced small firefly electric traces.
To a man, we held our breath.
At last he spoke.
“At ease.”
And, as one, we let out our breath.
“Redleigh,” the captain said.
“All present, sir.”
The captain traced the air with his hands. “Yes, the temperature has
gone up ten degrees. All present, indeed.”
He moved along the front line, then stopped, one hand out, hovering near
my face.
“Ah, here’s one who runs the very furnace of youth. Your name?”
“Sir,” I said. “Ishmael Hunnicut Jones.”
“God, Redleigh,” said the captain, “isn’t that the sound of Blue Ridge
wilderness or the scarred red hills of Jerusalem?”
Without waiting for a response, he continued, “Well, now, Ishmael. What
do you see that I don’t?”
Staring at him, I pulled back, and from the far side of my mind, in a
panic, I whispered, “Quell?”
Suddenly I knew that if I should seize the captain’s dark machine
electric lenses, behind them I would find eyes the color of minted
silver, of fish that had never been born. White. Oh, God, this man is
white, all white.
And in my head I heard Quell, a shadow upon the air: “Some years ago the
universe set off a light-year immensity of photographic flash. God
blinked and bleached the captain to this color of sleeplessness and
terror.”
“What?” the captain demanded, for he had sensed our thoughts.
“Nothing, sir,” I lied. “And there is nothing I can see that you do
not.”
I waited for his reply, but none was forthcoming. Instead, he turned and
walked back to the head of the assembly and spoke. “How runs a ship in
space, men?”
The crew murmured, and one replied, “With tight seams and oxygen suits
at the ready, sir.”
“Well said,” the captain replied, and continued. “And how do you treat a
meteor, men?”
This time I gave him the answer. “A seven-second patch and all hands
saved, sir.”
The captain paused at this, and then gravely asked, “Then how do you
swallow a flaming comet whole, men?”
Silence.
“No answer?” thundered the captain.
Quell wrote invisibly on the air. “They have not as yet seen such
comets, sir.”
“They have not,” the captain said. “And yet such comets do come by.
Redleigh?”
Redleigh touched a control pad and a star chart descended from the
ceiling before us. It was a three-dimensional work of art, a
chart-maker’s multi-textual dream of the universe.
The captain reached out a blind hand.
“So, here, in miniature, is the universe.”
The star chart blinked.
The captain went on. “Will your eyes accomplish what mine, gone dead,
cannot? From the regions of the Horsehead Nebula, among a billion fires,
one special light burns. Blind, I feel its presence thus.”
He touched the center of the screen. At that instant, a vast, long,
beautiful comet was illumined before us.
“Do I touch the maelstrom, Redleigh?” the captain said.
“Yes, sir,” replied Redleigh, as the crew whispered at the vast beauty
revealed.
“Closer. Brighter,” commanded the captain.
The image of the comet brightened to an immense ghost.
“So,” said the captain. “Not a sun, a moon, or a world. Who’ll name it?”
“Sir,” said Redleigh, gently. “That is merely a comet.”
“No!” shouted the captain. “It is not merely a comet. That is a pale
bride with flowing veil come back to bed her lost unbedded groom. Isn’t
she lovely, men? A holy terror to the sight.”
We stood silent, waiting.
Redleigh, moving closer, said, “Captain, is that not the comet that
first passed Earth some thirty years ago?”
And I, half-remembering, spoke and gave its name: “Leviathan.”
“Yes!” the captain said. “Speak up! Again!”
“Leviathan,” I repeated, wondering what was going on. “The largest comet
in history.”
The captain whirled away from the star screen and turned his blind gaze
upon us. “The brute chemistry of the universe thrown forth in light and
trailing nightmare. Leviathan!”
“Was it not Leviathan, Captain,” said Redleigh, softly, “that put out
your eyes?”
The men murmured and stared harder at the beautiful beast.
“But to give me great vision!” the captain said. “Yes! Leviathan! I saw
it close. I touched the hem of its great million-mile-long bridal veil.
And then that virgin whiteness, jealous of my loving glance, rubbed out
my sight. Thirty, thirty, thirty years ago. I still see it on my inner
lids every night, so passing strange, so full of Arctic miracles, that
huge white thunderhead of God. I ran to it. I offered up my fevered
soul. And it snuffed me out! And then it ran, leaving me. Yet look.”
He touched the three-dimensional chart and the comet brightened yet
again, loomed even larger.
“Leviathan returns,” said the captain. “I have waited thirty long years,
and the moment has finally come. And I have chosen you, men, to be with
me on this starship to rush and meet that downfell light, which having
once doomed me now cycles round to doom itself. Soon, I will lift my
hands—your hands—to make that strike.”
The men stirred, but said nothing.
“What?” the captain said. “Silence?”
“Sir,” Redleigh said, “that is not our mission, our destination. What of
our loved ones on Earth…”
“They will know of it! And they will celebrate when we have bled this
beast and interred it in the Coalsack Nebula burial ground.”
“But questions will be asked, sir,” said Redleigh.
“And we will answer those questions. And we will complete our mission.
After we have dealt with Leviathan. We must learn the stuffs of pure
destruction. Look on Leviathan! What is it? Some dread thing torn from
out God’s throat when He knew darkness in His sleep? Gone evil with
time, gone tired with creation, did God frighten up his bones and mind
and lungs in one titanic seizure to cough forth this sickening? Who
knows, can guess, or tell? All I know is that old curse and bled-forth
wound now terrorizes space and ravens at our heels.
“Let us speak gently now. Wherever God now is, why, spring and sweet
winds play. But with Leviathan, all dies and bleeds away. Great God, I
worship thee. But thy old ailment comes to winnow me and split my bones
and kindle up dead eyes to half an obscene light. So madness gives me
strength for this last night. Insanity makes grasp both long and broad.
Once clutched and killed, Leviathan, I will turn back to my God.”
We stood, as if spellbound.
Redleigh at last dared to propose: “This hell you speak of…is it quite
that Hell?”
“Why,” said the captain, “there’s Death himself come round to even up
old scores. God sums Himself on Earth four billion strong. But here’s
the beast to make that right go wrong. Within a month, this light-year
creature, mid-Pacific, will submerge and murder all that’s living on
Earth.”
“But our scientists, sir—” began Redleigh.
“Are blind!” yelled the captain. “No, worse! For even blind, I see! On
other journeys, Leviathan missed our Earth by a million miles or more.”
“And this time round,” insisted Redleigh, “the calculations show that it
will miss Earth by six times as much.”
“Your wise men say Survival? I say Death,” the captain roared. “Our
funeral comes this way. Changed, pulled, put on new tracks by far dark
worlds beyond our sight, put off by gravities of malice, Leviathan now
veers to doom us. Does no one see or care?”
We in our ranks shifted uneasily. What our captain spoke seemed madness,
and yet he was so sure, so strong.
“We must take care now,” said Redleigh finally, “if what you say is
true.”
“Aye to that!” we yelled as one.
“Proof, now, Redleigh,” said the captain. “Here are my charts.” He
pulled a slim disk from his coat and held it out in the direction of
Redleigh’s voice. “Computerize these as far as you or God can count and
then beyond.”
“I will take your charts, sir,” said Redleigh, gravely.
“Quickly,” said the captain. “Scan, study, see.”
Redleigh turned the disk over in his hands.
“For there you will find Doom,” the captain went on. “But, if serenity,
sweet peace, and mild excursions are your findings, man…if you discover
instead fair Heaven and find green Eden, say your say with graceful
data! Play the computer. If your final tune is joy, I will accept it,
and turn us back toward stallion and mare meadows and fine frolics; no
remorse.”
“Fair put, sir.”
“Where’s your hand?” said the captain, reaching out upon the air.
“Here, sir.”
The captain seized it. “Now man, attend. Here’s one who gives his palm
on palm to me. May I beg hearts and souls from all the rest?”
“They’re here!” came all our voices.
“And all about!” I added.
“Aye and aye!” cried many voices.
The captain still held tight to Redleigh’s hand, binding him to his
compact as he cried out a final oath: “Christ’s wounds swallow comets!
Much thanks for that sweet sound. Men! Ours is a holy mission. There
will be none greater in the history of humanity, though our sands run
forever through a glass as big as Creation’s landfall in far Centauri!
We will save our Earth! Technicians, stand alert! Oh, men, Leviathan is
a long white unhealed wound in space, a light that puts out light. Let
us heal it forever. Ready the alarms. The first man who spots it gets
double his pay for the journey! Squads, disperse. Fall out!”
The crew ran to their stations, all but Quell. Sensing that my friend
was not with me, I pulled up short, and turned to see Quell, gazing at
the captain with a look of terrible revelation. Redleigh, too, took note
of Quell’s expression, and stood quietly beside the captain.
The captain, feeling the silence, said, “Dismissed, Redleigh.”
“Sir.”
And Redleigh turned and walked away.
“Ishmael?” the captain said suddenly. “Dismissed.”
“Sir!” I saluted to those blind eyes, and started to leave but hesitated
to look back at the captain and Quell.
The captain sensed Quell drawing near. And yet Quell would not look at
him. The captain raised a hand to touch the air near Quell’s strange
green face. He seized his hand back as if it was half-burnt. Then he
turned and stepped back through the door leading off the main deck and
the door whispered shut.
There was a long moment in which Quell’s face gathered shadows of his
own future. I could not bear to witness it.
And then I heard the voices of the crew, coming from all around, one by
one.
“The comet Franciscus 12.”
“Halley’s comet.”
“The comet of Pope Innocent the Third.”
“The Great India comet of ’88.”
“The comet of Alcibiades.”
And on the great star screen, one by one, I saw gigantic manifestations
of comets, meteors, star clusters, all of “What is a comet, anyway?” I
heard myself say. “Who knows, really,” I answered myself. “Universal
vapors. The mighty indigestion of our creator. Quell?”
Quell’s thoughts touched mine.
“On my world, such comets are known as pilgrim visitors, far-traveling
specters, haunters of the feast. You see? Our history has as much
romantic nonsense as yours.”
“Well, then,” I said, “the captain has his reasons for seeking his
comet, and we have ours. There’s nothing like a riddle.”
“A riddle,” said Quell. “Let us sleep on that tonight. Perhaps in sleep,
we’ll dream, and in the dream, find an answer. A riddle. A riddle.”
And it was in the midst of the night, while I slept, that I heard
something stirring. Quell. I felt his mind move in mine and then, at
last, his voice: “May all the men rise up and listen.”
Then, not only in my mind, but with his tongue, Quell said the syllables
that made “Elijah.”
“Quell,” I whispered faintly.
And then how strange it was, for it was not Quell’s voice that I heard
now, in the middle of the night, but the voice that spoke in his mind.
It was the voice of Elijah, recalled.
“Oh, listen, hear!” said the voice that I’d last heard in the cathedral
on Earth. “Aboard this ship, far out in space, there will come a time
when you see land where there is no land, find time where there is no
time, when ancient kings will reflesh their bones and reseat their
crowns.”
“What’s that?” I heard from some other room along the corridor.
“Shut him off, shut him up,” cried another.
“No, wait, wait,” I whispered.
And Quell continued with the voice of Elijah: “Then, then, oh, then,
ship, ship’s captain, and ship’s men, all, all will be destroyed. All
save one!”
“All?” someone said.
“Save one,” said another.
“All will be destroyed,” said Quell, with the voice of Elijah.
And then he sank back into silence and slept.
I turned over but could not sleep, and sensed my crewmates in their
cubicles, up and down the corridor, sleepless till dawn.
The voice clock in every cabin ticked and named the hours and at last,
with no sunrise, in our minds we saw a ghost comet loom in spirit smoke
above the captain’s bunk, and the captain mourned his own death in his
sleep.
From the log of First Mate John Redleigh: Records dating 400 B.C. Rumors
have it that Alexander the Great’s death was predicted in the appearance
of the comet Persephone. The comet Palestrina arrived in the year one;
it may well have been the Star of Bethlehem. This much we know, but
little more. The main material of a comet’s body is methane gas and
wintry snow, wintry snow.
Unable to sleep, I arose and left my bunk, drawn to the captain’s cabin.
From outside that sealed door I could hear his nightmares within. “No,”
I heard him groan. “No, no, I say. Get off. Go!”
A figure came along the corridor: Redleigh. I pulled back into the
shadows as the first mate pounded on the captain’s door.
“Captain?”
The captain called out from within. “What? What?”
“You were having a nightmare, sir,” said Redleigh.
The door opened and the captain stood there, his white hair wild. “God,
I dreamt I fell, I fell, down in space, forever. Let me grasp my soul.”
“Ship’s log to be signed, sir,” said Redleigh.
“At four in the false morning? Good, Redleigh, something to keep me from
my nightmares. I’ll come with you to sign. How go the star computers?”
“They burn, sir, from overuse.”
“You jump to prove me wrong?”
“You have said you were right, sir,” said Redleigh. “I would prove
that.”
The captain stepped out of his cabin, and I moved back further into the
shadows, even though he could not see me. They started down the
corridor, toward the main deck, and I followed along.
“I know you, Redleigh. You have no heart for this chase, do you?”
“If by ‘chase’ you mean our proper business of charting stars and
exploring worlds…”
“No, no! Here!” the captain said as he emerged onto the vast main deck,
nearly empty now, and pointed toward the star screen. The
three-dimensional display hung brightly on the air.
“What do you know of the passage of dark planets and bright comets?”
“I think you must teach me, sir,” said Redleigh.
“And I will,” said the captain. “Here are a thousand thousand
star-charts, stamped, runneled, and humped. Run your hand over this
expanse. Touch the long mark of Halley’s comet; feel the heat of the
comet of Alliostro Minor. Here, the deep night plans for all God’s
circuitings and maunderings, all his long thoughts. God dreams joy:
green Earths appear. God suffers torments: Leviathan issues from the
vast portal of His raving eye and mouth. It rushes here! I know a way to
meet it head-on, fast, six weeks before it destroys Earth. We must move
fast to surprise it.”
“Surprise?” Redleigh turned from the charts that hung so brightly on the
air. “You cannot surprise a comet, sir. It neither lives nor cares.”
“But I live, I care,” said the captain.
Redleigh shrugged. “And shift the burdens of your knowledge to some
great wandering child, some universal accident that prowls the worlds,
homeless for eternity. I—”
“Go on,” said the captain.
“Sir, if as the Reverend Colworth says, all space is one flesh with us,
all worlds, suns, creatures extensions of one ground, one
all-encompassing will, then that ghost you speak of, sir, that comet,
that great terror-trailing monster, is but a true outmouthing of God
Himself. Not his sickness and despair, but His bright will that lights
the universal night. Would you stand against such breath?”
“If it wrenched my soul and burnt me blind, yes! Listen to the sound it
makes this very hour, out beyond.”
The captain reached out a hand, touching a screen. A loom of energy wove
immense sounds throughout the ship.
Nodding at this, the captain continued. “There’s the breath you spoke
of. It is a cold thing. It is all the graveyards of history somehow put
to space, and in its light-year shroud, ten billion on a billion men’s
lost souls yammer for release. I—we—go to rescue them!”
“That sound is but a dumb thing, sir, mere chemistry born of chaos, now
pulled by this tidal star, now hauled by that. You may as well stop your
own heart as try to stop that great pale beating.”
“But if both stop at once?” said the captain, “will not my victory over
it be as large as its victory over me? Small man, great traveling
doom—both weigh the same when the scale is death.”
“But in rending it,” said Redleigh, in quiet desperation, “you rend your
own flesh, Captain, which God has loaned you.”
“This flesh offends me!” cried the captain. “If it is all one, God
manifesting himself in minerals, light, motion, dark, or sensible man,
if that comet is my sister-self come preening by to try my Job-like
patience, was it not blasphemy it first tried on me? If I am God’s
flesh, why was I felled, struck blind? No, no! That thing is lost and
evil. Its great face hovers in the abyss. Behind its mindless glare I
sense the blood that oils the cogs of nightmare and the pit. And whether
I perceive all this in hellfire man, sweet blood-mouthed cannibal shark,
or huge white blinding mask flung down among the stars to frighten men
and push them to impulse much less than human, more than bones and soul
can bear, I must attack. Talk not of blasphemy to me, sir. It tried me
at breakfast. I will dine on it tonight.”
“Oh God,” whispered Redleigh. “Oh God help us, then.”
“He does,” the captain responded. “If we are His stuffs, alive, then we
sinew His arm, thrust out to stop that light-year beast. Would you turn
away from this greatest hunt?”
“I would,” murmured Redleigh, “and go to check my computers, sir.”
Redleigh turned to leave, but stopped when the captain said, “Why then
you’re as mad as me. No, madder. For I distrust ‘reality’ and its moron
mother, the universe, while you fasten your innocence to fallible
devices which pretend at happy endings. Lie down with machines, rise up
castrato. Sweet Jesus, you’ll make the pope’s choir yet. Such innocence
quakes my bones.”
“Sir,” Redleigh responded. “I am against you. But don’t fear me. Let the
captain beware the captain. Beware of yourself…sir.”
And once more Redleigh turned, and this time he walked away.
CHAPTER 4
I backed off and returned to my cabin, deeply distressed. I barely slept
the hours remaining till dawn, instead tossing and turning in my bunk,
while Quell lay undisturbed, dreaming who knows what alien dreams.
At the first bell, I rose and made my way to the communications deck.
There I found crewman Small, bent over his console.
“Do you know that a rocket feeds itself in space?” he asked.
“Feeds? What do you mean?”
“It wallows,” he explained, “like a great fish in currents of solar
vibration, cosmic rays, interstellar X-ray radiations. Ever hungry,
we—this ship—search for banquets of shout and shriek and echo. I sit
here, day in and day out, tuned to the great onrushings of space all
around us. Most of the time, all I hear is variations of anonymous
sound—hum and static and vibration. And once in a while, by
accident…listen!”
He touched a contact and from the console speaker came voices—distinct
human voices. He turned his face to mine, a strange light shining there.
As we stood, we heard broadcasts that had been made to crowds on Earth,
to the listening ears of people two hundred years ago. Churchill spoke
and Hitler shouted and Roosevelt answered and mobs roared; there were
football and baseball games from long-ago afternoons. They rose and
fell, moved in and out, like ocean waves of sound.
Small said, “No sound, once made, is ever truly lost. In electric
clouds, all are safely trapped, and with a touch, if we find them, we
can recapture those echoes of sad, forgotten wars, long summers, and
sweet autumns.”
“Mr. Small,” I said. “We must trap these broadcasts so we can hear them
again and again. Is there more? What have you found?”
“We have come upon a fountain of Earth’s younger days. Voices from
centuries past. Strange radio people, ghosts of laughter, political
charades. Listen.”
Small fiddled with the console dial again. We heard the moment the
Hindenburg went up in flames. Lindbergh landed in Paris in 1927. Someone
named Dempsey fought someone named Tunney in 1925. Crowds screamed in
horror, mobs cheered. And then, it began to fade away.
“We’re beyond them now,” said Small.
“Go back!” I cried. “That is our history.”
Another voice sounded from the console: “This afternoon at Number Ten
Downing Street, Prime Minister Churchill…”
The captain strode onto the deck.
“Sir,” said Small. “We have found a fountain of Earth’s younger days.
Voices from centuries past. Strange radio people, ghosts of laughter,
political charades. Listen!”
The captain said, most sadly, “Yes, yes.” And then, suddenly, “Small,
Jones, leave that now. They speak but to themselves. We cannot play, nor
laugh, nor weep with them. They are dead. And we have an appointment
with the real.”
Small reached again for the console dial, as a final voice announced:
“Line drive! Mantle safe at first!”
Then, silence.
I touched my cheek to wipe away a tear. Why do I weep? I wondered. Those
voices were not my people, my times, my ghosts. And yet once they lived.
Their dust stirred in my ears, and I could not stop my eyes.
Suddenly, over the ship’s intercom, a voice boomed: “Blue alert. All
scanning stations. Visual sighting. Star sector CV7. Visual sighting.
Blue alert!”
Quell and I stood before his viewing screen, stunned at what we saw
there.
“Great God,” I said. “What’s that?”
“A moon,” said Quell.
“Yes,” I said. “But what a moon. It looks so old. Much older than our
own, covered with towns, cities, ancient gardens. How long do you think
that moon has been spinning in space alone?”
Quell consulted his instrument panel, and zoomed in the picture.
“Ten thousand times a million years,” said Quell. “Oh lovely, lovely…the
spires, the jeweled windows, the lonely and deserted courtyards filled
with dust.”
And then we heard Redleigh’s voice: “Stand by! Diminish speed.”
And then the captain’s voice cut in: “Mr. Redleigh!”
“Sir, this moon! It’s very old and fine. Our mission is to explore, to
find, to report.”
“Yes, Redleigh, I can hear it in your voice. It is a lovely lost and
wandering world, an ancient beauty, passing strange, but pass it we
must. Resume course.”
And over the intercom came the order: “Resume full speed. Blue alert
canceled.”
The image of the lost moon, which had been projected on all the screens
throughout the ship, began to pass away.
“Lost again,” said Quell.
And once again, the ship was surrounded by black space.
CHAPTER 5
From Small’s console came dim voices, cloaked in static, from untold
miles away: “Lightfall 1 calling Cetus 7. Lightfall here. Inbound from
twelve years out. Cetus 7, do you read?”
My God, I thought, another spacecraft.
Quell’s voice touched my thoughts. “Impossible. In all these billions of
miles of space. What are the chances of meeting—”
“Another spaceship?” I asked aloud.
“This is Lightfall 1,” came the voice again. “Shall we hang fire, Cetus
7?”
Men were running to the main deck from every direction, crowding around
monitors.
“Cetus 7, request permission to approach, link, and board.”
“Yes!” cried the crew.
“No!” thundered the captain.
“Cetus 7, please respond.”
The captain instructed Small to open a communications channel to the
other ship. “Lightfall 1, this is Cetus 7. Permission denied.”
“Cetus 7— please confirm: permission denied? Do I read you?”
“You do,” our captain replied.
“But my men, Captain, listen to them!”
And over the open communications channel we hear a grand clamor from the
other ship, a few thousand miles off.
“Damned fools at nursery games,” said our captain. “There is no time. No
time!”
“Time?!” said the voice from Lightfall 1. “Why, for Christ’s sake,
that’s all there is in space! God has a plentitude of time. And I? I am
full of long years wandering and news of strange stars and terrible
comets.”
“Comets?” our captain cried.
“The greatest comet in the universe, sir!” said the commander of
Lightfall 1.
“Stand by, then,” our captain said. “Permission to come aboard.”
We watched on the viewscreens as the Lightfall 1 approached. Both ships
reached out mechanical arms and grasped each other as friends. There was
a dull thunk as the linkage was complete, and within the hour the
Lightfall 1’ s captain stepped aboard the Cetus 7 and saluted.
“Jonas Enderby here, of the Lightfall 1.”
He stepped out of the airlock, and from behind him came a dozen or so
crew members of the Lightfall 1—dark, light; male and female; short,
tall; human and alien—glancing about them. We smiled in welcome, eager
to hear their story.
Later, in the communal mess, Commander Enderby raised a glass to our
captain, with whom he sat at the center table. “To your health, sir. No,
mine. My God, it’s been nine months since I’ve had an honest-to-God
drink. I’m with child! And that child is thirst.”
The Lightfall commander drank.
“More!” he demanded.
“More, yes,” our captain said. “And then speak.”
“Would you like to hear of comets?” said Enderby of the Lightfall 1.
“I am tuned to that,” replied our captain, a bright light glinting in
his eye.
We all inched a little closer, as close as protocol would allow, to
listen.
“God sickened in my face,” said Enderby. “I am not clean yet. For it was
the greatest, longest, brightest—”
Our captain cut in. “Leviathan?!”
Enderby gasped. “You know it?”
“You tracked it then?”
“Tracked it, hell, it bled me white and cracked my bones!
I only just escaped with my life.”
“Ah,” the captain cried. “Do you hear, Redleigh?”
Enderby continued. “I do not mean to stretch the joke. It tried me, sir.
It swallowed me, my ship, and crew in one great hungry gulp. We lived in
Leviathan!”
“In! Hear that, Redleigh? In!”
The Lightfall 1 commander went on. “You do make it sound jolly, sir.”
Our captain stood, all stony silence. “I meant no offense. Of all
people, I well know…”
“And jolly it was!” Enderby continued. “What else can one do when stuck
deep in the belly of the beast? We danced a rigadoon in Leviathan’s
gut!”
“And yet—you’re here!”
“Sir, it could not stomach us! We poisoned it with laughter. All round
within it we rose, we fell, we rose again, mystified by Fate, hysterical
with chance. We fired our laughs like cannons at its heart!”
The captain shook. “Laughter? Dancing?” he wondered.
And Enderby of the Lightfall 1 touched his right eye. “Yes! Though
before it took us into its maw, it spoiled my sight and killed this eye.
See? Pure forge-cast Irish crystal. Glass! I swear. Shall I pluck it out
and play at marbles?”
“No, no. Let it be,” our captain said with a sigh. “I believe you.”
“I see you do,” Enderby replied. “Leviathan did blind me once, but
completed only half the job. It would have destroyed my other eye, if
it’d had the chance. But we raised such a riot that Leviathan suffered
sickness and spat us out back unto the stars!”
Our captain seized Enderby’s arm. “Where?”
“Ten million miles beyond the outermost circumscape of Saturn’s
transit.”
“Do you hear that, Redleigh?” our captain cried. “It is still on
course!”
“Course?” The Lightfall 1 captain laughed. “What course? Do you think it
knows what it is doing, where it is going? How can chaos be plotted,
planned, coursed? Where is that gin? I need another drink.”
Redleigh stepped forward and doled it out.
“My charts are right and true,” said the captain, grabbing Redleigh’s
arm and spilling gin in the process. “I will go to meet that ghost!”
“On my recommendation?” Enderby said, astonished. “Did I make it sound
too bright? Hell.” He shook his head. “Here’s to caps and bells and
rollicking tunes. Here’s to Leviathan and you, sir. May you cap its bile
as it spits you out. God will that it may spit you out.”
“We must be away, and now,” the captain said, his brow glistening with
sudden sweat. “All hands, on deck!”
Enderby stood and said, “But Captain, can we not stay a bit longer? My
crew would do well for some more time with new faces, new friends, news
of home. We are weary, and dry as sand.”
“My thirst is greater,” the captain thundered. “We must be off.”
Enderby drained his glass and slammed it on the table. “To hell with
you, sir! Go on your fool’s mission, if that is what you choose.”
Enderby stood, and motioned for his crew to follow. They wound their way
through the corridors to the airlock doors, donned their suits, and
left.
In moments, Lightfall 1 and all its crew were gone, lost again to
soundless space.
CHAPTER 6
Deep in the false night, our captain walked along the sleeping quarter
corridors. Quell scanned his mind and spoke his words to me in whispers:
“‘What, pretending at sleep? Do that, and bite your bitter tongues,
which hate me for spoiled games. But if Christ Himself walked through
space this night—’”
And Quell, speaking in his own voice, added: “Not Christ. But one of His
lost shepherds.”
The next morning, Redleigh summoned Quell and me to Small’s
communication console. There we met crewman Downs.
“This communication occurred last night,” Redleigh said, nodding at
Small, who touched a contact on his console. We listened, and heard at
first the usual static and pulses of space, and at last a fine voice
began to speak.
“This is starship Rachel,” a far voice said. “Theological starship
Rachel, the spacecraft of Pius the Wanderer, calling Cetus 7. Answer,
Cetus 7.” And the captain, switching on, said, “Cetus 7 here.”
The mournful voice of Pius filled the air. “Have you seen a small
life-rocket adrift? A space storm carried it away. Fine priests were in
it, pacing that comet—”
“Leviathan?!” asked the captain.
The Rachel’s captain responded, “Yes! My son, my only son, good child of
God, was on that rocket. Fearless, curious. The Great White Bride, he
called it. He went to search the White Bride’s wake, with two other good
men. And now I search for him. Will you help?”
“I have no time, sir,” said our captain.
“Time!” the Rachel’s captain cried. “Why, I’ve lost my whole life. You
must help me.”
The captain spoke again. “Away! I go to redeem your son. God help you,
Captain.”
The Rachel’s captain, voice fading, said, “God forgive you, master of
the Cetus 7.”
And the recording went dead. We five looked at each other, stung by the
exchange. I said, “So the Rachel, mourning her lost children, fell away
and we move toward what, annihilation?”
My companions looked away, uneasily.
Quell spoke. “Mr. Redleigh, you sent for us?”
Distantly, an airlock door opened and somewhere, above, out of sight, we
felt the captain’s strange magnetic tread.
Downs looked upward and said, “Is it about him?”
“Him, and more,” said Redleigh. “About clouds of old radio time that
spoke in tongues, which we let pass. Fellow spacefarers travel-weary and
lonely. Priest ships we refuse to rescue. Jobs left undone—”
Downs cut in. “But, sir, the captain has told us that this comet is our
job.”
“Well, then,” said Redleigh, “here are the captain’s charts. Leviathan
will strike Earth, yes?”
“Yes,” we all agreed. “Why, of course, yes.”
“Here is Earth,” Redleigh said, pointing at the chart. “Now, Downs,
light its substance. Now, let us illuminate Leviathan, there. Move both
Earth and white light on their ways, here, and see how they travel. The
computer sums and keeps the score. There!”
The great star chart took fire. We saw our planet Earth. We saw the
comet. Earth moved. Leviathan moved. The universe wheeled. Leviathan
rushed along space and Earth spun about the sun.
“There, see,” said Downs. “A collision course! The comet will destroy
Earth! Just as the captain said.”
“No, it will not,” said Redleigh.
And as we watched the unfolding of the great star chart, the huge comet
streaked by without striking Earth.
“See, it goes,” commented Redleigh. “The comet continues on, leaving
Earth untouched.”
We watched the comet fade.
Redleigh switched off the chart.
Downs spoke up. “Captains don’t lie.”
“They don’t,” said Redleigh, “unless they are mad. Then lying’s all the
truth they know. Quell?”
We looked at Quell, who shifted uneasily.
“Quell knows,” said Redleigh. “Quell, these men are drowning. Give them
air.”
Quell remained silent with his eyes shut and when he spoke, spoke only
to himself. “O fathers of time, forgive me. Here,” he gestured, pulling
us close into his spider arms. “Let me gather your minds. So. And thus.”
We felt our souls embraced. We looked up. Quell had gathered us and
bound it to the soul and mind and voice of the captain.
From the uppermost deck of the ship, beneath the stars, we heard our
captain cry, “I think I see!”
We were shaken, for we did hear him clearly, though he was impossibly
far away.
Quell shook his head and pulled back and the captain’s voice faded.
“Quell,” I urged. “Go on! Please. We must hear.”
Quell gathered us to him again. There was fire in his eyes and strange
green cheeks. The captain’s voice grew strong again as it moved through
Quell.
“Yes, I almost think I do. Far worlds, long dead, break on these eyes
with living sights, again, again, again, and say: ‘We live! Remember us!
Oh, think on us. Our sins forgive! Our virtues celebrate, though flesh
and blood, and blood’s sweet will are gone. And with it that despair
called hope, which wakes us at dawn. Remember us!’
“You are remembered, though I knew you not. Your ancient plight
inspires, your nightmare’s not forgot…I keep it here kindled with my
own; your ghost of outrage I give flesh and bone; your spirit war moves
my arm to smite; you speak my noon and instruct my night.
“As you to me, so I to other worlds will one day be when this night’s
deeds, the things we say and act out on this lonely stage, one million
years on from this hour will break and flower on some far shore, where
such as you look up, and behold, and know our loss or gain, life’s
wakening or death’s yawn.”
And again, quietly, our captain continued.
“So we, like they, pass on, forever ghosts, knocking at portals, prying
at doors, speaking our actions, re-promising old dreams, welcome or
unwelcome. Yet on we go, light-year on light-year, and no one there
beyond to know. Thus they and theirs, and we and ours will shadow-show
eternity, two films projected to opposite screens and nothing and
nothing and nothing in between.
“I murder or murdered will be this night. But there, trapped and
traveled in storms of light I am not yet born.
“O God I would be that child, to start again and, starting, know some
peace on a clean baptismal morn.”
Quell let us go, dropping his arms, his eyes closed.
“Oh, God…,” Redleigh said, touched and anguished.
“God, yes,” said Small. “No more, no more of this. It must be stopped.”
Quell drew in a breath, and then again the captain’s voice came.
“Eternal noons, I asked, O Lord! Eternal midnight, my reward. O
whiteness there! My pale and wandering lust. O spirit dread, stand
forth! This time I will not swerve. My path is fixed beyond the
gravities! Tracked like the worlds that fire about the sun, so runs my
soul in one trajectory.
“Blind, my body aches and is one eye! I’ll weave eclipse to darken you
who dared to darken me. Your veil will be your winding sheet. Your
mindless gossamer I’ll bind to strangle you. Leviathan! Leviathan!”
We felt his hands reach out to grasp and hold and kill.
And, last: “Can I do this and bank my fires?”
Quell echoed, in his own weary voice, “Fires.”
And we were silent, standing there, and the captain said no more.
CHAPTER 7
At last Redleigh said, “Well?”
And Downs lifted his head and looked straight at the first mate and
said, “That was unlawful, uncommon, criminal eavesdropping. We have no
right!”
“Upon uncommon dangers!”
“Would you mutiny, sir?” said Small.
Redleigh pulled back, a horrified look on his face. “Mutiny?!”
Quell broke in. “He would…take over.”
And we answered mutely, with our own horrified faces.
Redleigh said, “Have you not just heard what is in his heart, what he
intends to do?”
Downs replied, “We have. But those thoughts of the captain’s which we
have borrowed…why, how do they differ from ours? All men are
poet-murderers in their souls, ashamed to bleed it out.”
Small said, “You ask us to judge thoughts!”
“Judge actions then!” Redleigh responded. “Leviathan comes. We are
changing our course to meet it. Someone has tampered with the
computer—just twenty-four hours ago it said one thing, now it says
another.”
Downs said, “And so it goes with machines. Astronomical sums are nice,
but blood is best. Flesh is easier. Mind and will are excellent. The
captain is all these. The computer doesn’t know I live. The captain
does. He looks, he sees, he interprets, he decides. He tells me where to
go. And as he is my captain, so I go.”
“Straight to hell,” said Redleigh.
“Then hell it is.” Downs shrugged. “The comet’s birthing-place. The
captain has the beast in his sights. I hate beasts too. My captain
rouses me with No! And I am his dearest echo.”
Little said, “And I!”
“Quell?” said Redleigh, turning to the green alien.
“I have said too much,” said Quell. “And all of it the captain’s.”
“Ishmael?” said Redleigh.
“I,” I replied, “am afraid.”
Downs and Small stepped away. “Excused, Mr. Redleigh?”
“No!” shouted Redleigh. “Sweet Jesus, he’s blinded you, too. How can I
make you see?”
“It’s late in the day for that, Redleigh,” said Small.
“But see you will, dammit! I’m going to the captain. Now. You must stand
behind if not with me. You’ll hear it from his own mouth.”
“Is that a command, sir?”
“It is.”
“Well, then,” said Small, “aye, sir.”
“And aye, I guess,” said Downs.
And the three crewmen walked away, Quell and me following, listening for
the strange electronic pulse of the captain, near but far.
CHAPTER 8
“Mr. Redleigh, you have come to mutiny.”
The captain had granted us entrance to his quarters and he stood within,
facing us, his strange white eyes seeming to stare.
“Sir,” said Redleigh. “The simple fact is—”
The captain interrupted. “Simple? The sun’s temperature is 20,000
degrees. Yet it will burn Earth. Simple? I distrust people who come with
plain facts and then preach calamities. Now, Redleigh, listen. I am
giving over command of this spacecraft to you.”
“Captain!” cried Redleigh in surprise.
“Captain no more. You will take the credit for the grand destiny ahead.”
“I have no desire for destinies,” said Redleigh.
“Once you know it, you will desire it. You come with facts? Leave with
more than that. Who has seen a comet up close?”
“Why no one, sir, save you.”
“Who has touched a comet’s flesh?”
“Again, no one that we know.”
“What is a comet’s stuff that we should run to welcome it?”
“To the point, Captain.”
“The point! We go as fishers with our nets. We go as miners to a deep
and splendid mine of minerals both raw and beautiful. That school of
fish, which is Leviathan in space, is most certainly the largest
treasure of all time. Dip our nets in that and bring up miracles of
fish, pure energies that put the miracles at Galilee to shame. In that
vast treasure house we shall unlock and take of as we will. There must
be ten billion mines, so vast their glitter would burn your eyes. Such
black diamonds fall from space each night, all night, throughout all our
lives, and burn to nothing. We catch that rain. We save its most bright
tears to sell in common markets most uncommonly. Who says no to this?”
“Not I—as yet,” said Redleigh, warily.
“Then siphon off the very breath of that great ghost. Its breath is
hydrogen and mixtures of such flaming vapors as will light entire
civilizations for our children’s children’s lifetimes. Such energy,
harnessed, controlled, collected, kept, released, will work atomic
wonders for our race, and cause such further wonders of recompense. I
see rare bank accounts that will retire us all early, on to madness.”
“Madness?”
“The madness of pleasure and the good life and sweet ease. Leviathan’s
breath and body are yours to bank for cash and credit. As for myself, I
ask a single thing: leave its soul to me. Well?”
“Why, if that’s the sort of shower that falls from space,” Downs said,
“I’ll run out in that rain.”
“Yes! As children run in spring showers!”
And I thought, His poetry has won me, but not his facts.
The captain now turned to Quell and said, “Good Quell, you read my mind.
Are not fair weather there and rain and minted silver coins lost in a
high new grass?”
And Quell had no answer.
“Redleigh?”
“Damn you, sir.”
“No sooner damned than saved,” replied the captain. “Salvation rings me
in. Listen to its sound. Small? Downs?”
“Aye, sir!” said both.
“Quell? Ishmael?” A pause. “Your silence is affirmative.” And, turning
to Redleigh: “Where is your mutiny now?”
“You have bought them, sir!” said Redleigh,
“Bid then, and buy them back,” replied the captain.
Later, in the privacy of my own bunk, I made the following entry in my
personal journal: We have run from old radio voices, shunned lost moons
with lost cities, refused to share glad drinks and fine laughs with
lonely spacemen, and ignored rare priests searching for their lost sons.
The list of our sins grows long. Oh God! I must listen then, to space,
to see what else is there, what other crimes we might commit in
ignorance.
Putting the journal down, I touched a contact on the room’s radio set.
At first there was nothing but cold static and then came music, a
symphony stranger than any I’d ever heard.
I turned it up and listened with my eyes shut.
The sound of the music caused the sleeping Quell to stir. I switched it
off, and from his side of the room came Quell’s voice, urgent.
“Turn it back on, quickly.”
I touched the contact again, and the music returned. It was beautiful, a
requiem for the living to be mourned like the dead.
I knew it haunted Quell, for his mind now embraced mine.
“Oh, listen,” he whispered. “Do you hear? Music from my far world.”
“Yours?” I said. “Billions of miles off? Oh, Lord!”
“Lord indeed,” said Quell. “Music that has traveled all the way from my
galaxy, and more. That is the music of my father’s father’s suffering
and death.”
The music continued to play, somber and funereal.
I felt tears sting my eyes for no reason, and Quell went on: “The dirge
my grandfather composed for his own funeral, his great lament.”
“Why, listening,” I wondered aloud, “do I mourn for myself?”
Then Quell reached out with an unseen hand and an invisible mind and
spoke to Downs.
“Downs,” he said. “Can you put aside your ship’s tasks for a while and
make me a special space suit?”
“I would, sir, if I knew how,” came Downs’s reply.
“I will draw it,” said Quell, “and give you the plan. Come here now.”
“Quell!” I said, alarmed. “What’s this about?”
I sat up, and saw Quell at his desk, his strange hand drawing a strange
shape on the computer screen before him.
“There,” said Quell. “The proper suit, decorated with symbols of my lost
world.”
“Is this to be your coffin, then?” said Downs, as he entered our room
and looked at Quell’s plans.
“All beings in space suits inhabit future coffins of their own use and
shape. This is but a darker thing. Cut it from night, solder it with
shadows.”
“But why?” Downs wanted to know. “Why do you want a suit of death?”
“Listen,” I urged.
I turned up the otherworldly music. Downs listened and his eyes trembled
and his hands began to move.
“God, look at my fingers. It’s as if they have a mind of their own. That
dirge does this. Oh, Quell, good Quell, I guess there’s no way but that
I must make this terrible suit.”
“Quell,” I interrupted, “that music has been to the far side of the
universe and back. Why does it arrive here, now?”
“Because it is the proper time.”
“Quell!”
But silent, he sat there, staring in a fixed position at nothingness.
“Quell,” I urged. “Listen to me.”
Downs put a hand on my shoulder. “He doesn’t hear you.”
“He must feel what I think!” I replied.
“No,” said Downs. “I’ve seen the like before. Whether among the natives
in the lost seas of Earth or the far side of space, it’s much the same.
Death is speaking to him.”
“Don’t listen, Quell!” I said, and put my hands over his ears, which was
stupid, for as Downs then said: “His whole body hears. How will you stop
that?”
“Like this!” I cried. “Like this!”
I wrapped my arms around Quell and held him tight, very tight.
Downs said, softly, “Let it be. You might as well try to breathe life
into the white marble on a tomb.”
“I will!” I said. “Oh, Quell, it’s Ishmael here! Your friend. Dammit,
Quell, I ask, no, I demand—let it go! This very instant, stop! I’ll be
very angry with you, if this goes on. I won’t speak to you again! I’ll,
I’ll…” And here I paused, for I could not breathe. “I shall weep.”
I was surprised by my own tears and pulled back to see them falling on
my numbed palms. I held out my hands to Quell, showing him those tears.
“Quell, look, please look,” I pleaded.
But Quell did not see.
I tried to think what I must do.
And then I turned and stabbed at the radio contact on the console. The
far funeral music died.
I stared at Quell and waited. An echo of the music lingered in the room.
“He still hears it,” said Downs.
Suddenly, breaking the silence, a horn, a klaxon, a bell, and a voice:
“Red alert! Crew to stations! Red alert!”
I turned and ran, following Downs along the corridor toward the main
deck.
Reaching my post, I brought up the lights on the multilevel screen
before me. A pattern of atomic light, many-colored, played before my
eyes.
“What is that?” I wondered aloud.
Redleigh came to stand behind me, and posed the question, “Leviathan?”
The captain approached with his pulsing electric sound.
“No. The great comet’s beyond, still some distance away. It sends a
messenger ahead to warn us off. It fires a storm of gravities, atomic
whirlwinds, dust storms of meteors, cosmic bombardments, solar
explosions. Pay it no mind. That is but a mere mote of dust compared to
Leviathan.”
I tuned into the sensors on my console, and it was as the captain said.
Somewhere, nearly out of range, far off but approaching fast, was a
behemoth of unimaginable size and power.
Our spacecraft trembled.
CHAPTER 9
The trembling became more convulsive, the light on the screen more
erratic. The sound grew loud, but, we knew, it was not the immense sound
Leviathan might make when it arrived.
“Captain,” said Redleigh. “Permission to turn back. We’ll be destroyed.”
“Head on, Mr. Redleigh,” said the captain. “It’s merely testing us.”
The storm on the screen rose and fell and rose again. And then, a sudden
silence.
“What?” said Redleigh.
The captain said, “What, what, indeed!”
“It’s gone,” I said, checking my screen again in disbelief. “The storm
that ran before the comet is gone. But what of Leviathan itself?”
I ran some more scans, searching the vast expanse around our ship for
hostile entities. “The comet! It’s vanished, too! It’s gone from the
sensors.”
“No!” said the captain.
“Yes,” I said. “According to the readings, all the space around us is
empty.”
“Thank God,” said Redleigh, almost to himself.
“No, I say, no!” the captain yelled. “My eyes see nothing. Yet—it must
be there. I can almost touch it. I feel it. It is—”
A familiar voice broke in. “Gone,” Quell said, quietly, staring at the
emptiness of space on the computer screen. “Gone.”
“Quell!” I cried. “You’ve come back! Thank God.”
Quell said nothing.
“Quell, what happened,” I asked. “Out there?”
Quell moved forward slowly. “The funeral music—it’s gone. Our traveling
burial grounds, gone. The comet, the nightmare, all…gone.”
“Yes,” I said. “But why?”
Quell remained silent.
“Out with it, man!!” cried the captain.
Quell finally turned away from the screen and spoke to us. “That storm
has wounded Time. We have turned a corner in Eternity. The very stuff of
the void, the abyss has been…turned wrong side out…atom on atom…molecule
on molecule…particle on particle reversed…I feel it…so.”
And Quell reached out a hand as if his mind had fled.
“It can’t be!” I heard myself say.
“So say I!” said the captain, disbelieving.
“Space says otherwise,” said Quell, calmly. “The storm has picked us up
and thrown us back two thousand years. The past has become our present.”
“If this is now the past,” said Redleigh, “what year is it?”
Quell thought for a few moments. “Before Columbus? Yes, certainly.
Before the birth of Christ? Most likely. Before your Caesar built his
Roman roads through Britain’s moors, or Plato spoke or Aristotle
listened? Maybe. That great star, the beast, it pities us.”
“Pity?” said the captain. “How can you say pity?”
Quell searched through space with eye and mind. “It would not fight with
us. Instead, it would hide us deep, so it would not be forced to war
against us. It has given us a chance, a path away from it. That, sir, is
pity.”
“I will have none!” the captain said.
“Elijah,” I whispered.
“What?” the captain turned toward my voice.
“Elijah. The day before our liftoff from Earth. Elijah said—”
“Said what?” the captain demanded impatiently.
“‘Far out in space, there’ll come a time when you see land where there
is no land, find time where there is no time; when ancient kings will
reflesh their bones and reseat their crowns…’”
“Is that time now?” asked Redleigh.
And Quell replied, “Yes, now. For look. And…feel.”
I finished the memory of Elijah’s words: “‘Then, oh then, ship, ship’s
captain, ship’s men, all, all will be destroyed! All save one.’”
All save one, I thought, as the captain exploded with rage. “Fools, damn
fools!” he cried. “We do not take this past, accept these ancient years.
We do not hide in pyramids or run from locust plagues to cower, grovel
underneath the robes of Christ! We will stand forth.”
He turned and strode toward the lift to the upper reaches. “The airlock,
open it! Although blind, I will go forth and find the monster myself!”
CHAPTER 10
Quell’s mind moved outside the ship to find the captain, alone.
And though I could not see, I heard, and what the captain finally said
was this: “What? Nothing? All quiet, gone, spent? Is this the end? No
more the hunt, the journey, and the goal? That terrifies me most: No
more the goal! From here on then, what is the captain for? What does he
do, if time and circumstance knock all the mountains down to one dull
flat and endless plain, one long bleak winter afternoon, not even tea
and simple bread to brighten it?
“Oh Christ, the thought of mindless noons that have no ends, or end in
maunderings, stale tea leaves in a cup which tell no murders and no
blood, and so no life—that breaks my bones. The sound of one leaf
turning in a book would crack my spine. One dust mote burning on a
sunlit hearth would smother my soul. The simple things that snug
themselves in halls too clean, too quiet, that lie in well-made beds and
smile idiot smiles! Oh, turn away. Such peace is a winepress to crush
your soul.
“And yet…God, feel…the universe itself fills me this hour with quiet
joy. Unseen by me, there one small fire goes out, but yet another
freshens itself forth in birth. It is my heart’s midnight, but yet some
foundling sun reminds me that somewhere a million light-years on, a boy
gets out of bed in cold well-water morn; the circus now arrives, a
life’s begun with animals and flags and bunting and bright lights. Would
I deny his right, his joy at rising to run forth and greet the show? I
would deny, I would!
“But no, ah God, but surely no. It cracks my heart to think of him
derelict with age, but would I warn him not to turn the page and let
life begin?
“I would! Our very life’s a sin against itself!
“But then again, once more, I’d keep my tongue and let him play. Go,
boy, I would advise, on some far world. Start up the day, spin forth
your captured joys. O, know delight. Mind not on me. I stay here with my
night.”
Suddenly Small was behind me, and reached over my shoulder to adjust
some controls on the console. The screen came to life, and we saw the
captain out on the hull, tethered to the ship by an airline. Redleigh,
similarly suited for space and tied to the ship by a line, hovered a few
yards behind the captain. He had a weapon in his hand, but indecision
showed on his face behind his airmask. Quell’s mind moved, searching,
and he touched good Redleigh’s mind and in his thoughts I read: “When he
speaks so, what must I do? Destroy or not destroy? And even as he moves
back and forth, from light to dark, his madness most inconstant, so my
own sanity wavers. I would kill him. But then again, I would not.”
“Leviathan!” yelled the captain at the black emptiness surrounding him.
“Stand forth! You must be there!”
I heard his breath rasping in the silent void, as he waited for an
answer that would not come.
“Oh, God,” he continued. “Give me, oh give me back just one millionth
part of all the visions of my youth. Restore my sight. For just one
moment in this long night, give me the strength that vision gives to
finish out this thing, see darkness with these eyes, know whiteness then
for death, do justice with these hands! Give back, oh I beseech, I
humbly ask, I do cry out, I pray!”
At this the captain spun around, as if he was about to fall in the zero
gravity of space, as if the weight of all he had said was too much.
“Captain!” Redleigh cried out. “No!”
“But yes…it’s given.” The captain struggled to right himself. “Hold on,
it’s given back! My vision is clear. The universe stands right. I can
see! The stars! My God, the billion stars, the stars!”
At which the captain wept.
Redleigh, seeing those same stars, spoke to himself. “Oh thank you, God,
for miracles which teach. But then, I wonder, will he learn?”
“Who is that?” the captain said. “Redleigh? Is that you? My friend’s
face seen at last?”
He reached out and almost touched the faceplate of his first mate’s
helmet.
Redleigh responded, “It is the face of a friend. And this friend says,
Turn back. There is still time. Time comes back to us. Your sight is
healed. What more can you ask for now? It is a sign, a miracle. It is a
true gift given you, sir. Now act on it.”
“I will,” the captain said. “Let me drink first. Let me look. Oh,
Redleigh, it is like fresh mountain water. It is a cold, clear thing,
this gift of seeing once again. Oh, God, the universe is lovely strange.
I have hungered for it for thirty years. There is no bottom to my
thirst. Let me stare. Let me truly stand alert. Let my eyes open wide,
there, and yet more and more.”
There was a soft pulsation of green and yellow light on the monitor
before us, a far sound of bells and cries of murmuring waves and crowds.
I listened, close.
“Quell,” I asked. “What is it?”
“Time,” Quell said, “turns upon itself.”
“Look, and feel!” the captain said.
And Quell told all that he felt and saw: “The knot falls loose…great
Time unties itself. The years reverse. We have returned. Leviathan gives
back our time and years. This is 2099.”
“2099,” the captain said. “Redleigh, did you hear?”
“Yes, Captain, yes!”
“We are once again in our proper hour! Two gifts, Mr. Redleigh. The gift
of seeing and the gift of long-returning years.”
“God is generous, Captain. He has corrected the calendar and touched
your eyes.”
“Would that that were true.”
“It is!”
“No, it only seems to be so,” the captain said. “Not God but the beast
has made these offerings. It bribes me to stand clear. It sweetens me
with banquetings of sight to mend my soul and fend me off. That stuff is
spoiled. Need be, I’ll now sew up these eyes or pluck them out with
these two hands. I do not bribe. I do not take. I do not stay. If time
is given me, I’ll use it to make plans. If sight is given me, I’ll use
it well to mark my enemy’s burial place. Leviathan, thy gifts will be a
sword into thy breast!”
“Captain, it says escape!”
“To what? To run to Earth and on the way have time reversed again so we
are greeted by the bones of Charlemagne or fall dead with Caesar,
bloodied in his forum?”
“Christ’s bones! God’s ghost, oh give me strength to pull this trigger.”
The weapon Redleigh carried was now pointed directly at the captain.
“You never will.”
“But if I could!” said Redleigh. “How fine to land back home and go with
simple cavemen into a cave, live out a life less a nightmare than all
this, lie down with saber-tooths, sweet Christ, and rest awhile.”
“We shall rest, Mr. Redleigh, at the dead heart of the comet.”
“I see,” said Redleigh. “Now I am dead. Let me put away my gun. Here
comes Leviathan, to pick my bones. Shall I greet it, Captain, with you?”
There was a great light, an immense sound, a fantastic approaching
dazzle and splendor.
And Quell echoed, “To pick my bones.”
CHAPTER 11
“Sir?”
Quell came to attention as Downs came on deck.
“Sir, your suit is finished.” The engineer held out a suit made of some
stiff black material.
“Much thanks,” said Quell. “It is a fine piece of work.”
Downs tapped on the metal carapace. “I am tempted to die and wear the
damned thing myself.”
“Stick around,” said Quell. “You may get your wish.”
“Quell!” I said.
Quell stiffened, alert, turning toward me.
“You heard it all.”
“The captain,” I said, “has been given his sight, but is more blind than
ever before.”
“And we shall share his blindness,” said Quell. “Look!”
The dazzling storm of light grew behind my eyes, where Quell had placed
it. Likewise, it burst on the screens all around the deck.
“All hands!” the captain commanded. “Emergency life-suits on! Ready and
stand by emergency life-craft! Redleigh, inside! All hands! All hands!”
The crew ran with eager shouts.
“Oh, yes,” I said to myself. “The comet approaches. And it is a great
white holy terror that fills the universe and swallows every star. And
look, my God, oh look! The crew! They run like children run at their
games.”
“Listen to their thoughts,” Quell said, gesturing at the people rushing
madly around us. “I give you leave. The hot blood rushes in their veins.
Hear how they truly run!”
He touched my brow and their thoughts flowed into mine. I felt and heard
the shriek, the joyous cry, the glorious wail and shout of men running
downhill to doom.
The captain appeared among us, and all hands turned to him, faces
flushed with anticipation.
“Have you ever seen the like?!” said the captain. “Oh God, that fire,
brighter than ten million suns. Everyone to stations.”
“Aye aye, sir!” the crew shouted as one.
“Now,” said the captain by radio to the crew in their suits, “in each
and every life-craft ship, know the engines of destruction. Draw on my
hunger to devour this thing—make it yours! In each craft is a beam more
powerful than any hell-fire laser ever built. Wider, longer, swifter,
surer. Use that power! Fret the beast. Lay him waste. Life-craft One
under command of crewman Downs?”
“Downs here,” cried the man. “Life-craft One ready!”
“Launch!”
I heard the first craft blast away, carrying Downs and his companion.
“Life-craft Two!” the captain shouted. “Crewman Small!”
“Small here,” a voice replied. “Life-craft Two…ready!”
“Launch!”
Concussion, and Small and his voice and his crewmate were gone.
“Mr. Redleigh,” said the captain, turning to his first mate. “The third
craft is yours. Use it well.”
“Sir!” said Redleigh.
“Quell,” said the captain. And I saw that Quell had donned his black
suit. “Quell, you go with Redleigh. Ishmael stays with me, here on the
main ship. Stand by for launch of Life-craft Three.”
“Quell,” Redleigh said, as the two prepared to leave the main deck. “You
wear your suit of death.”
“It fits, Mr. Redleigh, it fits.”
“Will there be room for me?”
“Death,” Quell said, “makes a large coffin. We shall not knock elbows.”
“All right,” said Redleigh. “Then, on the double.”
Quell turned to me before leaving, as if to say something.
“Quell,” I said, “let me go with you. Captain? I must ask—”
But Quell cut in. “No. Stay. And live. You will live, you know, to be
very old. I, who sees beyond, tell you this. Be old, Ishmael. Be happy.
Dear friend, goodbye.”
“Oh, Quell,” I whispered. “Leave your mind with me, so we may be friends
to the end.”
I felt his thoughts, his mind did linger in my ears and in my head.
“My mind is yours,” said Quell as he left. “Yours.”
A few moments later, the captain commanded, “Launch Life-craft Three!”
Redleigh’s voice came over the intercom, “Life-craft Three launching!”
Concussion. Quell and Redleigh catapulted into the universe.
“Ishmael, stand close,” said the captain.
“Sir!” I said.
“They fly,” the captain said. “There, see the life-crafts as they go.”
Watching the computer screen, we saw the craft, already far out beyond
us, and heard their voices, mingled. And in those lonely craft, Quell,
Redleigh, Small, and Downs. The voices said, “Craft One, full speed.
Craft Two, full. Three, on target.”
“Oh, Ishmael, look!” the captain said. “That is the whole Antarctic
continent, all white, and somehow hurled upon the universal air to shake
our sight! Leviathan!”
“It’s too much!” I cried. “I cannot see!”
“Let it burn your eyes, as it burned mine,” the captain said. “We’ll
still have hands to put it out!”
“Quell!” I shouted.
For I was hearing music: the music of Quell’s ancestors, the funeral
dirge of his grandfather. It was in Quell’s mind, and somehow it came to
me.
Quell’s voice replied, long miles away: “I hear you, young friend.”
“Oh, Quell, that music!”
“Yes,” Quell said. “Leviathan has learned that tune…and plays it well.”
And then the music was playing not only in my head, but coming over the
ship’s speakers—loud, crashing, melancholy waves.
Suddenly the captain said, “I’ll stop that sound! I’ll kill that thing!
Crafts One and Two—destroy! Craft Three—destroy! Redleigh—destroy!”
And Redleigh’s voice, in concert with the others, echoed back:
“Destroy!”
The music crescendoed—immense sounds and vibrations. It swelled and rose
and fell away.
“Destroy and be destroyed,” I said to myself, remembering. To the
captain, I said, “Oh, sir, our ships are too small. That comet destroys
them! I see the men’s bones, as if on an X-ray. The laser-beam weapons
they aim are no more than matchstick torches against that great hand of
fire that closes in on them like a fist.”
I watched as Life-crafts One, Two, and Three disappeared.
“There,” I whispered. “I faintly see. My vision fades. The ships, one by
one, fall, plucked free of skins, their metal skeletons revealed, the
men tossed out in millrace radiation. Flashing meteors…all
swallowed…vanishing.”
“No, good Ishmael,” came Quell’s faint whisper. “We are gone, but we
have each been thrown to a different warp in Time.”
“The men in Life-craft One,” I asked, “their weapons stilled, where do
they go?”
Quell’s whisper said, “Our friend Downs is sent to death, perhaps, and
burial with Richard, mad lost king, on his green plain, his crown and
blood tossed at his feet.”
“The men in Life-craft Two spin further on. They drop, despairing,
where?”
“In Illinois. Oh strange,” came Quell’s mute words.
“In Illinois, near the tomb where Lincoln sleeps. And Redleigh? Quell,
what of him?”
“Still here. We know not where we go. This comet steers us. Time is its
weapon!”
I turned to the captain. “Time,” I said. “The comet has flung them
throughout Time. Quell says Time is its weapon.”
“As Time is mine!” said the captain. “My crew dispersed, my weapons
gone, yet I have one huge weapon left, aboard this ship. Time! Time is
all! So I have made an engine that, like Leviathan, can twist all Time
like a spinning top. Now, with my vast machine we’ll use the comet’s
power against itself. As in the Orient, we fall and take our killer with
us, using all his weight for his defeat. That mouth which would have
swallowed us, we will cause to gape and turn about. What’s larger than
Leviathan? Eternity! The void! The dark abyss! The stuff between the
stars! That is the mouth I use. My engine will open a seam in space and
drop Leviathan in.”
And in that instant, our captain played some keys of the main computer
console and the engines of our rocket throbbed to hysteria.
“Leviathan,” cried the captain, “meet Leviathan! Destruction, meet
destruction! Comet, see thy mirror image! Annihilation, know
annihilation!”
The entire universe around us shook. I heard Quell’s voice as it faded
among the stars.
“Oh, Ishmael.”
“Quell!”
The captain’s voice was loud in that last great sound, and in that final
moment he shouted, “What? My ship gone, too? Its flesh ripped free? Its
bones strewn forth? Am I blind once more? Then blind, I seize on thee!
Dead, I grapple with thee. Where is thy heart? Oh there, now there—I’ll
stifle it. Oh damned and dread Leviathan, it comes to this!”
There was a final explosion—a great outpouring of shrapneled ship, lost
humans, and wild beams. And I, thrown upward, floated in my life-suit
above the wreckage, surrounded by mirages, dreams, motes, shadows,
stars.
Gone, yes, all gone, I thought. Down the long black mineshaft of the
universe, its bridal veil trailing despairs and woes, celebrating
itself, a mindless mystery forever in motion, but…wait…now truly gone?
Gone all the ships, men, large, small, sane or mad, the captain with
them, madness maddened. Did he open wide the seam, that strange vast
hole in eternity he spoke of, and drop Leviathan in? And are they lost
forever? Or will, I wonder, Leviathan return? Will he return in thirty
years and bring with him all those who would have killed him?
Long years from now, will the monster and my mates slide down the length
of the abyss, return as one at last…the hunter and the hunted, the
feared and the fearer, the madness and the vaulting dream of madness,
together fused forever through centuries yet unborn? Will it all be
here, will it all pass by when Earth is old and looks up to behold
Leviathan, our ships, our crew, our captain—an endless cortege to the
specter ghost?
A dark shape floated nearby, turning slowly. I recognized it as Quell’s
funeral suit.
“Quell!”
I reached out and seized the suit, and turning it, found it empty. I
spoke to empty space. “No, just the chaff, the husk. My good friend
gone. Oh, Quell.”
I embraced the empty suit and the lost funeral music of Quell’s
ancestors sounded once again in my ears.
Alone, I floated with the memory of good Quell, who had gone to be with
comets and their gods. I drifted so, aimlessly, holding on to the suit,
a strange life-raft, knowing the air in my life-suit would soon be gone.
How long? I wondered. A day, maybe two…until…?
Above, I see a light, and hear a voice through static.
“Starship Rachel, this is starship Rachel…”
A ship, passing, investigating the wreckage, comes to pick me up at
last. The Rachel, who, in her long search for her missing children finds
but another orphan. I let the coffin go. I let the memory of Quell go to
his light-year burial ground.
The drama’s done. Only one remains. I, Ishmael, alone, am here to tell
you this.
“Starship Rachel standing by. We see you. Come aboard. Come aboard.”
About the Author
The author of more than thirty books, RAY BRADBURY is one of the most
celebrated fiction writers of our time. Among his best-known works are
Fahrenheit 451, The Martian Chronicles, The Illustrated Man, Dandelion
Wine, and Something Wicked This Way Comes. He has written for the
theater and the cinema, including the screenplay for John Huston’s
classic film adaptation of Moby Dick, and was nominated for an Academy
Award. He adapted sixty-five of his stories for television’s The Ray
Bradbury Theater, and won an Emmy for his teleplay of The Halloween
Tree. He has been honored with a National Book Foundation medal for
Distinguished Contribution to American Letters, a National Medal of
Arts, and a Pulitzer Prize Special Citation. Among his most recent books
are the novels Farewell Summer and From the Dust Returned—selected as
one of the Best Books of the Year by the Los Angeles Times—and The Cat’s
Pajamas, a new story collection. Mr. Bradbury lives in Los Angeles.
www.raybradbury.com
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins author.
ALSO BY RAY BRADBURY
AHMED AND THE OBLIVION MACHINES BRADBURY SPEAKS
BRADBURY STORIES
THE CAT’S PAJAMAS
DANDELION WINE
DARK CARNIVAL
DEATH IS A LONELY BUSINESS
DRIVING BLIND
FAHRENHEIT 451
FAREWELL SUMMER
FROM THE DUST RETURNED
A GRAVEYARD FOR LUNATICS
GREEN SHADOWS, WHITE WHALE
THE HALLOWEEN TREE
I SING THE BODY ELECTRIC!
THE ILLUSTRATED MAN
LET’S ALL KILL CONSTANCE
LONG AFTER MIDNIGHT
THE MACHINERIES OF JOY
THE MARTIAN CHRONICLES
A MEDICINE FOR MELANCHOLY
THE OCTOBER COUNTRY
ONE MORE FOR THE ROAD
QUICKER THAN THE EYE
R IS FOR ROCKET
S IS FOR SPACE
SOMETHING WICKED THIS WAY COMES A SOUND OF THUNDER
THE STORIES OF RAY BRADBURY
THE TOYNBEE CONVECTOR
WHEN ELEPHANTS LAST IN THE DOORYARD BLOOMED YESTERMORROW
ZEN IN THE ART OF WRITING
Credits
Jacket design by James L. Iacobelli
Jacket illustration Tim O’Brien/lottreps.com
Copyright
This book is a work of fiction. The characters, incidents, and dialogue
are drawn from the author’s imagination and are not to be construed as
real. Any resemblance to actual events or persons, living or dead, is
entirely coincidental.
NOW AND FOREVER. Copyright © 2007 by Ray Bradbury. All rights reserved
under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment
of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive,
non-transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book
on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins
e-books.
Mobipocket Reader July 2007 ISBN 978-0-06-144491-3
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.uk.harpercollinsebooks.com
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com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/9j/4AAQSkZJRgABAQAAAQABAAD/2wBDAAgGBgcGBQgHBwcJCQgKDBQNDAsLDBkSEw8UHRo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/9j/4AAQSkZJRgABAQAAAQABAAD/2wBDAAgGBgcGBQgHBwcJCQgKDBQNDAsLDBkSEw8UHRo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