prose_contemporaryRayBradburyApple-core BaltimorecutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Apple-core Baltimore
On the way to the cemetery Menville decided they needed to pick up
something to eat, so they stopped the car at a roadside stand near an
orange grove where there were displays of bananas, apples, blueberries,
and, of course, oranges.
Menville picked out two wonderful, big, glossy apples and handed one to
Smith.
Smith said, ‘How come?’
Menville, looking enigmatic, just said, ‘Eat, eat.’ They stowed their
jackets in the car and walked the rest of the way to the graveyard.
Once inside the gates, they walked a great distance until at last they
came to a special marker.
Smith looked down and said, ‘Russ Simpson. Wasn’t he an old friend of
yours from high school?’
‘Yeah,’ said Menville. ‘That was the one. Part of the gang. My very best
friend, actually. Russ Simpson.’
They stood for a while, biting into their apples, chewing quietly.
‘He must have been very special,’ Smith said. ‘You’ve come all this way.
But you didn’t bring any flowers.’
‘No, only these apples. You’ll see.’
Smith stared at the marker. ‘What was there about him that was so
special?’
Menville took another bite of his apple and said, ‘He wasconstant. He
was there every noon, he was there on the streetcar going to school and
then back home every day. He was there at recess, he sat across from me
in homeroom, and we took a class in the short story together. It was
that kind of thing. Oh, sure, on occasion he did crazy stuff.’
‘Like what?’ said Smith.
‘Well, we had this little gang of five or six guys who met at lunchtime.
We were all different, but on the other hand, we were all sort of the
same. Russ used to sort of pick at me, you know how friends do.’
‘Pick? Like what?’
‘He liked to play a game. He’d look at all of us and say, “Someone say
‘Granger.’” He’d look at me and say, “Say ‘Granger.’” I’d say “Granger”
and Russ would shake his head and say, “No, no. One of you others say
‘Granger.’” So one of the other guys would say “Granger” and they would
all laugh, a big reaction, because he said “Granger” just the right way.
Then Russ would turn to me and say, “Now it’s your turn, you say it.” I
would say “Granger” and no one would laugh and I’d stand there, feeling
left out.
‘There was a trick to the whole thing but I was so stupid, so naive,
that I could never figure out that it was a joke, the sort of thing they
played on me.
‘Then one time I was over at Russ’s house and a friend of his named
Pipkin leaned over the balcony in the living room and dropped a cat on
me. Can you believe that?! The cat landed right on my head and clawed my
face. It could have put out my eyes, I thought later. Russ thought it
was a great joke. Russ was laughing and Pip was laughing, and I threw
the cat across the room. Russ was indignant. “Watch what you’re doing
with the cat!” he said. “Watch what the cat was doing with me!” I cried.
That was a big joke; he told everyone. They all laughed, except me.’
‘That’s some memory,’ said Smith.
‘He was there every day, was in school with me, my best friend. Every
once in a while, at lunchtime, he’d eat an apple and when he finished
he’d say, “Apple core.” And one of the other guys would say,
“Baltimore.” Russ would then say, “Who’s your friend?” They’d point at
me and he’d throw the apple core–hard–at me. This was a routine; it
happened at least once a week for a couple of years. Apple-core
Baltimore.’
‘And this was your best friend?’
‘Sure, my best friend.’
They stood there by the grave, still working at their apples. The sun
was getting hotter and there was no breeze.
‘What else?’ said Smith.
‘Oh, not much. Well, sometimes at lunchtime I’d ask the typing teacher
to let me use one of the typewriters so I could write, as I didn’t have
a typewriter of my own.
‘Finally, I had a chance to buy one real cheap, so I went without lunch
for a month or so, saving my lunch money. Finally, I had enough to buy
my very own typewriter so I could write whenever I wanted.
‘One day Russ looked at me and said, “My God, do you realize what you
are?” I said, “What?” He said, “You’re a stale fruitcake, giving up your
money to buy that damned typewriter. A stale fruitcake.”
‘I often thought later that someday when I finished my great American
novel, that’s what I’d call it:Stale Fruitcake.’
Smith said, ‘Better thanGatsby, huh?’
‘Gatsby, sure. Anyway, I had the typewriter.’
They were quiet then, the only sound the last bites into their
diminishing apples.
A distant expression came over Smith’s face and he blinked and suddenly
whispered, ‘Apple-core.’
To which, quickly, Menville said, ‘Baltimore.’
Smith then said, ‘Who’s your friend?’
Menville, looking down at the marker near his feet, eyes wide, said,
‘Granger.’
‘Granger?’ said Smith, and stared at his friend.
‘Yeah,’ said Menville. ‘Granger.’
At this Smith raised his hand and threw his apple core down on top of
the gravestone.
No sooner was this done than Menville hurled his apple core down, then
reached and took it up again and threw it a second time so that the
gravestone was so littered with shreds of the apple core that you
couldn’t make out the name on the marker.
They stared at the mess.
Then Menville turned and began to walk away, threading through the
gravestones, tears streaming down his cheeks.
Smith called after him. ‘Where are you going?’
Menville, not looking back, said in a hoarse voice, ‘To get some more
apples, damn it to hell, more apples.’

