antiqueRayBradburyLet's All Kill ConstanceundRayBradburycalibre
0.8.6522.8.201202dce4ae-e9f7-4986-9b9a-90fa69e0e6951.0
This book is dedicated
with love
to my daughter
ALEXANDRA,
without whose help
the Third Millennium
might never have arrived.
and again
with gratitude and love
to SID STEBEL
CHAPTER ONE
IT was a dark and stormy night.
Is that one way to catch your reader?
Well, then, it was a stormy night with dark rain pouring in drenches on
Venice, California, the sky shattered by lightning at midnight. It had
rained from sunset going headlong toward dawn. No creature stirred in
that downfall. The shades in the bungalows were drawn on faint blue
glimmers where night owls deathwatched bad news or worse. The only thing
that moved in all that flood ten miles south and ten miles north was
Death. And someone running fast ahead of Death.
To bang on my paper-thin oceanfront bungalow door.
Shocking me, hunched at my typewriter, digging graves, my cure for
insomnia. I was trapped in a tomb when the hammering hit my door,
midstorm.
I flung the door wide to find: Constance Rattigan.
Or, as she was widely known, The Rattigan.
A series of flicker-flash lightning bolts cracked the sky and
photographed, dark, light, light, dark, a dozen times: Rattigan.
Forty years of triumphs and disasters crammed in one brown surf-seal
body. Golden tan, five feet two inches tall, here she comes, there she
goes, swimming far out at sunset, bodysurfing back, they said, at dawn,
to be beached at all hours, barking with the sea beasts half a mile out,
or idling in her oceanside pool, a martini in each hand, stark naked to
the sun. Or whiplashing down into her basement projection room to watch
herself run, timeless, on the pale ceiling with Eric Von Stroheim, Jack
Gilbert, or Rod La Rocque's ghosts, then abandoning her silent laughter
on the cellar walls, vanishing in the surf again, a quick target that
Time and Death could never catch.
Constance .
The Rattigan.
"My God, what are you doing here?" she cried, rain, or tears, on her
wild suntanned face.
"My God," I said. "What are you?"
"Answer my question!"
"Maggie's east at a teachers' conference. I'm trying to finish my new
novel. Our house, inland, is deserted. My old landlord said, your beach
apartment's empty, come write, swim. And here I am. My God, Constance ,
get inside. You'll drown!"
"I already have. Stand back!"
But Constance did not move. For a long moment she stood shivering in the
light of great sheets of lightning and the following sound of thunder.
One moment I thought I saw the woman that I had known for years, larger
than life, leaping into and jumping out of the sea, whose image I had
witnessed on the ceiling and walls of her basement's projection room,
backstroking through the lives of Von Stroheim and other silent ghosts.
Then, that changed. She stood in the doorway, diminished by light and
sound. She shrank to a child, clutching a black bag to her chest,
holding herself from the cold, eyes shut with some unguessed dread. It
was hard for me to believe that Rattigan, the eternal film star, had
come to visit in the midst of thunders.
I finally said again, "Come in, come in."
She repeated her whisper, "Stand back!"
She swarmed on me, and with one vacuum-suction kiss, harassed my tongue
like saltwater taffy, and fled. Halfway across the room she thought to
come back and buss my cheek lightly.
"Jeez, that's some flavor," she said. "But wait, I'm scared!"
Hugging her elbows, she sogged down to dampen my sofa. I brought a huge
towel, pulled off her dress, and wrapped her.
"You do this to all your women?" she said, teeth chattering.
"Only on dark and stormy nights."
"I won't tell Maggie."
"Hold still, Rattigan, for God's sake."
"Men have said that all my life. Then they drive a stake through my
heart."
"Are your teeth gritting because you're half-drowned or scared?"
"Let's see." She sank back, exhausted. "I ran all the way from my place.
I knew you weren't here, it's been years since you left, but Christ, how
great to find you! Save me!"
"From what, for God's sake?"
"Death."
"No one gets saved from that, Constance ."
"Don't say that! I didn't come to die. I'm here, Christ, to live
forever!"
"That's just a prayer, Constance , not reality."
"You're going to live forever. Your books!"
"Forty years, maybe."
"Don't knock forty years. I could use a few."
"You could use a drink. Sit still."
I brought out a half bottle of Cold Duck.
"Jesus! What's that?"
"I hate scotch and this is el cheapo writer's stuff. Drink."
"It's hemlock." She drank and grimaced. "Quick! Something else!"
In our midget bathroom I found a small flask of vodka, kept for nights
when dawn was far off. Constance seized it.
"Come to Mama!"
She chugalugged.
"Easy, Constance ."
"You don't have my death cramps."
She finished three more shots and handed me the flask, eyes shut.
"God is good."
She fell back on the pillows.
"You wanna hear about that damn thing that chased me down the shore?"
"Wait." I put the bottle of Cold Duck to my lips and drank. "Shoot."
"Well," she said. "Death."
CHAPTER TWO
I WAS beginning to wish there was more in that empty vodka flask.
Shivering, I turned on the small gas heater in the hall, searched the
kitchen, found a bottle of Ripple.
"Hell!" Rattigan cried. "That's hair tonic!" She drank and shivered.
"Where was I?"
"Running fast."
"Yeah, but whatever I ran away from came with."
The front door knocked with wind.
I grabbed her hand until the knocking stopped.
Then she picked up her big black purse and handed over a small book,
trembling.
"Here."
I read: Los Angeles Telephone Directory, 1900. "Oh, Lord," I whispered.
"Tell me why I brought that?" she said.
I turned from the As on down through the Gs and Hs and on through M and
TV and O to the end, the names, the names, from a lost year, the names,
oh my God, the names.
"Let it sink in," said Constance .
I started up front. A for Alexander, Albert, and William. B for
Burroughs. C for ...
"Good grief," I whispered. "1900. This is I960." I looked at Constance ,
pale under her eternal summer tan. "These people. Only a few are still
alive." I stared at the names. "No use calling most of these numbers.
This is—"
"What?"
"A Book of the Dead."
"Bull's-eye."
"A Book of the Dead," I said. "Egyptian. Fresh from the tomb."
"Fresh out." Constance waited.
"Someone sent this to you?" I said. "Was there a note?"
"There doesn't have to be a note, does there?"
I turned more pages. "No. Since practically everyone here is gone, the
implication is—“
"I'll soon be silent."
"You'd be the last name in these pages of the dead?"
"Yep," said Constance .
I went to turn the heat up and shivered.
"What an awful thing to do."
"Awful."
"Telephone books," I murmured. "Maggie says I cry at them, but it all
depends on what telephone books, when."
"All depends. Now ..."
From her purse she pulled out a second small black book.
"Open that."
I opened it and read, "Constance Rattigan" and her address on the beach,
and turned to the first page. It was all As.
"Abrams, Alexander, Alsop, Allen."
I went on.
" Baldwin , Bradley, Benson, Burton , Buss . . ."
And felt a coldness take my fingers.
"These are all friends of yours? I know those names."
"And . . . ?"
"Not all, but most of them, buried out at Forest Lawn. But dug up
tonight. A graveyard book," I said.
"And worse than the one from 1900."
"Why?"
"I gave this one away years ago. To the Hollywood Helpers. I didn't have
the heart to erase the names. The dead accumulated. A few live ones
remained. But I gave the book away. Now it's back. Found it when I came
in tonight from the surf."
"Jesus, you swim in this weather?"
"Rain or shine. And tonight I came back to find this lying like a
tombstone in my yard."
“No note?”
"By saying nothing, it says everything."
"Christ." I took the old directory in one hand, Rattigan's small names
and numbers book in the other.
"Two almost-Books of the Dead," I said.
"Almost, yes," said Constance . "Look here, and here, and also here."
She showed me three names on three pages, each with a red ink circle
around it and a crucifix.
"These names?" I said. "Special?"
"Special, yes. AW dead. Or so I think. But they're marked, aren't they?
With a cross by each, which means what?"
"Marked to die? Next up?"
"Yes, no, I don't know, except it scares me. Look."
Her name, up front, had a red ink circle around it, plus the crucifix.
"Book of the Dead, plus a list of the soon possibly dead?"
"Holding it, how does that book feel to you?"
"Cold," I said. "Awfully cold."
The rain beat on the roof.
"Who would do a thing like this to you, Constance? Name a few."
"Hell, ten thousand." She paused to add sums. "Would you believe nine
hundred? Give or take a dozen."
"My God, that's too many suspects."
"Spread over thirty years? Sparse."
"Sparse!" I cried.
"They stood in lines on the beach."
"You didn't have to ask them in!"
"When they all shouted Rattigan!?"
"You didn't have to listen."
"What is this, a Baptist revival?"
“Sorry.”
"Well." She took the last swig in the bottle and winced. "Will you help
find this son of a bitch, or two sons of bitches, if the Books of the
Dead were sent by separate creeps?"
"I'm no detective, Constance."
"How come I remember you half-drowned in the canal with that psycho
Shrank?"
"Well . . ."
"How come I saw you up on Notre Dame at Fenix Studios with the
Hunchback? Please help Mama."
"Let me sleep on it."
"No sleep tonight. Hug these old bones. Now ..."
She stood up with the two Books of the Dead and walked across the room
to open the door on black rain and the surf eating the shore, and aimed
the books. "Wait!" I cried. "If I'm going to help, I'll need those!"
"Atta boy." She shut the door. "Bed and hugs? But no phys ed."
"I wasn't planning, Constance ," I said.
CHAPTER THREE
AT two forty-five in the middle of the dark storm, a terrific lightning
bolt rammed the earth behind my bungalow. Thunder erupted. Mice died in
the walls.
Rattigan leaped upright in bed.
"Save me!" she yelled.
" Constance ." I stared through the dark. "You talking to yourself, God,
or me?"
"Whoever's listening!"
"We all are."
She lay in my arms.
The telephone rang at three A.M. , the hour when all souls die if they
need to die.
I lifted the receiver.
'"Who's in bed with you?" Maggie asked from some country with no rains
and no storms.
I searched Constance 's suntanned face, with the white skull lost under
her summer flesh.
"No one," I said.
And it was almost true.
CHAPTER FOUR
AT six in the morning dawn was out there somewhere, but you couldn't see
it for the rain. Lightning still flashed and took pictures of the tide
slamming the shore.
An incredibly big lightning bolt struck out in the street and I knew if
I reached across the bed, the other side would be empty.
" Constance !"
The front door stood wide like a stage exit, with rain drumming the
carpet, and the two phone books, large and small, dropped for me to
find.
" Constance ," I said in dismay, and looked around.
At least she put on her dress, I thought.
I telephoned her number. Silence.
I shrugged on my raincoat and trudged up the shoreline, blinded by rain,
and stood in front of her Arabian-fortress house, which was brightly lit
inside and out.
But no shadows moved anywhere.
" Constance !" I yelled.
The lights stayed on and the silence with it.
A monstrous wave slammed the shore.
I looked for her footprints going out to the tide.
None.
Thank God, I thought. But then, the rain would have erased them.
"All right for you!" I yelled.
And went away.
CHAPTER FIVE
LATER I moved along the dusty path through the jungle trees and the wild
azalea bushes carrying two six-packs. I knocked on Crumley's carved
African front door and waited. I knocked again. Silence. I set one
six-pack of beer against the door and backed off.
After eight or nine long breaths, the door opened just enough to let a
nicotine-stained hand grab the beer and pull it in. The door shut.
"Crumley," I yelled. I ran up to the door.
"Go away," said a voice from inside.
"Crumley, it's the Crazy. Let me in!"
"No way," said Crumley's voice, liquid now, for he had opened the first
beer. "Your wife called."
"Damn!" I whispered.
Crumley swallowed. "She said that every time she leaves town, you fall
off the pier in deep guano, or karate-chop a team of lesbian midgets."
"She didn't say that!"
"Look, Willie"—for Shakespeare—"I'm an old man and can't take those
graveyard carousels and crocodile men snor-keling the canals at midnight
. Drop that other six-pack. Thank God for your wife."
"Damn," I murmured.
"She said she'll come home early if you don't cease and desist."
"She would, too," I muttered.
"Nothing like a wife coming home early to spoil the chaos. Wait." He
took a swallow. "You're okay, William, but no thanks."
I set the other six-pack down and put the 1900 telephone book and
Rattigan's private phone book on top, and backed off.
After a long while that hand emerged again, touched Braille-wise over
the books, knocked them off, and grabbed the beer. I waited. Finally the
door reopened. The hand, curious, fumbled the books and snatched them
in.
"Good!" I cried.
Good! I thought. In one hour, by God . . . he'll call!
CHAPTER SIX
IN one hour, Crumley called.
But didn't call me William.
He said, "Crud, crap, crapola. You really know how to hook a guy. What
is it with these goddamn Books of the Dead?"
"Why do you say that?"
"Hell, I was born in a mortuary, raised in a graveyard, matriculated in
the Valley of the Kings outside Karnak in upper, or was it lower, Egypt
? Some nights I dream I'm wrapped in creosote. Who wouldn't know a book
that's dead when it's served with his beer?"
"Same old Crumley," I said.
"I wish it wasn't. When I hang up I'm calling your wife!"
"Don't!"
"Why not?"
"Because—" I stopped, gasped, and then blurted out, "I need you!"
"Crud."
"Did you hear what I said?"
"I heard," he muttered. "Christ."
And at last, "Meet you down by Rattigan's. Around sunset. When things
come out of the surf to get you."
"Rattigan's."
He hung up before I could.
CHAPTER SEVEN
EVERYTHING by night, that's the ticket. Nothing at noon ; the sun is too
bright, the shadows wait. The sky burns so nothing dares move. There is
no fun in sunlit exposure. Midnight brings fun when the shadows under
trees lift their skirts and glide. Wind arrives. Leaves fall. Footsteps
echo. Beams and floorboards creak. Dust sifts from tombstone angel
wings. Shadows soar like ravens. Before dawn, the streetlights die, the
town goes briefly blind.
It is then that all good mysteries start, all adventures linger. Dawn
never was. Everyone holds their breath to bind the darkness, save the
terror, nail the shadows.
So it was only proper that as dark waves were striking a darker shore, I
met Crumley on the sand, out front of her big white Arabian-fortress
beach house. We walked up and looked in.
All the doors still stood wide, bright lights burned inside while
Gershwin punched holes in a player-piano roll in 1928 to be played again
and again, triple time, with no one listening except me and Crumley
walking through lots of music, but no Constance .
I opened my mouth to apologize for calling Crumley.
"Drink your gin and shut up." Crumley thrust a beer at me.
"Now," he went on, "what the hell does all this mean?" He thumbed the
pages of Rattigan's personal Book of the Dead. "Here, here, and over
here."
There were red ink marks circling a half-dozen names, with deeply
indented crucifixes freshly inscribed.
" Constance guessed, and so did I, that those marks meant the owners of
those names were still alive, but maybe not for long. What do you
think?"
"I don't," said Crumley. "This is your picnic. I was all set to head for
Yosemite this weekend, and you show up like a film producer who improves
the flavor of screenplays by peeing on every other scene. I'd better run
for Yosemite right now; you got that look of a wild rabbit with
intuitions."
"Hold on." For he was starting to move. "Don't you want to prove or
disprove which of these names are still kicking or which dropped dead?"
I grabbed the book, then tossed it back so he had to catch. It fell open
at one page with a more-than-enormous crucifix by an
almost-circus-banner name. Crumley scowled. I read the name upside down:
Califia. Queen Califia. Bunker Hill . No address. But there was a phone
number.
Crumley could not take his eyes off it, scowling.
"Know where that is?" I said.
" Bunker Hill , hell, I know, I know. I was born a few blocks north of
there. A real free-for-all stewpot of Mexicans, Gypsies,
stovepipe-out-the-window Irish, white trash and black. Used to go by
there to look in at Callahan and Ortega, Funeral Directors. Hoped to see
real bodies. My God, Callahan and Ortega, what names, right there in the
middle of Juarez II, Guadalajara bums, dead flowers from Rosarita Beach
, Dublin whores. Crud!" Crumley suddenly yelled, furious at listening to
his own travel talk, half selling himself on my next expedition. "Did
you hear me? Did you listen? God!"
"I heard," I said. "So why don't we just call one of those red circle
numbers to see what's aboveground or below?"
And before he could protest, I seized the book and ran up the dune to
Rattigan's outdoor pool, brightly lit, with an extension phone on a
glass-top patio table, waiting. I didn't dare look at Crumley, who had
not moved as I dialed.
A voice answered from long miles away. That number was no longer in
service. Damn, I thought, and then, Wait!
I dialed information swiftly, got a number, dialed it, and held the
phone out so Crumley could hear the voice:
"Callahan and Ortega, good evening," the voice said, a full rich ripe
brogue from center stage of Abbey Theatre. I smiled wildly. I saw
Crumley, below, twitch.
Callahan and Ortega," the voice repeated, louder now, its temper roused.
A long pause. I stayed mum. "Who the hell is this?"
I hung up before Crumley reached me.
"Son of a bitch," he said, hooked.
"Two blocks, maybe three, from where you were born?"
"Four, you conniving bastard."
"Well?" I said.
Crumley grabbed Rattigan's book.
"Almost but not quite a Book of the Dead?" he said.
"Want to try another number?" I opened the book, turned, and stopped
under the Rs. "Here's one, oh Lord yes, even better than Queen Califia."
Crumley squinted. "Rattigan, Mount Lowe . What kind of Rattigan lives up
on Mount Lowe ? That's where the big red trolley that's been dead half
my lifetime used to take thousands up for picnics."
Memory shadowed Crumley's face.
I touched another name.
"Rattigan. St. Vibiana's Cathedral."
"What kind of Rattigan, holy jumping Jesus, hides out in St. Vibiana's
Cathedral?"
"Spoken like a born-again Catholic." I studied Crumley's now-permanent
scowl. "Want to know? I'm on my way."
I took three false steps before Crumley swore. "How the hell you going
to get there with no license and no car?"
I kept my back turned. "You're going to take me."
There was a long brooding silence.
"Right?" I prompted.
"You know how in hell to find where the Mount Lowe trolley once ran?"
"I was carried up by my folks when I was eighteen months old."
"That means you can show the way?"
"Total recall."
"Shut up," said Crumley as he tossed a half-dozen bottles of beer into
the jalopy. "Get in the car."
We got in, left Gershwin to punch piano-roll holes in Paris , and drove
away.
"Don't say anything," said Crumley. "Just nod your head left, right, or
straight ahead."
CHAPTER EIGHT
"I'LL be damned if I know why in hell I'm doing this," Crumley muttered,
almost driving on the wrong side of the street. "I said, I'll be damned
if I know why in hell—"
"I heard you," I said, watching the mountains and the foothills coming
closer.
"You know who you remind me of?" Crumley snorted. "My first and only
wife, who knew how to flimflam me with her shapes and sizes and big
smiles."
"Do I flimflam you?"
"Say you don't and I'll throw you out of the car. When you see me
coming, you sit and pretend to be working a crossword puzzle. You're
maybe four words into it before I grab your pencil and shove you outta
the way."
"Did I ever do that, Crumley?"
"Don't get me mad. You watching the street signs? Do so.
Now. Tell me, why are you heading this damn-fool expedition?"
I looked at the Rattigan phone book in my lap. "She was running away,
she said. From Death, from one of die names in this book. Maybe one of
them sent it to her as a spoiled gift. Or maybe she was running toward
them, like we're doing, heading for one to see if he's the sinner who
dared to send tombstone dictionaries to impressionable child actresses."
"Rattigan's no child," Crumley groused.
"She is. She wouldn't've been so great up on the screen if she hadn't
kept one heckuva lot of her Meglin Kiddie self locked up in all those
sexual acrobatics. It's not the old Rattigan who's scared here; it's the
schoolgirl in panic running through the dark forest, Hollywood , full of
monsters."
"You whipping up another of your Christmas fruitcakes full of nuts?"
"Does it sound like it?"
"No comment. Why would one of these red-lined friends send her two books
full of lousy memories?"
"Why not? Constance loved a lot of people in her time. So, years later,
one way or another, a lot of people hate her. They got rejected, left
behind, forgotten. She got famous. They were found with the trash by the
side of the road. Or maybe they're real old now and dying, and before
they go they want to spoil things."
"You're beginning to sound like me," Crumley said.
"God help me, I hope not. I mean—"
"It's okay. You'll never be Crumley, just like I'll never be Jules Verne
Junior. Where in hell are we?"
I glanced up quickly.
"Hey!" I said. "This is it. Mount Lowe! Where the great old red trolley
train fell down dead, a long time ago.
"Professor Lowe," I said, reading some offhand memory from the dark side
of my eyelids, "was the man who invented balloon photography during the
Civil War."
"Where did that come from?" Crumley exclaimed.
"It just came," I said, unsettled.
"You're full of useless information."
"Oh, I don't know," I said, offended. "We're here at Mount Lowe , right?
And it's named for Professor Lowe and his Toonerville Trolley scaling
its heights, right?"
"Yeah, yeah, sure," Crumley said.
"Well then, Professor Lowe invented hot-air balloon photography that
helped catch enemy images in the great war of the states. Balloons, and
a new invention, trains, won for the North."
"Okay, okay," Crumley grumbled. "I'm outta the car and ready to climb."
I leaned out the car window and looked at the long weed-choked path that
went up and up a long incline in evening's gathering shadows.
I shut my eyes and recited. "It's three miles to the top. You really
want to walk?"
Crumley glared at the foothill.
"Hell, no." He got back in the car and banged the door shut. "Is there
any chance we could run off the edge of that damn narrow path? We'd be
goners."
"Always the chance. Onward!"
Crumley edged our jalopy to the foot of the mostly blind path, cut the
engine, got out, walked over, kicked some dirt, and pulled some weeds.
"Hallelujah!" he exclaimed. "Iron, steel! The old rail track, didn't
bother to yank it out, just buried it!"
"See?!" I said.
His face crimson, Crumley plunged back in, almost submerging the car.
"Okay, smart-ass! Damn car won't start!"
"Put your foot on the starter!"
"Damn!" Crumley stomped the floorboard. The car shimmied.
"Double-damn smart-ass kids!"
We ascended.
CHAPTER NINE
THE way up the mountain was a double wilderness. The dry season had come
early and burned the wild grass to sere crispness. In the rapidly fading
light the whole hillside up to the peak was the color of wheat, fried by
the sun. As we rode, it crackled. Two weeks before, someone had tossed a
match and the whole foothill had exploded in flame. It was headlined in
the papers and lit the television news, the flames were so pretty. But
now the fire was gone and the chars and dryness with it. There was a
dead-fire smell as Crumley and I threaded the lost path winding up Mount
Lowe .
On the way, Crumley said, "It's good you can't see over my side. A
thousand-foot drop."
I clutched my knees.
Crumley noticed. "Well, maybe only a five-hundred-foot drop."
I shut my eyes and recited off my clenched eyelids.
"The Mount Lowe railway was part electric, part cable car."
Crumley, made curious, said, "And?"
I unclenched my knees.
"The railway opened July Fourth, 1893 , with free cake and ice cream and
thousands of riders. The Pasadena City Brass Band rode the first car
playing 'Hail, Columbia .' But considering their passage into the
clouds, they had shifted to 'Nearer My God to Thee,' which made at least
ten thousand people along the way cry. Later in the ascension they
decided to do 'Upward, Always Upward' as they reached the heights. They
were followed in three cable cars by the Los Angeles Symphony; the
violins in one car, the brass in a second, and the timpani and woodwinds
in the third car. In the confusion, the conductor was left behind with
his baton. Later in the day the Salt Lake City Mormon Tabernacle Choir
ascended, also in three cars; sopranos in one, the baritones in another,
and the bass in the third. They sang 'Onward, Christian Soldiers,' which
seemed very appropriate as they vanished in the mist. It was reported
that ten thousand miles of red, white, and blue bunting covered all of
the trolleys and the trains and the cable cars. When the day was finally
over, one semihysterical woman who admired Professor Lowe for what he
had done to bring about the creation of the Mount Lowe railway and its
taverns and hotels was quoted as saying, 'Praise God from whom all
blessings flow and also praise Professor Lowe,' which made everyone cry
again," I babbled on.
Crumley said, "I'll be damned."
I added, "The Pacific Electric Railway ran to Mount Lowe , the Pasadena
Ostrich Farm, Seleg Lion Zoo, San Gabriel Mission, Monrovia , Baldwin 's
Ranch, and Whittier ."
Crumley mumbled under his breath and drove on in silence.
Taking that as a hint, I said, "Are we there yet?"
"Cowardly custard," said Crumley. "Open your eyes."
I opened my eyes.
"I think we're there."
And we were. For there stood the ruins of the old rail station, and
beyond that, a few charred struts of the burned pavilion.
I got out slowly and stood with Crumley surveying miles of land that
went forever to the sea.
"Cortes never saw better," said Crumley. "View's great. Makes you wonder
why they didn't rebuild."
"Politics."
"Always is. Now, where in hell do we find someone named Rattigan in a
place like this?"
"There!"
Some eighty feet away, behind a huge spread of pepper trees, was a small
cottage half-sunk in the earth. Fire hadn't touched it, but rain had
worn its paint and battered its roof.
"There's got to be a body in there," Crumley said as we walked toward
it.
"Isn't there always a body, or else why come see?"
"Go check. I'll stand here hating myself for not bringing more booze."
"Some detective." I ambled over to the cottage and had one helluva time
yanking its door wide. When it finally whined and gave way, I lurched
back, afraid, and peered in.
"Crumley," I said at last.
"Yeah?" he said, sixty feet away.
"Come see."
"A body?" he said.
"Even better" I said in awe.
CHAPTER TEN
WE entered a labyrinth of newsprint. A labyrinth; hell, a catacomb with
narrow passages between stacks of old newspapers—the New York Times, the
Chicago Tribune, the Seattle News, the Detroit Free Press. Five feet on
the left, six on the right, and a pathway between which you might jockey
through, fearful of avalanches that could crush and kill.
"Holy magoly!" I breathed.
"You can say that again," Crumley groused. "Christ, there must be ten
thousand Sunday and daily papers stacked here, in layers—look, yellow
down below, white on top. And not just one stack, ten dozen—my God, a
hundred!"
For indeed the catacomb of newsprint hollowed back through twilight
shadow to curve out of sight.
It was a moment, I later said, like Lord Carnarvon opening Tut's tomb in
1922. All those ancient headlines, those obituary piles, that led to
what? More news stacks and more beyond. Crumley and I sidled through
with hardly enough space for bellies or behinds.
"God," I whispered, "if ever a real earthquake hit—"
"It did!" came a voice from far down the stacked tunnel of print. A
mummy cried. "Kicked the stacks! Almost pancaked me!"
"Who's there?" I called. "Where in hell are you?"
"A great maze, yeah?" The mummy's voice yelled in glee. "Built it
myself! Morning extra by night final, race specials, Sunday comics, you
name it! Forty years! A museum library of news, un-fit to print. Keep
moving! Around the bend to your left. I'm here somewhere!"
"Move!" Crumley panted. "There's gotta be a space with fresh air!"
"That's it!" the dry voice called. "You're close. Bear left. Don't
smoke! Damn place's a firetrap of headlines: 'Hitler Takes Power,'
'Mussolini Bombs Ethiopia for Kindling,' 'Roosevelt Dead,' 'Churchill
Builds Iron Curtain,' swell, huh?"
We turned a final comer among tall flapjack stacks of print to find a
clearing in the forest.
On the far side of the clearing was an army cot. On the cot lay what
seemed a long bundle of beef jerky or a mummy rampant from the earth.
There was a strong smell. Not dead, I thought, not alive.
I approached the cot slowly, with Crumley behind. I knew the odor now.
Not death, but the great unwashed.
The rag bundle stirred.  Some ancient blanket shreds flaked from a face
like watermarks on mud shallows. A faint crack of light glinted between
two withered lids.
"Pardon my not rising," the withered mouth trembled. "Chez Monsieur from
Armentières, haven't got up in forty years." It cackled a cackle that
almost killed it. It began to cough.
"No, no, I'm okay," it whispered. The head fell back. "Where the hell
you been?"
"Where . . . ?"
"I been expecting you!" said the mummy. "What year is it? 1932? 1946?
1950?"
"You're getting warmer."
"1960. Howzat?"
"Bull's-eye," said Crumley.
"I'm not all crackers." The old man's dry dust mouth quavered. "You
bring my vittles?"
"Vittles?"
"No, no, couldn't be. It's a kid, totes the dog food through that Grub
Street newsprint alley, can by can, or the whole damn thing falls.
You're not him—or he?"
We glanced behind and shook our heads.
"How you like my penthouse? Original meaning: place where they used to
pent up people so they couldn't run amok. We gave it a different meaning
and raised the rent. Where was I? Oh, yeah. How you like this joint?"
"A Christian Science reading room," said Crumley.
"Darn tootin'," said Ramses II. "Started 1925. Couldn't stop. Smash and
grab, not much smash, mainly grab. It all started one day when I forgot
to throw out the morning papers. Next thing there was a week collected
and then more Tribune/Times/Daily News trash. That there on your right
is 1939. On the left: 1940. One stack back: '41. Neat!"
"What happens if you want a special date and it's four feet down?"
"I try not to figure that. Name a date."
" April ninth, 1937 ," leaped off my tongue.
"Why the hell that?" said Crumley.
"Don't stop the boy," came the whisper from under the dust blanket. "
'Jean Harlow, dead at twenty-six. Uremic poisoning. Services mañana.
Forest Lawn. Nelson Eddy, Jeanette MacDonald duet at the obsequies.' "
"My God!" I exploded.
"Pretty damn smart, huh? More!"
" May third, 1942 ," popped from my mouth.
" 'Carole Lombard killed. Air crash. Gable weeps.' "
Crumley turned to me. "Is that all you know? Dead film stars?"
"Don't fret the kid," said the old voice six feet under. "What you doing
here?"
"We came—" said Crumley.
"It's about—" I said.
"Don't." The old man whirled a dust storm of thoughts. "You're a
sequel!"
"Sequel?"
"Last time anyone climbed Mount Lowe looking to jump off, he failed,
went back down, and was hit by a car that cured his living. Last time
someone really came was . . . noon today!"
"Today!?"
"Why not? Come find the old crock, drowned in dust, no rolls in the hay
since '32. Someone did come a few hours ago, shouted down those tunnels
of bad news. Recall that fairy tale porridge mill? Say 'go!' it made hot
porridge. Kid got it started. Forgot the 'stop' word. Damn porridge
flooded the whole town. People ate their way door-to-door. So I got
newsprint, not porridge. What did I just say?"
"Someone shouted down—"
"The corridor between the London Times and Le Figaro? Yeah. Woman,
braying like a mule. Yells emptied my bladder. Threatened to tiddlywink
my stacks. One shove and it's dominoes, she screamed, whole damn print
architecture squashes me!"
"I should think earthquakes—"
"Had 'em! Shook the hell out of 'Yang-Tse River Deluge' and 'Il Duce
Conquers,' but here I am. Even the big one, in '32, didn't kick my poker
stacks. Anyway, this wild woman screamed all my vices and demanded
certain papers from special years. I said try first row on the left,
then the right; I keep all the raw stuff high. I heard her wrestle the
stacks. Her cursing could have set ' London on Fire!' She slammed the
door, skedaddled, looking for a place to jump. I don't think a car got
her. Know who she was? I been holding out on you. Guess?"
"I can't," I said, stunned.
"See that desk there in cat litter? Scrap the litter, lift the stuff
with fancy type."
I stepped to the desk. Under a tangle of sawdust and what seemed to be
bird droppings, I found two dozen identical invitations.
" 'Clarence Rattigan and—' " I paused.
"Read it!" said the old man.
" 'Constance Rattigan,' " I gasped, and went on. " 'Are pleased to
announce their marriage atop Mount Lowe , June tenth, 1932 , at three in
the afternoon. Motor and rail escorts. Champagne following.'"
"That hit you where you live?" said Clarence Rattigan.
I glanced up.
"Clarence Rattigan and Constance Rattigan," I said. "Hold on. Shouldn't
Constance 's maiden name be listed?"
"Looks like incest, you mean?"
"Strange peculiar."
"You don't get it," the lips husked. " Constance made me change my name!
It was Overholt. She said she was damned if she'd give up her
first-class moniker for a second-rate hand-me-down, so—"
"You got baptized before the ceremony?" I guessed.
"Never was but finally did. Episcopal deacon down in Hollywood thought I
was nuts. You ever try to argue with Constance ?"
'I—"
"Won't take yes for an answer! 'Love Me or Leave Me,' she sang. I liked
the tune. Hit me with the baptismal oil, laid on the unction. First damn
fool in America to burn his birth certificate."
"I'll be damned," I said.
"No. Me. What you staring at?"
"You.
"Yeah, I know," he said. "I don't seem like much. Wasn't much then. See
that bright doohickey on top o' the invites? Mount Lowe train motorman's
brass handle. Rattigan liked the way I banged that brass. Me, the
motorman on the Mount Lowe trolley! Jesus! Is there any beer anywhere?"
he added suddenly.
I gathered my spit. "You claim you were Rattigan's first husband and
then ask for beer?"
"I didn't say I was her first husband, just one of some. Where's that
beer?" The old man gummed his lips.
Crumley sighed and pulled some stuff from his pockets. "Here's beer and
Mallomars."
"Mallomars!" The old man stuck out his tongue and I placed one on it. He
let it melt on his tongue like a Jesus wafer. "Mallomars! Women! Can't
live without 'em!"
He half sat up for beer.
"Rattigan," I urged.
"Oh, yeah. Marriage. She rode up on the trolley and went wild with the
weather, thought it was my creation, proposed, and after our honeymoon,
one night, found out I had nothing to do with the climate, grew icicles,
and vamoosed. My body will never be the same." The old man shivered.
"Is that all?"
"What d'ya mean, all?! You ever throw her two falls out of three?"
"Almost," I whispered.
I pulled out Rattigan's phone book. "This clued us onto you.”
The old man peered at his name circled in red ink. "Why would someone
send you here?" He mused over another swallow. "Wait! You some sort of
writer?"
"Some sort."
"Well hell, that's it! Haw long you known her?"
"A few years."
"A year with Rattigan's a thousand and one nights. Lost in the Fun
House. Hell, son. I bet she red-circled my name because she wants you to
write her autobiography. Starting with me, Old Faithful ."
"No," I said.
"She ask you to take notes?"
"Never."
"Damn, wouldn't that be great? Anyone ever written a book wilder than
Constance , more wrathful than Rattigan? A bestseller! Lie down with
Rattigan, get up with sequined fleas. Run down the hill, sign a
publisher! I get royalties for revelations! Okay?"
"Royalties."
"Now gimme another Mallomar, more beer. You still need more guff?"
I nodded.
"That other table . . ." An orange crate. "A list of wedding guests."
I went to the orange crate and riffled through some bills until I found
one piece of quality paper and peered at it as he said, "You ever wonder
where the name California came from?"
"What's that—"
"Pipe down. The Hispanics, when they marched north from Mexico in 1509,
carried books. One published in Spain had an Amazon queen ruling in a
land of milk and honey. Queen Califia. The country she ruled was named
California . The Spaniards took one look down this here valley, saw the
milk, ate the honey, and named it all—"
" California ?"
"So, check that guest list."
I looked and read: "Califia! My God! We tried to call her today! Where
is she now?"
"That's what the Rattigan wanted to know. It was Califia predicted our
predestined marriage, but not our downfall. So Rattigan trapped me with
a hammerlock and mobbed this place with bums and bad champagne, all
because of Califia. 'Where the hell is she?' she shouted today, down the
tunnel of newsprint. 'You would know!' she yelled. 'Not guilty!' I
yelled back up the tunnel. 'Go, Constance! Califia ruined us both. Go
kill her, then kill her again. Califia!'"
The mummy fell back, exhausted.
"You said all that," I asked. "At noon today?"
"Some such," sighed the old man. "I sent Rattigan off for blood. I hope
she finds that damned half-ass-trologer and . . ." His voice wandered.
"More Mallomars?"
I laid the cookie on his tongue. It melted. He talked fast.
"You wouldn't think it to see this boneless wonder, but I got half a mil
in the bank. Go see. I mouth-to-mouth-breathed Wall Street stocks not
dead, just asleep. From 1941 through Hiroshima , Enewetak, and Nixon. I
said buy IBM, buy Bell . Now I got this great spread with a view
overlooking L.A. , a one-holer Andy Gump behind, and the Glendale
Market, well tipped, sends up a kid with Spam, canned chili, and bottled
water! The life of Riley! You guys done shadowboxing my past?"
"Almost."
"Rattigan, Rattigan," the old man went on. "Good for a few hoots and
raucous applause. She was written up in those papers from time to time.
Grab one paper off the top of each stack, four on the right, six on the
left, all different. She left snail-track spoors on the path to
Marrakech. Today she came back to clean her catbox."
"Did you actually see her?"
"Didn't need to. That yell would split Rumpelstiltskin and sew him back
up."
"Is that all she wanted, Califia's address?"
"And the papers! Take 'em and go to hell. It's been a long divorce with
no surcease."
"Can I have this?" I lifted an invitation.
"Take a dozen! Only ones showed up were Rattigan's Kleenex guys. She
used to wad and throw 'em over her shoulder. 'You can always order
more,' she said. Grab the invites. Steal the newsprint. What did you say
your name was?"
"I didn't."
"Thank God! Out!" said Clarence Rattigan.
Crumley and I threaded our way, gingerly, through the labyrinthine
towers, borrowed copies of eight different newspapers from eight
different stacks, and were about to head out the front door when a kid
with a loaded box barred our way.
"What you got there?" I said.
"Groceries."
"Mostly booze?"
"Groceries," the kid said. "He still in there?"
"Don't come back!" King Tuts voice cried from deep down far away in the
newsprint catacomb. "I won't be here!"
"He's there, all right," said the kid, two shades paler.
"Three fires and an earthquake! One more ahead! I feel it coming!" The
mummy's voice faded.
The kid looked at us.
"It's all yours." I stepped back.
"Don't move, don't breathe." The kid put one foot inside the door.
Crumley and I didn't move, didn't breathe.
And he was gone.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
CRUMLEY managed to swerve his wreck around and head us back downhill
without falling off the edge. On the way, my eyes brimmed.
"Don't say it." Crumley avoided my face. "I don't want to hear."
I swallowed hard. "Three fires and an earthquake. And more coming!"
"That did it!" Crumley hit the brakes. "Don't say what you think,
dammit. Sure, another quake's coming: Rattigan! She'll rip us all! Out,
out, and walk!"
"I'm afraid of heights."
"Okay! Zip your lip!"
We drove down beneath twenty thousand leagues of silence. Out on the
street, in traffic, I scanned the newspapers, one by one.
"Hell," I said, "I wonder why he let us have these?"
"Whatta you see?"
"Nothing. Zero. Zilch."
"Gimme." Crumley grabbed and used one eye on the news, one on the road.
It was starting to rain.
" 'Emily Starr, dead at twenty-five,' " he read.
"Watch it!" I cried as the car drifted.
He scanned another paper. " 'Corinne Kelly divorces Von Sternberg.' "
He hurled the paper over his shoulder.
" 'Rebecca Standish in hospital. Fading fast.' "
Another toss, another paper. " 'Genevieve Carlos marries Goldwyn's son.'
So?"
I handed him three more between flashes of rain. They all went into the
backseat.
"He said he wasn't crackers. Well?"
I shuffled the news. "We're missing something. He wouldn't keep these
for the hell of it."
"No? Nuts collect peaches, plums collect nuts. Fruit salad."
"Why would Constance —" I stopped. "Hold on."
"I'm holding." Crumley clenched the wheel.
"Inside, society page. Big picture. Constance, good Lord, twenty years
younger, and the mummy, that guy up there, younger, with more flesh, not
bad looking, their wedding, and on one side Louis B. Mayer's assistant,
Marty Krebs, and on the other, Carlotta Q. Califia, noted astrologer!"
"Who told Constance to marry up on Mount Lowe . Astrologer forecasts,
Constance takes the dive. Find the obituary page."
"Obit—?"
"Find it! Whatta you see?"
"Holy cow! The daily horoscope and the name—Queen Califia!"
"What's the forecast? Fair? Mild? Good day to start a garden or marry a
sucker? Read it!"
" 'Happy week, happy day. Accept all proposals, large or small.' So,
what's next?"
"We got to find Califia."
"Why?"
"Don't forget—she's got a red circle around her name, too. We got to see
her before something awful happens. That red crucifix means death and
burial. Yes?"
"No," said Crumley. "Old Tutankhamen up on Mount Lowe is still flopping
around, and his name's red-inked, too, with a crucifix!"
"But he feels someone's coming to get him."
"Who, Constance? That knee-high wonder?"
"All right, the old man's alive. But that doesn't mean Califia hasn't
already been wiped out. Old Rattigan didn't give us much. Maybe she can
give us more. All we need is an address."
"That's all? Hey." Crumley suddenly swerved to the curb and got out.
"Most people never think, Constance didn't think, we didn't think. One
place we never looked. The Yellow Pages! What a goof! The Yellow Pages!"
He was across the sidewalk and into a public phone booth to scrabble
through some beat-up Yellow Pages, tear out a page, and tote it back.
"Old phone number, useless. But maybe a half-ass address."
He shoved the page in my face. I read: QUEEN CALIFIA. Palmistry.
Phrenology. Astrology. Egyptian Necrology. Your life is mine. Welcome.
And the damned zodiac street locale.
"So!" said Crumley, as close to hyperventilation as he ever got.
"Constance tipped us to the Egyptian relic and the relic names Califia
who said marry the beast!"
"We don't know that!"
"Like hell we don't. Let's see."
He put the car in gear and we went fast, to see.
CHAPTER TWELVE
WE drove up near Queen Califia's Psychic Research Lodge, dead center of
Bunker Hill. Crumley gave it a sour eye. Then I nodded to one side and
he saw what to him was a lovely sight: CALLAHAN AND ORTEGA FUNERAL
PARLOR.
That raised his spirits. "It's like a homecoming," he admitted.
Our jalopy stopped. I got out.
"You coming in?" I said.
Crumley sat staring out the windshield, hands on the steering wheel, as
if we were still moving. "How come," he said, "everything seems downhill
with us?"
"You coming in? I need you."
"Outta the way."
He was halfway up the steep concrete steps and then the cracked cement
walk before he stopped, surveyed the big white dilapidated bird cage of
a house, and said, "Looks like the half bakery where they bake your
misfortune cookies."
We continued up the walk. On the way we met a cat, a white goat, and a
peacock. The peacock flirted its thousand eyes, watching us pass. We
made it to the front door. When I knocked, an unseasonable blizzard of
paint snowflakes rained on my shoes.
"If that's what holds this joint up, it won't be long," observed
Crumley.
I rapped on the door with my knuckles. Inside I heard what sounded like
a massive portable safe being trundled across a hardwood floor.
Something heavy was shoved up against the other side of the door.
I raised my hand again, but a high sparrow voice inside cried, "Go
away!"
"I just want—"
“Go away!”
"Five minutes," I said. "Four, two, one, for God's sake. I need your
help."
"No," the voice shrilled, "I need yours."
My mind spun like a Rolodex. I heard the mummy. I echoed him.
"You ever wonder where the name California came from?" I said.
Silence. The high voice lowered to almost a whisper. "Damn."
Three sets of locks rattled.
"Nobody knows that about California. Nobody."
The door opened a few inches.
"Okay, give," the voice said.
A hand like a great plump starfish thrust out.
"Put it there!"
I put my hand in hers.
"Turn it over."
I turned it, palm up.
Her hand seized it.
"Calmness."
Her hand massaged mine; her thumb circumnavigated the lines on my palm.
"Can't be," she whispered.
More quiet motions as she thumbed the pads under my fingers.
"Is," she sighed.
And then, "You remember being born!"
"How did you know that?"
"You must be the seventh son of a seventh son!"
"No," I said, "just me, no brothers."
"My God." Her hand jumped in mine. "You're going to live forever!"
"No one does."
" You will. Not your body. But what you do. What do you do?"
"I thought my life was in your hands."
She let out a breathless laugh.
"Jesus. An actor? No. Shakespeare's bastard son."
"He had no sons."
"Melville, then. Herman Melville's by-blow."
"Wish it were true."
"Is."
I heard the great weight behind the door roll back on creaking wheels.
The portal drifted wide.
I saw an immense woman in an immense crimson velvet queen's robe
receding on roller wheels in a metal throne across the hardwood floor to
the far side of the room. She stopped by a table on which rested not
one, but four crystal balls, coruscant with light from a green-and-amber
Tiffany lamp. Queen Califia, astrologer, palmist, phrenologist, past and
futurist, sank inside three hundred mountainous pounds of too-too-solid
flesh, her stare flashing X rays. A vast iron safe hulked in the
shadows.
"I don't bite."
I stepped in. Crumley followed.
"But leave the door open," she added.
I heard the peacock scream in the yard and dared to hold out my other
hand.
Queen Califia reared back as if burned.
"You know Greene, the novelist?" she gasped. "Graham Greene?"
I nodded.
"Wrote about a priest who lost faith. Then witnessed a miracle he
himself had caused. The shock at his renewed faith almost killed him."
"So?"
"So." She stared at my hand as if it were disconnected from my arm.
"Lord."
"Is it happening to you?" I said. "What happened to that priest?"
"Oh, God!"
"Did you lose your faith, your power to heal?"
"Yes," she murmured.
"And now, just now, it all came back?"
"Dammit! Yes!"
I crushed my hand to my chest to blind it.
"How'd you guess that?" I said.
"No guess. Scares the hell out of me."
She saw the wedding invitation and the newspaper in my outstretched
hand.
"You've been up to see him," she said.
"You looked. That's cheating."
That brought a half smile and then a snort. "People ricochet off him and
end up here."
"Not often enough, I think. May I sit?" I said. "I'll fall if I don't."
She nodded at a chair a few feet away, a safe distance. I fell into it.
Crumley, ignored, looked peevish.
"You were saying?" I said. "People don't visit old Rattigan often. No
one knows he's alive on Mount Lowe. But someone went there and yelled at
him today."
"She yelled?" The great mountain almost melted in remembrance, "I
wouldn't let her in."
"Her?"
"It's  always a mistake"—Queen  Califia cast a glance toward the crystal
balls—"to guess futures and, damn fool, tell them. I give hints, not
facts. I won't tell people what stocks to buy, what flesh to borrow.
Diets, yes, I sell vitamins, Chinese herbs, but not longevity."
"You just did."
"You're different." She leaned. The rollers under her massive chair
squealed.
"The future lies ahead of you. I've never seen a future so clear. But
you are in terrible danger. I see all the time that you have to live,
but someone could destroy it. Be careful!"
She paused for a long moment, closed her eyes, and then said, "You her
friend? You know who I mean."
I said, "Yes—and no."
"Everyone says that. She's black and white and wild all over.”
"Who are we talking about?"
"We don't need names. I wouldn't let her in. An hour ago." I looked at
Crumley. "We're catching up, getting close." "Don't," said Califia. "The
way she yelled I thought she might have a knife. Til never forgive you!'
she screamed. 'You gave us the wrong road maps, down instead of up, lost
instead of found. May you roast in hell!' Then I heard her drive away. I
won't sleep at all tonight."
"Did she say—this sounds crazy—where she was going?" "Not crazy at all,"
said Califia. "I would think that since she went first to that old fool
on Mount Lowe who she dropped after one bad night, then me who put her
up to it, well, next, why not the poor sap who performed the ceremony?
She wants to get us all together, to push us off a cliff!"
"She wouldn't do that."
"How would you know? How many women you had in your life?"
At last I said, sheepishly, "One."
Queen Califia mopped her face with a handkerchief big enough to cover
half her bosom, regained her composure, and slowly advanced on me,
propelling herself on glider wheels with dainty pushes of her incredibly
small shoes. I could not take my eyes off how tiny her feet were
compared with the vast territory above, and the great lunar face that
loomed on that expanse. I saw the ghost of Constance drowned beneath
that flesh. Queen Califia shut her eyes.
"She's using you. You love her?"
"Carefully."
"Keep your clothes on and your motor running. She ask you to get her
with child?"
"Not in so many words."
"No words, just bastard stillborns. She whelped monsters down the whole
L.A. basin, lousy Hollywood Boulevard, dead-end Main. Burn her bed,
scatter the ashes, call a priest."
"Which priest, where?"
"I'll put you in touch. Now ..." She paused, refusing to spit out the
name. "Our friend. She's always missing. One of her dodges, to make men
panic. One hour with her does it. They riot in the streets. You know the
game Uncle Wig-gily? Well, Uncle Wiggily says jump back ten hops, head
for the Hen House, quit!"
"But she needs me!"
"No. She dines on spoilage. Blessed are the wicked who relish
wickedness. Your bones will knead her bread. If she were here, I'd run
her down with my chair. God, she made Rome's ruins. Hell," she added.
"Let me see your palm again." Her massive chair creaked. Her wall of
flesh threatened.
"You going to take back what you saw in my hand?"
"No. I just say what I see in an open palm. You will have another life
beyond this! Tear up that newspaper. Burn the wedding invitation. Leave
town. Tell her to die. But tell her cross-country by phone. Now, out!"
"Where do I go from here?"
"God forgive me." She shut her eyes and whispered, "Check that wedding
invitation."
I raised the invite and stared.
"Seamus Brian Joseph Rattigan, St. Vibiana's Cathedral, celebrant."
"Go tell 'im his sister is in two kinds of hell, and to send holy water.
Scram! I got lots to do."
"Like what?"
"Throw up," she said.
I clutched Father Seamus Brian Joseph Rattigan in my sweaty palm, backed
off, and bumped into Crumley.
"Who are you?. " said Califia, finally noticing my shadow.
"I thought you knew," Crumley said.
We went out and shut the door.
The whole house shifted with her weight.
"Warn her," Califia cried. "Tell her, don't come back."
I looked at Crumley. "She didn't tell your future!"
"Thank the Lord," said Crumley, "for small blessings."
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
BACK down the steep cement steps we went, and under the pale moonlight
by the car, Crumley peered into my face. "What's that mad-dog look?"
"I've just joined a church!"
"Get in, for Christ's sake!"
I got in, running a fever.
"Where to?"
"St. Vibiana's Cathedral."
"Holy mackerel!"
He banged the starter.
"No." I exhaled. "I couldn't stand another face-on. Home, James, a
shower, three beers, and to bed. We'll catch Constance at dawn."
We passed Callahan and Ortega, nice and slow. Crumley looked almost
happy.
Before the shower, the beers, and the snooze, I pasted seven or eight
newsprint front pages on the wall over my bed, where I might wake in the
night in hopes of solutions.
All the names, all the pictures, all the headlines big and small saved
for mysterious or not mysterious reasons.
Behind me," Crumley snorted. "Horse apples! You going to commune with
news that was dead as soon as it was printed?"
"By dawn, sure, they just might drop off the wall, slide under my
eyelids, and get stuck in the creative adhesive in my brain."
"Creative adhesive! Japanese bushido! American bull! Once those things
are off the wall, like you, do they propagate?"
"Why not? If you don't put in, you never get out."
"Wait while I kill this." Crumley drank. "Lie down with porcupines, get
up with pandas?" He nodded at all those pictures, names, and lives.
"Constance in there somewhere?"
"Hidden."
"Hit the shower. I'll stand guard on the obituaries. If they move, I'll
yell. How does a margarita strike you as nightcap.”
"I thought you'd never ask," I said.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
ST. Vibiana's Cathedral awaited us. Downtown L.A. Skid Row. At noon,
heading east, we stayed off the main boulevards.
"Ever seen W. C. Fields in If I Had a Million? Bought some old tin
lizzies and rammed road hogs. Super," said Crumley. "That's why I hate
highways. I want to roadkill. You listening?"
"Rattigan," I said. "I thought I knew her." "Hell." Crumley laughed
gently. "You don't know anyone. You'll never write the great American
novel, because you don't know shoats from shinola. You overestimate
character where there is none, so you upchuck fairy princes, virgin
milkmaids. Most writers can't even do that, so you go with your taffy
pulls, thirteen to the dozen. Let those realists scoop dog doo."
I remained silent.
"Know what your problem is?" Crumley barked, and then softened his
voice. "You love people not worth loving."
"Like you, Crum?"
He glanced over cautiously.
"Oh, I'm okay," he admitted. "I've more holes than a sieve, but I
haven't fallen through. Hold on!" Crumley hit the brakes. "The pope's
home away from home!"
I looked out at St. Vibiana's Cathedral in the midst of the slow-motion
desolation of long-dead Skid Row.
"Jesus," I said, "would have built here. You coming in?"
"Hellfires, no! I was kicked outta confession, age twelve, when I
skinned my knees on wild women."
"Will you ever take Communion again?"
"When I die. Hop out, buster. From Queen Califia to the Queen of
Angels."
I climbed out.
"Say a Hail Mary for me," Crumley said.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
INSIDE the cathedral it was empty, just after noon, and just one
penitent was waiting by the confessional when a priest arrived and
beckoned her in.
His face confirmed I was in the right place.
When the woman left, I ducked in the other side of the confessional,
tongue-tied.
A shadow moved in the lattice window.
"Well, my son?"
"Forgive me, Father," I blurted out. "Califia."
The other confessional door banged wide with a curse. I opened my door.
The priest reared as if I had shot him.
It was Rattigan Déjà Vu. Not svelte in ninety-five pounds of suntanned
seal-brown flesh, but marrowed in a wire-coat-hanger skeleton-thin
Florentine Renaissance priest. Constance's bones hid there, but the
flesh skinned over the bones was skull pale, the priest's lips were
ravenous for salvation, not bed and sinful breakfasts. Here was
Savonarola begging God to forgive his wild perorations, and God silent,
with Constance's ghost burning from his eyes, and peering from his
skull.
Father Rattigan, riven, found me harmless save for that word, jerked his
head toward the vestry, led me in, and shut the door.
"You her friend?"
"No, sir."
"Good!" He caught himself. "Sit. You have five minutes. The cardinal is
waiting."
"You had better go."
"Five minutes," said Constance from inside the mask of this genetic
twin. "Well?"
"I've just visited—"
"Califia." Father Rattigan exhaled with controlled despair. "The Queen.
Sends people she can't help. She has her church, not mine."
"Constance has disappeared again, Father."
"Again?"
"That's what the Queen, ah, Califia said."
I held out the Book of the Dead. Father Rattigan turned its pages.
"Where'd you get this?"
"Constance. She said someone sent it to her. To scare her, maybe, or
hurt her, or God knows what. I mean, only she knows if it's a real
threat."
"You think she might just be hiding to spoil things for everyone?" He
deliberated. "I myself am of two minds. But then there were those who
burned Savonarola then and elevate him now. A most peculiar
sinner-cum-saint."
"Aren't there similarities, Father?" I dared to say. "Lots of sinners
became saints, yes?"
"What do you know about Florence in 1492 when Savonarola made Botticelli
burn his paintings?"
"It's the only age I know, sir, Father. Then Savonarola, now Constance
..."
"If Savonarola knew her, he'd kill himself. No, no, let me think. I've
starved since dawn. Here's bread and wine. Let's have some before I
fall."
The good father pulled a loaf and a jug out of the vestry closet, and we
sat. Father Rattigan broke the bread, then poured a small wine for
himself, and a large for me, which I took gladly.
"Baptist?" he said.
"How did you guess?"
"I'd rather not say."
I tipped back my glass. "Can you help me with Constance, Father?"
"No. Oh, Lord, Lord, maybe."
He refilled my glass.
"Last night. Can it be? I stayed in the confessional late. I felt ... as
if I were waiting for someone. Finally, near midnight, a woman entered
the confessional and for a long while was silent. Finally, like Jesus
calling Lazarus, I insisted, and she wept. It all came out. Sins by the
pound and the truckload, sins from last year, ten years, thirty years
past, she couldn't stop, on and on, night on dreadful night, on and on,
and finally she was still and I was about to instruct her with Hail
Marys when I heard her running. I checked the other side of the
confessional but only smelled perfume. Oh Lord, Lord."
"Your sister's scent?"
"Constance?" Father Rattigan sank back. "Hell burned twice, that
perfume."
Last night, I thought. So close. If Crumley and I had only come then.
"You'd better go, Father," I said.
"The cardinal will wait."
"Well," I said, "if she returns, would you call me?"
"No," said the priest. "The confessional's as private as a lawyer's
office. Are you that upset?"
"Yes." I twisted the wedding ring on my finger, absently.
Father Rattigan noticed.
"Does your wife know all this?"
"Approximately."
"That sounds like delicatessen morality."
"My wife trusts me."
"Wives do that, God bless them. Does my sister seem worth saving?"
"Doesn't she to you?"
"Dear God, I gave up when she claimed mouth-to-mouth resuscitation was a
Kama Sutra pose."
"Constance! Still, Father, if she shows up again, could you call my
number and hang up? I'd know you were signaling her arrival."
"You do know how to split hairs. Give me your number. I see in you not
so much a Baptist but a fair Christian."
I gave him my number as well as Crumley's.
"Just one ring, Father."
The priest studied the numbers. "We all live on the slope. But some, by
a miracle, grow roots. Don't wait. Your phone may never ring. But I'll
give your number to my assistant, Betty Kelly, too, just in case. Why
are you doing this?"
"She was heading fast off a cliff."
"Watch out she doesn't take you with. I'm ashamed I said that. But as a
child she skated out and stopped in mid-traffic to laugh."
He fixed me with a bright needle eye. "But why do I tell you this?"
"It's my face."
"Your what?"
"My face. I look in mirrors but never catch myself. The expression
always changes before I can trap it. It's got to be a blend of the Boy
Jesus and Genghis Khan. It drives my friends crazy."
This relaxed some of the priest's bones. "Does idiot savant sound
right?"
"Almost. The school bullies took one look and beat the hell out of me.
You were saying?"
"Was I? Yes, well, if that screaming woman was Constance, and her voice
seemed different, she gave me orders. Imagine, orders to a priest! Gave
me a deadline. Said she'd be back in twenty-four hours. I must give
complete forgiveness for all her sins, twenty thousand strong. As if I
could assign such mass-market absolution. I told her she must forgive
herself, and ask others for forgiveness. God loves you. 'But He
doesn't,' she said. And then she was gone."
" Will she come back?"
"With doves on her shoulders or lightning bolts."
Father Rattigan walked me to the front of the cathedral. "And how does
she look? Like a siren singing to lure damned sailors to drown. Are you
a poor damn sailor?"
"No, just someone who writes people on Mars, Father."
"I hope they are happier than we are. Wait! Good Lord, there was a thing
she said. That she was joining a new church. And might not come back to
douse my ears."
"What church, Father?"
"Chinese. Chinese and Grauman's. Some church!"
"To many it is. You've been there?"
"To see King of Kings, I found the forecourt superior to the film. You
look as if you're about to break and run."
"To the new church, Father. Chinese. Grauman's."
"Stay off the quicksand footprints. Many sinners have sunk there. What
film's playing?"
"Abbott and Costello in Jack and the Beanstalk?
"Lamentable."
"Lamentable." I ran.
"Mind the quicksand!" Father Rattigan called after me as I raced out the
doors.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
ON the way across town I was a hot-air balloon full of Great
Expectations. Crumley kept hitting my elbow to make me calm down, calm
down. But we had to get to that other church.
"Church!" Crumley muttered. "Since when do double features sideline the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost?"
"King Kong! That's when! 1932! Fay Wray kissed my cheek."
"Holy mackerel." Crumley switched on the car radio.
"—afternoon—" a voice said. "Mount Lowe—"
"Listen!" I said, my stomach a chunk of ice.
The voice said, "Death . . . police . . . Clarence Rattigan . . . victim
..." A flare of static. "Freak accident. . . victim smothered, smothered
. . . old newspapers. Recall brothers in Bronx? Saved stacks of old
papers that fell and killed the brothers? Newspapers . . ."
"Turn it off."
Crumley turned it off.
"That poor lost soul," I said.
"Was he really that lost?"
"Lost as you can get without giving it the old heave-ho."
"You want to drive by?"
"Drive by," I said at last, making noises.
"You didn't know him," said Crumley. "Why those noises?"
The last police car was leaving. The morgue van had long since left. A
lone policeman on his motorcycle stood at the bottom of Mount Lowe.
Crumley leaned out his window.
"Anything to keep us from driving up?"
"Just me," said the officer. "But I'm leaving."
"Were there any reporters?"
"No, it wasn't worth it."
"Yeah," I said, and made more noises.
"Okay, okay," Crumley groused, "wait till I get this damn car aimed
before you upchuck your hairball."
I waited and fell apart, silently.
The motorcycle policeman left, and it was a long late afternoon journey
up to the ruined temple of Karnak, the destroyed Valley of the Kings,
and lost Cairo, or so I said along the way.
"Lord Carnarvon dug up a king, we bury one. I wouldn't mind a grave like
this."
"Bull Montana," said Crumley. "He was a wrestling cowboy. Bull."
At the top of the hill there were no ruins, just a vast pyramid of
newspapers being rummaged by a bulldozer driven by an illiterate. The
guy bucking the wheeled machine had no idea he was reaping Hearst's
outcries, '29, or McCormick's eruptions in the Chicago Tribune, '32.
Roosevelt, Hitler, Baby Rose Marie, Marie Dressier, Aimee Semple
McPher-son, one, twice buried, forever shy. I cursed.
Crumley had to restrain me from leaping out to seize VICTORY IN EUROPE
or HITLER DEAD IN BUNKER or AIMEE WALKS FROM SEA.
"Easy!" Crumley muttered.
"But look what he's doing to all that priceless stuff! Let go, dammit!"
I leaped forward to grab two or three front pages.
Roosevelt was elected on one, dead on another, reelected on the third,
and then there was Pearl Harbor and Hiroshima at dawn.
"Jesus," I whispered, pressing the damned lovely things to my ribs.
Crumley picked up "l WILL RETURN," SAYS MACARTHUR. "I get your point,"
he admitted. "He was a bastard, but the best emperor Japan ever had."
The guy minding the grim reaping machine had stopped and was eyeing us
like more trash.
Crumley and I jumped back. He plowed through toward a truck already
heaped with MUSSOLINI BOMBS ETHIOPIA, JEANETTE MACDONALD MARRIES, AL
JOLSON DEAD.
"Fire hazard!" he yelled.
I watched a half-hundred years of time pour into the Dumpster.
"Dry grass and newsprint, firetraps," I mused. "My God, my God, what
if—"
"What if what?"
"In some future date people use newspapers, or books, to start fires?"
"They already do," said Crumley. "Winter mornings, my dad shoved
newspaper under the coal in our stove and struck a match."
"Okay, but what about books?"
"No damn fool would use a book to start a fire. Wait. You got that look
says you're about to write a ten-ton encyclopedia."
"No," I said. "Maybe a story with a hero who smells of kerosene."
"Some hero."
We walked over a killing field of littered days, nights, years, half a
century. The papers crunched like cereal underfoot.
"Jericho," I said.
"Someone bring a trumpet here, and blow a blast?"
"A trumpet blast or a yell. There's been a lot of yelling lately. At
Queen Califia's, or here, for King Tut."
"And then there's the priest. Rattigan," Crumley said. "Didn't Constance
try to blow his church down? But hell, look, we're standing on Omaha
Beach, Normandy, over Churchill's war rooms, holding Chamberlain's
damned umbrella. You soaking it up?"
"Wading three feet deep. I wonder how it felt, that last second when old
Rattigan drowned in this flood. Franco's Falangists, Hitler's youth,
Stalin's Reds, Detroit's riots, Mayor La Guardia reading the Sunday
funnies, what a death!"
"To hell with it. Look."
The remnant of Clarence Rattigan's burial cot was sticking up out of a
cat litter of STOCK MARKET CRASHES and BANKS CLOSE. I picked up a final
discard. Nijinsky danced on the theater page.
"A couple of nuts," said Crumley. "Nijinsky, and old Rattigan, who saved
this review!"
"Touch your eyelids."
Crumley did so. His fingers came away wet.
"Damn," he said. "This is a graveyard. Move!"
I grabbed TOKYO SUES FOR PEACE . . .
And then headed for the sea.
Crumley drove me to my old beach apartment, but it was raining again,
and I looked at the ocean threatening to drown us all with a storm that
could knock at midnight and bring Constance, dead, and the other
Rattigan, also dead, and crush my bed with rain and seaweed. Hell! I
yanked Clarence Rattigan's newspapers off the wall.
Crumley drove me back to my small empty tract house, with no storm on
the shore, and stashed vodka by my bed, Crumley's Elixir, and left the
lights on and said he would call later that night to see if my soul was
decent, and drove away.
I heard hail on the roof. Someone thumping a coffin lid. I called Maggie
across a continent of rain. "Do I hear someone crying?" she said.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
THE sun was long gone when my phone rang.
"You know what time it is?" said Crumley.
"Ohmigod, it's night!"
"People dying takes a lot out of you. You done blubbering? I can't stand
hysterical sob sisters, or bastard sons who carry Kleenex."
"Am I your bastard son?"
"Hit the shower, brush your teeth, and get the Daily News off your
porch. I rang your bell, but you were lost. Did Queen Califia tell your
fortune? She should have told her own."
"Is she—?"
"I'm heading back to Bunker Hill at seven-thirty. Be out front with a
clean shirt and an umbrella!"
I was out front with a clean shirt and an umbrella at seven twenty-nine.
When I got in, Crumley grabbed my chin and scanned my face.
"Hey, no stormy weather!"
And we roared to Bunker Hill.
Passing Callahan and Ortega seemed different suddenly.
There were no police cars or morgue wagons.
"You know a scotch ale called Old Peculiar?" said Crumley as we pulled
up to the curb. "Look at the nonevent outside Queen Califia's."
I also looked at the newspaper in my lap. Califia wasn't a headliner.
She was buried near the obits.
" 'Renowned psychic, famed in silent films, dies in fall. Alma Crown,
a.k.a. Queen Califia, was found on the steps of her Bunker Hill
residence. Neighbors reported hearing her peacock cry. Searching,
Califia fell. Her book The Chemistry of Palmistry was a 1939 bestseller.
Her ashes are to be strewn in the Egyptian Valley of the Kings, where,
some said, she was born.' "
"Garbage," said Crumley.
We saw someone on the front porch of the Queen's house and walked up. It
was a young woman in her twenties, with long dark hair and Gypsy
coloring, wringing her hands, moaning, and letting tears fall, pointing
her face toward the front door.
"Awful," she mourned. "Oh, awful, awful."
I opened the front door and stared in.
"No, my God, no."
Crumley came to look in at the desolation.
For the house was completely empty. All the pictures, crystal balls,
tarot cards, lamps, books, records, furniture had vanished. Some
mysterious van and transfer company had lugged it all away.
I walked into the small kitchen, pulled open drawers. Empty, vacuumed
clean. Pantry: no spices, canned fruit. The cupboard was bare, so her
poor dog had none.
In her bedroom the closet was crammed with hangers but no tent-size
dressing gowns, stockings, shoes.
Crumley and I went out to stare at the young Gypsy woman's face. "I saw
it all!" she cried, pointing in all directions. "They stole everything!
They're all poor. Excuses! Poor! Across the street, when the police
left, they knocked me down, old women, men, kids, yelling, laughing, ran
in and out, carrying chairs, drapes, pictures, books. Grab this, grab
that! A fiesta! One hour and it was empty. They went to that house over
there! My God, the laughs. Look, my hands, the blood! You want Califia's
junk? Go knock on doors! You gonna go?"
Crumley and I sat down on either side of her. Crumley took her left
hand. I took her right.
"Sonsabitches," she gasped. "Sonsabitches."
"That's about it," said Crumley. "You can go home. There's nothing to
guard. Nothing inside."
"She is inside. They took her body, but she's still there. I'll wait
until she says go."
We both looked over her shoulder at the screen door and some unseen
massive ghost.
"How will you know when she says go?"
The Gypsy wiped her eyes. "I'll know."
"Where are you going?" said Crumley.
Because I was on the walk heading across the street. At the opposite
house I knocked.
Silence. I knocked again.
I peered through a side window. I could see shapes of furniture in
midfloor, where there should be no furniture, and too many lamps, and
rolled carpets.
I kicked the door and cursed and went to the middle of the street and
was about to yell at every door when the Gypsy girl came quietly to
touch my arm.
"I can go now," she said.
"Califia?"
"Said okay."
"Where to?" Crumley nodded at his car.
She could not stop staring at Califia's home, the center of all
California.
"I have friends near the Red Rooster Plaza. Could you—"
"I could," said Crumley.
The Gypsy looked back at the vanishing palace of a queen.
"I will be back tomorrow," she called.
"She knows you will," I said.
We passed Callahan and Ortega, but this time Crumley ignored it.
We were quiet on the way to the plaza named for a rooster of a certain
color.
We dropped the Gypsy.
"My God," I said on the way back, "it's like a friend, years ago, died,
and the immigrants from Cuernavaca poured in, grabbed his collection of
old 1900 phonographs, Caruso records, Mexican masks. Left his place like
the Egyptian tombs, empty."
"That's what it's like to be poor," said Crumley.
"I grew up poor. I never stole."
"Maybe you never had a real chance."
We passed Queen Califia's place a final time.
"She's in there, all right. The Gypsy was right."
"She was right. But you're nuts."
"All this," I said. "It's too much. Too much. Constance hands me two
wrong-number phone books and flees. We almost drown in twenty thousand
leagues of old newspapers. Now, a dead queen. Makes me wonder, is Father
Rattigan okay?"
Crumley swerved the car to the curb near a phone booth.
"Here's a dime!"
In the phone booth I dialed the cathedral.
"Is Mister ..." I blushed. "Father Rattigan ... is he all right?"
"All right? He's at confession!"
"Good," I said foolishly, "as long as the one he's confessing is okay."
"Nobody," said the voice, "is ever okay!"
I heard a click. I dragged myself back to the car. Crumley eyed me like
a dog's dinner. "Well?"
"He's alive. Where are we going?"
"Who knows. From here on, this trip is a retreat. You know Catholic
retreats? Long silent weekends. Shut la trap. Okay?"
We drove to Venice City Hall. Crumley got out and slammed his door.
He was gone half an hour. When he returned he stuck his head in the
driver's-side window and said, "Now hear this, I just took a week's sick
leave. And, Jesus, this is sick. We got one week to find Constance,
shield St. Vibiana's priest, raise the Lazarus dead, and warn your wife
to stop me from strangling you. Nod your head yes."
I nodded.
"Next twenty-four hours you don't speak without permission! Now where
are those goddamn phone books?"
I handed him the Books of the Dead.
Crumley, behind the wheel, scowled at them.
"Say one last thing and shut up!"
"You're still my pal!" I blurted.
"Pity," he said, and banged the gas.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
WE went back to Rattigan's and stood down on the shoreline. It was early
evening and her lights were still full on; the place was like a full
moon and a rising sun of architecture. Gershwin was still manhandling
Manhattan one moment, Paris the next.
"I bet they buried him in his piano," said Crumley.
We got out the one Book of the Dead, Rattigan's personal phone pals,
mostly cold and buried, and repeated what we had done before. Went
through it page by page, with a growing sense of mortality.
On page 30 we came to the Rs.
There it was: Clarence Rattigan's dead phone and a red Christian cross
over his name.
"Damn. Now let's check Califia again."
We riffled back and there it was, with big red lines under her name and
a crucifix.
"That means—?"
"Whoever planted this book with Constance marked all the names with red
ink and a cross, handed it over, and then killed the first two victims.
Maybe. I'm running half-empty."
"Or, hoping Constance would see the red ink crucifixes, before they were
killed, panic on that night she came running, and destroy them
inadvertently with her shouts. Christ! Let's check the other red lines
and crosses. Check St. Vibiana's."
Crumley turned the pages and exhaled. "Red crucifix."
"But Father Rattigan's still alive!" I said. "Hell!"
I trudged up the sand to Rattigan's poolside phone. I dialed St.
Vibiana's.
"Who's this?" a sharp voice answered.
"Father Rattigan! Thank God!"
"For what?"
"This is Constance's friend. The idiot."
"Dammit!" the priest cried.
"Don't take any more confessions tonight!"
"You giving orders?"
"Father, you're alive! I mean, well, is there anything we can do to
protect you, or—"
"No, no!" the voice cried. "Go to that other heathen church! That Jack
and the Beanstalk place!"
The telephone slammed.
I looked at Crumley, he looked at me.
"Look under Grauman's," I said.
Crumley looked. "Chinese, yeah. And Grauman's name. And a red circle and
a crucifix. But he died years ago!"
"Yeah, but part of Constance is buried there, or written there in
cement. I'll show you. Last chance to see Jack and the Beanstalk*."
"If we time it," said Crumley, "the film will be over."
CHAPTER NINETEEN
WE didn't have to time it right.
When Crumley dropped me in front of the Other Church, the great loud
boisterous romantic tearstained celluloid cathedral . . . There was a
sign on the red Chinese front door, CLOSED FOR ALTERATIONS, and some
workmen moving in and out. A few people were in the forecourt, fitting
their shoes in the footprints.
Crumley dropped me and vamoosed.
I turned to look at the great pagoda facade. Ten percent Chinese, ninety
percent Grauman's. Little Sid's.
He was, some said, knee-high to a midget, the eighth Dwarf Cinema
Munchkin, all four feet bursting with film clips, sound tracks, Kong
shrieking on the Empire State, Colman in Shangri-la, friend to Garbo,
Dietrich, and Hepburn, haberdasher to Chaplin, golf buddy to Laurel and
Hardy, keeper of the flame, recollector of ten thousand Pasts . . . Sid,
pourer of cement, imprinter of fair and flat feet, begging and getting
pavement autographs.
And there I stood on a lava flow of signatures of ghosts who had
abandoned their shoe sizes.
I watched the tourists quietly testing their feet in the vast spread of
cement prints, laughing softly.
What a church, I thought. More worshipers here than at St. Vibiana's.
"Rattigan," I whispered. "Are you here?"
CHAPTER TWENTY
IT was said that Constance Rattigan had the smallest tootsies in all
Hollywood, perhaps in the whole world. She had her shoes cobbled in
Rome, and airmailed to her twice a year because her old ones were melted
from champagne poured by crazed suitors. Small feet, dainty toes, tiny
shoes.
Her imprints left in Grauman's cement the night of August 22, 1929,
proved this. Girls testing their size found their feet to be titanic and
pitiful and abandoned her prints in despair.
So here I was alone on a strange night in Grauman's forecourt, the only
place in dead, unburied Hollywood where shoppers brought dreams for
refunds.
The crowd cleared. I saw her footprints some twenty feet away. I froze.
Because a small man in a black trench coat, a snap-brim hat yanked over
his brow, had just tucked his shoes in Rat-tigan's footprints.
"Jesus God," I gasped. "They fit!"
The small man gazed at his tiny shoes. For the first time in forty
years, Rattigan's tracks were occupied.
"Constance," I whispered.
The small man's shoulders shrank.
"Right behind you," I whispered.
"Are you one of them?" I heard a voice say from under the large dark
hat.
"One of what?" I said.
"Are you Death chasing me?"
"Just a friend trying to keep up."
"I've been waiting for you," the voice said, not moving, the feet
planted firmly in the footprints of Constance Rattigan.
"What's it mean?" I said. "Why this wild goose chase? Are you scared or
playing tricks?"
"Why would you say that?" the voice said, hidden.
"Good grief," I said. "Is this all some cheap dodge? Someone said you
might want to write your life and needed someone to help. If you expect
that to be me, no thanks. I've got better things to do."
"What's better than me?" said the voice, growing smaller.
"No one, but is Death really after you or are you looking for a new
life, God knows what kind?"
"What better than Uncle Sid's concrete mortuary? All the names with
nothing beneath. Ask away."
"Are you going to turn and face me?"
"I couldn't talk then."
"Is this some way of getting me to help you uncover your past? Is the
casket half-full or half-empty? Did someone else make those red marks in
your Book of the Dead, or did you make them?"
"It had to be someone else. Or else why would I be so frightened? Those
red ink marks? I've got to look them up, find which ones are dead
already, and which are just about to die but still alive. Do you ever
have the feeling everything's falling apart?"
"Not you, Constance."
"Christ, yes! Some nights I sleep Clara Bow, wake up Noah, wet with
vodka. Is my face ruined?"
"A lovely ruin."
"But still—"
Rattigan stared out at Hollywood Boulevard. "Once there were real
tourists. Now it's torn shirts. Everything's lost, junior. Venice pier
drowned, trolley tracks sunk. Hollywood and Vine, was it ever there?"
"Once. When the Brown Derby hung their walls with cartoons of Gable and
Dietrich, and the headwaiters were Russian princes. Robert Taylor and
Barbara Stanwyck drove by in their roadster. Hollywood and Vine? You
planted your feet there and knew pure joy."
"You talk nice. Want to know where Mama's been?"
She moved her arm. She took some newspaper clippings from beneath her
coat. I saw the names Califia and Mount Lowe.
"I was there, Constance," I said. "The old man was crushed by a
collapsed haystack of news. God, it looked like he died on the San
Andreas fault. Someone pushed the stacks, I think. An indecent burial.
And Queen Califia? A fall downstairs. And your brother, the priest. Did
you visit all three, Constance?"
"I don't have to answer."
"Let me try a different question. Do you like yourself?"
"What!?"
"Look. I like myself. I'm not perfect, hell no, but I never bedded
anyone if I felt they were breakable. Lots of men say hit the hay, live!
Not me. Even when it's offered on a plate. So with no sins, I don't
often have bad dreams. Oh, sure, there was the time I ran away from my
grandma when I was a kid, ran away and left her blocks behind, so she
came home weeping. I still can't forgive myself. Or hitting my dog, just
once, I hit him. And that still hurts, thirty years later. Not much of a
list, right, to make bad dreams?"
Constance stood very still.
"God, God," she said, "how I wish I had your dreams."
"Ask and I'll give you the loan."
"You poor dumb innocent stupid kid. That's why I love you. Somewhere, at
heaven's gate, can I trade in my old chimney soot nightmares for fresh
clean angel wings?"
"Ask your brother."
"He threw me downstairs to hell long ago."
"You haven't answered my question. Do you like yourself?"
"What I see in the mirror, sure. It's what's inside the glass, deep
under, scares me. I wake late nights with all that stuff swimming behind
my face. Christ, that's sad. Can you help me?"
"How? I don't know which is which, you or your mirror. What's up front,
what's beneath."
Constance shifted her feet.
"Can't you stand still?" I said. "If I say 'red light,' stop. Your feet
are stuck in that cement. What then?"
I saw her shoes ache to pull free.
"People are staring at us!"
"The theater's closed. Most of the lights are out. The forecourt is
empty."
"You don't understand. I've got to go. Straight on."
I looked up at the front doors of Grauman's, still open, with some
workmen carrying equipment inside.
"It's the next step, but God, how do I get there?"
"Just walk."
"You don't understand. It's hopscotch. There must be other footprint
paths to the door, if I can find them. Which way do I jump?"
Her head moved. The dark hat fell to the pavement. Constance's
close-cropped bronze hair came into view. She still stared ahead, as if
afraid to show me her face.
"If I say go, what then?" I asked.
"I'll go."
"And meet me again, where?" "God knows. Quick! Say 'go.' They're
catching up." "Who?"
"All those others. They'll kill me if I don't kill first. You wouldn't
want me to die right here? Well, would you?" I shook my head. "Ready,
set, go?" she asked.
"Ready, set."
And she was gone.
She zigzagged across the forecourt, a dozen fast steps to the right,
another dozen to the left, pause, and a final two dozen steps to a third
set of prints, where she froze, as if it were a land mine.
A car horn hooted. I turned. When I glanced back, the Grauman's front
door swallowed a shadow.
I counted to ten to give her a real start, then I bent down to pick up
the tiny shoes she had left behind in her footprints. Then I walked over
to the first set of prints where she had paused. Sally Simpson, 1926.
The name was just an echo from a lost time.
I moved on to the second set of prints. Gertrude Erhard, 1924. An even
fainter ghost of time. And the final footprints nearer the front door.
Dolly Dawn, 1923. Peter Pan. Dolly Dawn? A fleeting mist of years
touched me. I almost remembered.
"Hell," I whispered. "No way."
And got ready to let Uncle Sid's fake Chinese palace swallow me with one
huge dark dragon swallow.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
I STOPPED just outside the crimson doors, for as clearly as if he were
calling, I heard Father Rattigan shout, "Lamentable!"
Which made me pull out Rattigan's Book of the Dead.
I had only looked for names, now I looked for a place. There it was
under the Gs: Grauman's. Followed by an address and a name: Clyde
Rustler.
Rustler, I thought, my God, he retired from acting in 1920 after working
with Griffith and Gish and getting involved with Dolly Dimples's bathtub
death. And here was his name—alive?—on a boulevard where they buried you
without warning and erased you from history the way dear Uncle Joe
Stalin rubbed out his pals, with a shotgun eraser.
And, my heart thumped, there was red ink around his name and a double
crucifix.
Rattigan—I looked at the dark beyond the red door—
Rattigan, yes, but Clyde Rustler, are you here, too? I reached and
grasped one brass handle and a voice behind me announced bleakly:
"There's nothing inside to steal!"
A gaunt homeless guy stood to my right, dressed in various shades of
gray, speaking to the universe. He felt my gaze.
"Go ahead." I read his lips. "You got nothing to lose."
Plenty to win, I thought, but how do you excavate a big Chinese tomb
filled with black-and-white flicker film clips, an aviary of birds
shuttling the air, fireworks ricocheting a big ravenous screen, as swift
as memory, as quick as remorse?
The homeless man waited for me to self-destruct with remembrance. I
nodded. I smiled.
And as quickly as Rattigan, I sank into die theater's darkness.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
INSIDE the lobby there was a frozen army of Chinese coolies, concubines,
and emperors, dressed in ancient wax, parading nowhere.
One of the wax figurines blinked. "Yes?"
God, I thought, a crazy outside, a crazy in, and Clyde Rustler moldering
toward ninety or ninety-five.
Time shifted. If I ducked back out, I would find a dozen drive-ins where
teenage waitresses roller-skated hamburgers.
"Yes?" the Chinese wax mannequin said again.
I moved swiftly through the first entry door and down the aisle under
the balcony, where I stared up.
It was a big dark aquarium, undersea. It was possible to imagine a
thousand film ghosts, scared by gunshot whispers, soaring to flake the
ceiling and vanish in the vents. Melville's whale sailed there, unseen,
Old Ironsides, the Titanic. The Bounty, sailing forever, never reaching
port. I focused my gaze on up through the multiple balconies toward what
had once been called nigger heaven.
My God, I thought, I'm three years old.
That was the year when Chinese fairy tales haunted my bed, whispered by
a favorite aunt, when I thought death was just a forever bird, a silent
dog in the yard. My grandfather was yet to lie in a box at a funeral
parlor, while Tut arose from his tomb. What, I asked, was Tut famous
for? For being dead four thousand years. Boy, I said, how'd he do that?
And here I was in a vast tomb under the pyramid, where I had always
wished to be. If you lifted the aisle carpets, you'd find the lost
pharaohs buried with fresh loaves of bread and bright sprigs of onions;
food for far-traveling up-river to Eternity.
They must never ruin this, I thought. I must be buried here.
"It's not Green Glade Cemetery," said the old wax Chinaman nearby,
reading my mind.
I had spoken aloud.
"When was this theater built?" I murmured.
The old waxwork let loose a forty-day flood: "1921, one of the first.
There was nothing here, some palm trees, farmhouses, cottages, a dirt
main street, little bungalows built to lure Doug Fairbanks, Lillian
Gish, Mary Pickford. Radio was just a crystal matchbox with earphones.
Nobody could hear the future on that. We opened big. People walked or
drove from Melrose north. Saturday nights there were veritable desert
caravans of movie fanatics. The graveyard hadn't yet begun at Gower and
Santa Monica. It filled up with Valentino's ruptured appendix in '26. At
Grauman's opening night, Louis B. Mayer arrived from the Selig Zoo in
Lincoln Park. That's where MGM got their lion. Mean, but no teeth.
Thirty dancing girls. Will Rogers spun rope. Trixie Friganza sang her
famous 'I Don't Care' and wound up an extra in a Swanson film, 1934. Go
down, stick your nose in the old basement dressing rooms, you'll find
leftover underwear from those flappers who died for love of Lowell
Sherman. Dapper guy with mustache, cancer got him, '34. You listening?"
"Clyde Rustler," I blurted.
"Holy Jesus! Nobody knows him! See way up, that old projection room?
They buried him there alive in '29 when they built the new projection
room on the second balcony."
I stared up into phantoms of mist, rain and Shangri-la snow seeking the
High Lama.
My shadow friend said: "No elevator. Two hundred steps!"
A long climb, with no Sherpas, up to a middle lobby and a mezzanine and
then another balcony and another after that amid three thousand seats.
How do you please three thousand customers? I wondered. How? If
eight-year-old boys didn't pee three times during your film, you had it
made!
I climbed.
I stopped halfway to sit, panting, suddenly ancient instead of halfway
new.
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
I REACHED the back wall of Mount Everest and tapped on the old
projection-room door.
"Is that who I think it is?" a terrified voice cried.
"No," I said quietly, "just me. Back for one last matinee after forty
years."
That was a stroke of genius; upchucking my past.
The terrified voice simmered down.
"What's the password?"
It came right off my tongue, a boy's voice.
"Tom Mix and his horse, Tony. Hoot Gibson. Ken May-nard. Bob Steele.
Helen Twelvetrees. Vilma Banky ..."
"That'll do."
It was a long while before I heard a giant spider brush the door panel.
The door whined. A silver shadow leaned out, a living metaphor of the
black-and-white phantoms I had seen flickering across the screen a
lifetime ago.
"No one ever comes up here," said this old, old man.
"No one?"
"No one ever knocks on my door," said the man with silver hair and
silver face and silver clothes, bleached out by seventy years of living
under a rock in a high place and gazing down at unreality ten thousand
times. "No one knows I'm here. Not even me."
"You're here. You're Clyde Rustler."
"Am I?" For a moment I thought he might body-search his suspenders and
sleeve garters.
"Who are you?" He poked his face like a turtle's from its shell.
I said my name.
"Never heard of you." He glanced down at the empty screen. "You one of
them?"
"The dead stars?"
"They sometimes climb up. Fairbanks came last night."
"Zorro, D'Artagnan, Robin Hood? He knocked at your door?"
"Scratched. Being dead has its problems. You coming in or out?"
I stepped in quickly before he could change his mind.
The film projectors stood facing emptiness in a room that looked like a
Chung King burial chamber. It smelled of dust and sand and acrid
celluloid. There was only one chair between the projectors. As he'd
said, no one ever came to visit.
I stared at the crowded walls. There must've been three dozen pictures
nailed there, some in cheap Woolworth frames, others in silver, still
others mere scraps torn from old Silver Screen magazines, photographs of
thirty women, no two alike.
The old, old man let a smile haunt his face.
"My sweetheart dears, from when I was an active volcano."
The most ancient of ancient men looked out at me from behind a maze of
wrinkles, the kind you get when you search the icebox at six A.M. and
take out last night's pre-mixed martinis.
"I keep the door locked. I thought you were just here, yelling outside."
"Not me."
"Someone was. Outside of that, nobody's been up here since Lowell
Sherman died."
"That's two obituaries in ten minutes. Winter 1934. Cancer and
pneumonia."
"Nobody knows that!"
"I roller-skated by the Coliseum one Saturday 1934 before a football
game. Lowell Sherman came in whooping and barking. I got his autograph
and said, 'Take care.' He died two days later."
"Lowell Sherman." The old, old man regarded me with a new luster in his
eyes. "As long as you're alive, he is, too."
Clyde Rustler collapsed in the one chair and sized me up again. "Lowell
Sherman. Why in hell did you make the long climb up here? People have
died climbing. Uncle Sid climbed up once or twice, said to hell with it,
built the bigger projection booth a thousand yards downslope in the real
world, if there is a real one. Never went down to see. So?"
For he saw that I was casting my gaze around his primeval nest at those
walls teeming with dozens of faces, forever young.
"Would you like a rundown on these mountain-lion street cats?" He leaned
and pointed.
"Her name was Carlotta or Midge or Diana. She was a Spanish flirt, a Cal
Coolidge 'It girl' with a skirt up to her navel, a Roman queen fresh out
of DeMille's milk bath. Then she was a vamp named Illysha, a typist
called Pearl, an English tennis player—Pamela. Sylvia? Ran a nudist
flytrap in Cheyenne. Some called her 'Hard Hearted Hannah the Vamp of
Savannah.' Dressed like Dolley Madison, sang 'Tea for Two,' 'Chicago,'
popped out of a big clamshell like the pearl of paradise, Flo Ziegfeld's
craze. Fired by her father at thirteen for conduct unbecoming a human
who ripened fast: Willa-Kate. Worked in a chophouse chink joint: Lila
Wong. Got more votes than the president, Coney Island Beauty Pageant,
'29: not-so-plain Willa. Got off the night train in Glendale: Barbara
Jo, next day, almost, head of Glory Films: Anastasia Alice Grimes—"
He stopped. I looked up. "Which brings us to Rattigan," I said.
Clyde Rustler froze in place.
"You said no one's been up here for years. But—she came up here today,
right? Maybe to look at these pictures? Did she or didn't she?"
The old, old man stared at his dusty hands, then slowly rose to face a
brass whistle tube in the wall, one of those submarine devices that you
blew so it shrieked and you yelled orders.
"Leo? Wine! A two-dollar tip!"
A tiny voice squealed from the brass nozzle, "You don't drink!"
"I do now, Leo. And hot dogs!"
The brass nozzle squealed and died.
The old, old man grunted and stared at the wall. A long, terribly long
five minutes passed. While we waited I opened my notepad and took down
the names scrawled on the pictures. Then we heard the hot dogs and wine
rattling up the dumbwaiter. Clyde Rustler stared as if he had forgotten
that tiny elevator. He took forever opening the wine with a corkscrew,
sent by Leo, from down below. There was only one glass.
"One," he apologized. "You first. I'm not afraid of catching anything."
"I got nothing for you to catch." I drank and handed the glass over. He
drank and I could see the relaxation move his body.
"And now?" he said. "Let me show you some clips I glued together. Why?
Last week a stranger called from down below. That voice on the phone.
Was once Harry Cohn's live-in nurse, never said yes, but yes, yes,
Harry, yes! Said she was looking for Robin Locksley. Robin Hood.
Searching for Robin of Locksley. An actress took that name, a flash in
the pan. She disappeared in Hearst's castle or his backside kitchen. But
now this voice, years later, asks for Locksley. Spooked me. I ran
through my cans and found the one film she made in 1929, when sound
really took over. Watch."
He fitted the film into the projector and switched on the lamp. The
image shot down to flood the big screen.
On the screen a circus butterfly spun, flirting her gossamer wings,
dropping, to pull the bit from her smile, laugh, then run, pursued by
white knights and black villains. "Recognize her?"
“Nope.”
"Try this." He spun the film. The screen filled with a smoldering bank
of snow fires, a Russian noblewoman, smoking long languid cigarettes,
wringing her handkerchief, someone had died or was going to die.
"Well?" said Clyde Rustler hopefully.
"Nope."
"Try again!"
The projector lit the darkness with 1923; a tomboy climbing a tree to
shake down fruit, laughing, but you could see small crab apples under
her shirtfront.
" Tomboy Sawyer. A girl! Who? Damn!"
The old man filled the screen with a dozen more images, starting with
1925, ending with 1952, open, shut, mysterious, obvious, light, dark,
wild, composed, beautiful, plain, willful, innocent.
"You don't know any of those? My God, I've racked my brain. There must
be some reason why I've saved these damned clips. Look at me, dammit!
Know how old I am?"
"Around ninety, ninety-five?"
"Ten thousand years! Jesus. They found me floating in a basket on the
Nile! I fell downhill with the Tablets. I doused the fire in the burning
bush. Mark Antony said, 'Loose the dogs of war'; I loosed the lot. Did I
know all these wonders? I wake nights hitting my head to make the jelly
beans shake in place. Every time I've almost got the answer, I move my
head and the damned beans fall. You sure you don't remember these clips
or the faces on the wall? Good grief, we've got a mystery!"
"I was about to say the same. I came up here because someone else came.
Maybe that voice that called from down below."
"What voice?"
"Constance Rattigan," I said.
I let the fog settle behind his eyes.
"What's she got to do with this?" he wondered.
"Maybe she knows. Last time I saw her she was standing in her own
footprints."
"And you think she might know who all these faces belong to, what all
the names mean? Hold on. Outside the door ... I guess it was today.
Can't be yesterday. Today she said, 'Hand 'em over!'"
"Hand what over?"
"Hell, what do you see in this damn empty place worth handing over?"
I looked at the pictures on the wall. Clyde Rustler saw my look.
"Why would anyone want those?" he said. "Not worth nothing. Even I don't
know why in hell I nailed them there. Are they wives or some old
girlfriends?"
"How many of each did you have?"
"I don't have the fingers to count."
"One thing for sure, Constance wanted you to hand 'em over. Was she
jealous?"
"Constance? You got road rage in the streets, she had bed rage. Wanted
to grab all my lovelies, whoever in hell they were, and stomp, tear, and
burn them. Go on. Finish the wine. I got things to do."
"Like what?"
But he was rethreading the film clips in the projector, fascinated by a
thousand and one nights past.
I moved along the wall and scribbled furiously, writing down the names
under all of the pictures, and then said:
"If Constance comes back, will you let me know?"
"For the pictures? I'll throw her downstairs."
"Someone else said that. Only it was to hell instead of the second
balcony. Why would you throw her?"
"There's gotta be a reason, right? Don't recollect! And why did you say
you climbed up here? And what was it you called me?"
"Clyde Rustler."
"Oh, yeah. Him. It just came to me. Did you know I am Constance's
father?"
"What!?"
"Constance's father. I thought I told you before. Now you can leave.
Good night."
I went out and shut the door on whoever that was and the pictures on the
wall, whoever they were.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
DOWNSTAIRS, I edged to the front of the theater and stared down. Then I
stepped into the orchestra pit, and edged to the back wall and peered
though a door into a long hall that diminished into complete night and a
night inside that night, where all the old abandoned dressing rooms
were.
I was tempted to call a name.
But what if she answered?
Far off down that black corridor, I thought I heard the sound of a
hidden sea, or a river flowing somewhere in the dark.
I put one foot forward and pulled back.
I heard that dark ocean heave on an endless shore again.
Then I turned, and went away up through the great darkness, out of the
pit into the aisles with everyone gone, rushing toward the doors leading
out to an evening sky most dearly welcome.
I carried Rattigan's incredibly small shoes over to her footprints and
placed them neatly down to fit.
At which instant I felt my guardian angel touching my shoulder.
"You're back from the dead," said Crumley.
"You can say that again," I said, staring at the wide red doorway of
Grauman's Chinese with all those film creatures swimming in the dark.
"She's in there," I murmured. "I wish I knew a way to get her out."
"Dynamite tied to a bundle of cash might do it."
"Crumley!"
"Sorry, I forgot we were talking about Florence Nightingale."
I stepped back. Crumley regarded Rattigan's tiny shoes lodged in prints
put down a long, long time ago. "Not exactly ruby slippers," he said.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
WE rode across town in a warm silence. I tried to describe the great
black sea of Grauman's.
"There's this big dressing-room cellar, maybe full of stuff from 1925,
1930. I have a feeling she might be there."
"Save your breath," said Crumley.
"Someone's got to go down there to see."
"You afraid to go there alone?"
"Not exactly."
"That means damn right! Shut up and ride shotgun."
We were soon at Crumley's. He put a cold beer against my brow.
"Hold it there until you feel it cure your thinking."
I held it there. Crumley switched on the TV and began switching through
the channels.
"I don't know which is worse," he said, "your gab or the local TV news."
"Father Seamus Rattigan," the TV said.
"Hold it!" I cried.
Crumley switched back.
"... Vibiana's Cathedral."
And a blizzard of static and snow.
Crumley hit the damned TV with his fist.
". . . Natural causes. Rumored to be future cardinal . . ."
Another snowstorm. And the TV went dead.
"I been meaning to have it fixed," said Crumley.
We both stared at his telephone, telling it to ring.
We both jumped.
Because it did!
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
IT was a woman, Father Rattigan's assistant, Betty Kelly, inarticulate,
going down for the third time, begging for mercy.
I offered what small mercy I had, to come visit.
"Don't wait, or I'm dead myself," she wailed.
Betty Kelly was out in front of St. Vibiana's when Crumley and I
arrived. We stood for a long moment before she saw us, gave a quick,
half-realized wave, and dropped her gaze. We came to stand by her. I
introduced Crumley.
"I'm sorry," I said. She raised her head.
"Then you are the one was talking to Father!" she said. "Oh, Lord, let's
get inside."
The big doors were locked for the night. We went in through a door at
the side. Inside she swayed and almost fell. I caught and led her to one
of the pews, where she sat breathless.
"We came as quick as we could," I said.
"You knew him?" She gasped. "It's so confusing. You knew someone in
common, an acquaintance, a friend?"
"A relative," said Crumley. "The same name."
"Rattigan! She killed him. Wait!" She grabbed my sleeve.
For I was on my feet.
"Sit," she gasped. "I don't mean murder. But she killed him."
I sat back down, gone cold. Crumley backed off. She clutched my elbow
and lowered her voice.
"She was here, sometimes three times a day, in confession, whispering,
then raving. Poor Father looked like he'd been shot when she left, but
she hardly left, just stayed until he fell out starving, couldn't eat,
and the liquor cabinet low. He let her rave. Later I'd check the
confessional: empty. But the air smelled like it had been hit by
lightning. She kept shouting the same thing."
"What?"
'"I'm killing them, killing them!' she yelled. And I'll keep on killing
them until I've killed them all. Help me to kill them, bless their
souls! Then I'll kill the rest. Kill them all! Get them off my back, out
of my life! Then, Father,' she cried, Til be free, clean! But help me
bury them so they won't come back! Help me!'
'"Off! Away!' Father yelled. 'My God, what are you asking me to do?'
'"Help me put them away, pray over them so they won't come back, stay
dead! Say yes!'
"'Get out!' Father cried, and then she said worse."
"What?"
"She said, 'Then damn you, damn, damn, damn you to hell!' Her voice was
so loud, people left. I could hear her weeping. The Father must have
been in a state of shock. Then I heard footsteps running in the dark. I
waited for Father Rattigan to speak, say anything. Then I dared open the
door. He was there. And silent because ... he was dead."
And here the secretary let the tears shed themselves down her cheeks.
"Poor man," she said. "Those dreadful words stopped his heart, as they
almost stopped mine. We must find that awful woman. Make her take back
the words so he can live again. God, what am I saying? Him slumped there
as if she had drained his blood. You know her? Tell her she's done her
worst. There, I've said it. Now I've thrown up, and where do you go to
be clean? It's yours, and sorry I did it to you."
I looked down at my suit as if expecting to find her vile upchuck.
Crumley walked over to the confessional and opened both doors and stared
in at the darkness. I came to stand next to him and take a deep breath.
"Smell it?" said Betty Kelly. "It's there and ruined. I've told the
cardinal to tear it down and burn it."
I took a final breath. A touch of charcoal and St. Elmo's fires.
Crumley closed the doors.
"It won't help," Betty Kelly said. "She's still there. So is he, poor
soul, dead tired and dead. Two coffins, side by side. God help us. I've
used you all up. You have the same look the poor father had."
"Don't tell me that," I said weakly.
"I won't," she said.
And led by Crumley, I beggared my way to the door.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
I COULDN'T nap, I couldn't stay awake, I couldn't write, I couldn't
think. At last, confused and maddened, very late I called St. Vibiana's
again.
When at last Betty Kelly answered she sounded like she was in a cave of
torments.
"I can't talk!"
"Quickly!" I begged. "You remember all she said in the confessional?
Anything else important, consequential, different?"
"Dear God," said Betty Kelly. "Words and words and words. But wait. She
kept saying you must forgive all of us! All of us, every one! There was
no one in the booth but her. All of us, she said. You still there?"
At last I said, "I'm here."
"Is there more you want?"
"Not now."
I hung up.
"All of us," I whispered. "Forgive all of us!"
I called Crumley.
"Don't say it." He guessed. "No sleep tonight? And you want me to meet
you at Rattigan's in an hour. You going to search the place?"
"Just a friendly rummage."
"Rummage! What is it, theory or hunch?"
"P ure reason."
"Sell that in a sack for night soil!" Crumley was gone.
"He hang up on you?" I asked my mirror. "Hung up on you," my mirror
said.
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
THE phone rang. I picked it up as if it were red-hot.
"Is that the Martian?" a voice said.
"Henry!" I cried.
"That's me," the voice said. "It's crazy, but I miss you, son. Kinda
dumb, a colored saying that to an ethnic flying-saucer pilot."
"I've never heard better," I said, choking up.
"Hell," said Henry, "if you start crying, I'm gone."
"Don't," I sniffled. "Oh God, Henry, how fine it is to hear your voice!"
"Which means you've milked the cow and got a bucket of I-won't-say. You
want me polite or impolite?"
"Both, Henry. Things are nuts. Maggie's back east. I got Crumley here,
of course, but—"
"Which means you need a blind man to find your way out of a cowshed full
of cowsheds, right? Hell, let me get my hankie." He blew his nose. "How
soon do you need this all-seeing nose?"
"Yesterday."
"I'm there now! Hollywood, visiting some poor black trash."
"You know Grauman's Chinese?"
"Hell, yes!"
"How quickly can you meet me there?"
"As quick as you want, son. I'll be standing in Bill Robinson's
tap-dancer shoes. Do we visit another graveyard?"
"Almost."
I called Crumley to say where I was going, that I might be late getting
to Rattigan's, but that I'd be bringing Henry with me.
"The blind leading the blind," he said.
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
HE was standing exactly where he said he would be: in Bill Robinson's
"copasetic" dancing footprints, not banished to that long-gone nigger
heaven but out front where thousands of passing whites could see.
His body was erect and quiet, but his shoes were itching around in Bill
Robinson's marks, ever so serenely. His eyes were shut, like his mouth,
turned in on a pleased imagination.
I stood in front of him and exhaled.
Henry's mouth burst.
"Wrigley's Double Your Pleasure, Double Your Fun, with Wrigley's
Doublemint, Doublemint Gum! Don't get it on me!" He laughed, seized my
elbows. "Lord, boy, you look fine! I don't have to see to know. You've
always sounded like some of those people up on the screen!"
"That comes from sneaking into too many movies."
"Let me feel you, boy. Hey, you been drinking lotsa malts!"
"You look swell, Henry."
"I always wondered what I looked like."
"The way Bill Robinson sounds is how you shape, Henry."
"Am I in his shoes here? Say yes."
"A perfect fit. Thanks for coming, Henry."
"Had to. It's one helluva time since we ransacked graveyards! I go to
sleep nights running those graves ahead or behind. What kind of
graveyard's here?"
I glanced at Grauman's Oriental facade.
"Ghosts. That's what I said when I snuck backstage when I was six and
stared up at all those black-and-white things leering on the screen. The
Phantom playing the organ has his mask yanked off and jumps thirty feet
tall to kill you with one stare. Pictures tall and wide and pale and the
actors mostly dead. Ghosts."
"Did your folks hear you talk like that?"
"With them? Mum's the word."
"That's a nice son. I smell incense. Got to be Grauman's. Real class. No
chop-suey name."
"Here goes, Henry. Let me hold the door."
"Hey, it's dark in there. You bring a flashlight? Always feels good to
wave a flashlight and look like we know what we're doing."
"Here's the flashlight, Henry."
"Ghosts, you said?"
"Seances four times a day for thirty years."
"Don't hold my elbow, makes me feel useless. If I fall, shoot me!"
And he was off, hardly ricocheting down the aisle toward the orchestra
pit and the great spaces beyond and below.
"It getting darker?" he said. "Let me turn on the flash-light."
He switched it on.
"There." He smiled. "That's better!"
CHAPTER THIRTY
IN the dark unlit basement, there were rooms and rooms and rooms, all
with mirrors lining their walls, the reflections reflecting and
re-reflecting, emptiness facing emptiness, corridors of lifeless sea.
We went into the first, biggest one. Henry circled the flashlight like a
lighthouse beam.
"Plenty of ghosts down here."
The light hit and sank in the ocean deeps.
"Not the same as the ghosts upstairs. Spookier. I always wondered about
mirrors and that thing called reflection. Another you, right? Four or
five feet off, sunk under ice?" Henry reached out to touch the glass.
"Someone under there?"
"You, Henry, and me."
"Hot damn. I sure wish I could know that."
We moved on along the cold line of mirrors.
And there they were. More than ghosts. Graffiti on glass. I must have
sucked in my breath, for Henry swung his flashlight to my face.
"You see something I don't?"
"My God, yes!"
I reached out to the first cold Window on Time.
My finger came away smudged with a faint trace of ancient lipstick.
"Well?" Henry bent as if to squint at my discovery. "What?"
"Margot Lawrence. R.I.P. October 1923."
"Someone stash her here under glass?"
"Not quite. And over about three feet, another mirror: Juanita Lopez.
Summer '24."
"Don't ring no bell."
"Next mirror: Carla Moore. Christmas, 1925."
"Hey," said Henry. "Silent film but a sighted friend spoke her to me one
matinee. Carla Moore! She was something!"
I guided the flashlight.
"Eleanor Twelvetrees. April '26," I read.
"Helen Twelvetrees was in The Cat and the Canary?
"This might've been her sister, but so many names were fake, you never
know. Lucille LeSueur became Joan Crawford. Lily Chauchoin was reborn as
Claudette Colbert. Gladys Smith: Carole Lombard. Gary Grant was
Archibald Leach."
"You could run a quiz show." Henry extended his fingers. "What's this?"
"Jennifer Long: '29."
"Didn't she die?"
"Disappeared, about the time Sister Aimee sank in the sea and arose,
reborn, on the Hallelujah shore."
"How many more names?"
"As many as" there are mirrors."
Henry tasted one finger. "Yum! It's been a long time but—lipstick. What
color?"
"Tangee Orange. Summer Heat Coty. Lanvier Cherry."
"Why do you figure these ladies wrote their names and dates?"
"Because, Henry, it wasn't a lot of ladies. One woman signed the names,
all different."
"One woman who wasn't a lady? Hold my cane while I think."
"You don't have a cane, Henry."
"Funny how your hand feels things not there. You want me to guess?"
I nodded even though Henry couldn't see; I knew he'd feel the rush of my
bobbing head. I wanted him to say it, needed to hear him speak that
name. Henry smiled at the mirrors, and his smile beamed one hundredfold.
"Constance."
His fingers touched the glass.
"The Rattigan," he said.
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
AGAIN, Henry leaned to brush a reddish signature and then touch it to
his lips.
He moved to the next glass, repeated the gesture, and let his tongue
figure.
"Different flavors," he noted.
"Like different women?"
"It all comes back." His eyes squeezed tight. "Lord, Lord. Lots of women
passed through my hands, through my heart, came and went unseen; all
those flavors. Why do I feel stopped up?"
"Because I feel the same way."
"Crumley says when you turn on the faucets, stand back. You're a good
boy."
"I'm no boy."
"You sound like you're fourteen, when your voice changed and you tried
to grow a mustache."
He moved and touched, then looked with his sightless eyes at the ancient
residue on his fingers.
"All these have to do with Constance?"
"A hunch."
"You got a powerful stomach; I know from having your stuff read to me.
My mama once said a powerful midsection is better than two brains. Most
folks use their brains too much when they should be listening to that
thing under their ribs. The gang—ganglion? My mama never called it that.
House spider, she said. When she met some damn-fool politician, she
always felt right above her stomach. If the spider was twitching, she'd
smile: yes. But if the spider tightened into a ball, she shut her eyes:
no. That's you.
"My mama read you. She said you don't write them weary stories (she
meant eerie) with gray matter. You pull the spider legs under your ribs.
My mania said, 'That boy will never be sick, never get poisoned by
people, he knows how to upchuck, teasing that balled-up spider to let
go.' She said, 'He don't stay up nights in a bad life, getting old while
he's young. He'd make a great doctor, cut right to the pain and toss it
out.'"
"Your mama said all that?" I blushed.
"Woman who got twelve kids, buried six, raised the rest. One bad
husband, one good. She got fine ideas which side to use in bed so you
untie, let your gut free."
"I wish I had met her."
"She's still around." Henry put his palm on his chest.
Henry surveyed the unseen mirrors, pulled his black glasses from his
pocket, wiped and put them on.
"That's better. Rattigan, these names, was she crazy wild? Was she ever
honest-to-God sane?"
"Offshore. I heard her swimming way out with the seals, barking, a free
soul."
"Maybe she should have stayed out there."
"Herman Melville," I muttered.
"Say again?"
"Took me years to finish Moby-Dick. Melville should have stayed at sea
with Jack, his loving friend. Land? When he lived there, it tore his
soul from his heart. Onshore, he aged thirty years, in a customs shed,
half-dead."
"Poor son of a bitch," whispered Henry.
"Poor son of a bitch," I echoed quietly.
"And Rattigan? You think she should've stayed offshore, not in her fancy
beach place?"
"It was big, bright, white, and lovely, but a tomb full of ghosts, like
those films upstairs forty feet tall, fifty years wide, like these
mirrors here, and one woman hating them all for unknown reasons."
"Poor son of a bitch," murmured Henry.
"Poor bitch," I said.
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
"LET'S see some more," said Henry. "Switch on the lights so I won't need
my cane."
"Can you feel if lights are on or off?"
"Silly child. Read me the names!"
I took his arm and we moved along the mirrors as I read the names.
"The dates under the names," Henry commanded. "They getting closer to
now?"
1935. 1937. 1939. 1950. 1955.

And with names, names, names to go with them, all different.
"One too many," said Henry. "We done?"
"One last mirror and date.  October thirty-first.  Last year.”
"How come everything happens to you on Halloween?"
"Fate and providence love wimps like me."
"You say the date, but..." Henry touched the cold glass. "No name?"
"None."
"She going to come add a name? Going to show up making noises just a dog
hears, and no light down here. She—"
"Shut up, Henry." I stared along the mirrors in the cellar night where
shadow-phantoms ran.
"Son." Henry took my arm. "Let's git."
"One last thing." I took a dozen steps and stopped.
"Don't tell me." Henry inhaled. "You're fresh out of floor."
I looked down at a round manhole. The darkness sank deep with no end.
"Sounds empty." Henry inhaled. "A freshwater storm drain!"
"Beneath the back of the theater, yes."
"Damn!"
For suddenly a flood of water gushed below, a clean tide smelling of
green hills and cool air.
"It rained a few hours ago. Takes an hour for the runoff to get here.
Most of the year the storm drain's dry. Now it'll run a foot deep, all
the way to the ocean."
I bent to feel the inside of the hole. Rungs.
Henry guessed. "You're not climbing down?"
"It's dark and cold and a long way to the sea, and if you're careless,
drowning."
Henry sniffed.
"You figure she came up this way to check those names?"
"Or came in through the theater and climbed down."
"Hey! More water!"
A gust of wind, very cold, sighed up out of the hole.
"Jesus Christ!" I yelled.
"What?"
I stared. "I saw something!"
"If you didn't, I did!" The flashlight beam arced crazily around the
mirrored room as Henry grabbed my elbow and lurched away from the hole.
"We going the right way?"
"Christ," I said. "I hope so!"
CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
OUR taxi dropped us at the curb behind Rattigan's big white Arabian
fortress.
"Lordy," said Henry, and added, "That meter ran overtime. From now on,
I'm driving."
Crumley was not out front by the shoreline but farther up by the pool
with half a dozen full martini glasses, two already empty. He gazed at
these fondly and explained.
"I'm ready now for your numbskull routines. I am fortified. Hello,
Henry. Henry, aren't you sorry you left New Orleans for this
can-o'-worms factory?"
"One of those drinks smells like vodka, right? That will make me not
sorry."
I handed a glass to Henry and took one for myself in haste while Crumley
scowled at my silence.
"Okay, spill it," he said.
I told him about Grauman's and the basement dressing-room mirrors.
"Plus," I said, "I been making lists."
"Hold it. You've sobered me up," said Crumley. "Let me kill another." He
lifted a glass in mock salute. "Okay, read your lists."
"The grocery boy on Mount Lowe. The neighbors of Queen Califia in Bunker
Hill. Father Rattigan's secretary. The film projectionist on high in
Grauman's Chinese."
Henry cut in. "That gent in Grauman's . . . ?"
I described Rustler, stashed among stacks of old film with the pictures
on the walls of all the sad women with all the lost names.
Henry mused. "Hey now. Did you make a list of those ladies in the
pictures up on high?"
I read off my pad: "Mabel. Helen. Marilee. Annabel. Hazel. Betty Lou.
Clara. Pollyanna ..."
Crumley sat up straight.
"You got a list of those names on the cellar mirrors?"
I shook my head. "It was dark down there."
"Easy as pie." Henry tapped his head. "Hazel. Annabel. Grace. Pollyanna.
Helen. Marilee. Betty Lou. Detect the similarities?"
As the names rolled from Henry's mouth, I ticked them off my penciled
list. A perfect match.
At which point there was a lightning strike. The lights failed. We could
hear the surf roar in to salt Rattigan's beach as pale moonlight
silvered the shore. Thunder clamored. It gave me time to think and say,
"Rattigan's got a complete run of Academy annuals with all the pictures,
ages, roles.
Her competition is in every one. It ties in with all those upstairs
pictures, downstairs mirrors, right?"
Thunder echoed, the lights blinked back on.
We went inside and got out the Academy books.
"Look for the mirror names," Henry advised.
"I know, I know," Crumley growled.
In half an hour we had thirty years of Academy annuals paper-clipped.
"Ethel, Carlotta, Suzanne, Clara, Helen," I read.
"Constance can't hate them all."
"Chances are," said Henry. "What else she got in her bookshelves?"
An hour later we found some actors' reference albums, crammed with
pictures, going way back. One with a legend up front giving the name J.
Wallington Bradford. I read, "A.k.a. Tallullah Two, a.k.a. Swanson,
Gloria in Excelsius, a.k.a. Funny Face."
A quiet bell sounded in the back of my head.
I opened another album and read: "Alberto Quickly. Fast flimflammery.
Plays all parts Great Expectations. Acts A Christinas Carol, Christmas
Carol's Scrooge, Marley, Three Christmases, Fezziwig. Saint Joan,
unburned. Alberto Quickly. Quick Change. Born: 1895. At liberty." The
quiet bell sounded again.
"Hold on," I said. I felt myself murmuring. "Pictures, mirrors, and now
here's a guy, Bradford, who is all women. And then here's another guy,
Quickly, who is all men, every man." The bell faded. "Did Constance know
them?"
Like a sleepwalker I moved to pick up Constance's Book of the Dead.
There it was.
Bradford on one page, near the beginning of the book.
Quickly toward the end.
"But no red circles around the names. So? Are they alive or dead?"
"Why not go see," said Henry.
Lightning struck. The lights failed again.
In the dark, Henry said, "Don't tell me, let me guess."
CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR
CRUMLEY dropped us by the old apartment house and ran.
"Now," said Henry, "what are we doing here?"
Inside, I glanced up the three-story stairwell. "Searching for Marlene
Dietrich alive and well."
Before I even knocked on the door, I caught the perfume through the
paneling. I sneezed and knocked.
"Dear God," a voice said. "I haven't a thing to wear."
The door opened and a billowing butterfly kimono stood there with a
Victorian relic inside, squirming to make it fit. It stopped squirming
and tape-measured my shoes, my knee bones, my shoulders, and finally eye
to eye.
"J. Wallington Bradford?" I cleared my throat. "Mr. Bradford?"
"Who's asking?" the creature in the doorway wondered. "Jesus. Come in.
Come in. And who's this other thing?"
"I'm the boy's Seeing Eye." Henry probed the air. "That a chair? Think
I'll sit. Sure smells strong in here. Nothing personal."
The kimono let loose a blizzard of confetti in its lungs and waved us in
with a grand sweep of its sleeve. "I hope it isn't business that brings
you here. Sit, while Mama pours gin. Big or small?"
Before I could speak he had filled a big glass with clear Bombay blue
crystal liquor. I sipped.
"That's a good boy," said Bradford. "You staying five minutes or the
night? My God, he's blushing. Is this about Rattigan?"
"Rattigan!" I cried. "How'd you know?"
"She was here and gone. Every few years Rattigan vanishes. It's how she
divorces a new husband, an old lover, God, or her astrologer. ¿Quien
sabe?"
I nodded, stunned.
"She came years ago, asking how I did it. All those people, she said.
Constance, I said, how many cat lives have you had? A thousand? Don't
ask which flue I slid up, which bed I ran under!"
"But—"
"No buts. Mother Earth knows all. Constance invented Freud, tossed in
Jung and Darwin. Did you know she bedded all six studio heads? It was a
bet she took at the Brown Derby from Harry Cohn. Til harvest Jack Warner
and his brothers till their ears fly off,' she said.
"All in the same year? Cohn yelled.
"'Year, hell,' said Constance. 'In one week, with Sunday off!'
" 'I bet a hundred you can't!' said Cohn.
" 'Make it a thousand and you're on,' said Constance.
"Harry Cohn glared. 'What will you put up as collateral?'
" 'Me,' said Rattigan.
" 'Shake!' cried Cohn.
"She shook all over. 'Hold these!' She flung her pants in Cohn's lap and
fled."
Breathless, J. W. Bradford raved on: "Did you know that once I was Judy
Garland. Then Joan Crawford, then Bette Davis. I was Bankhead in
Lifeboat. A real nightwalker, late sleeper, bed buster. You need help
finding Rattigan? I can list her discards. Some fell in my lap. You want
to say something?"
"Is there a real you in there, somewhere?" I said.
"God, I hope not. How terrible to find me in bed with just me! Rattigan.
You tried her beach house? Artie Shaw stayed there after Caruso. She got
him when she was thirteen. Drove him up the La Scala wall. When she
topped off Lawrence Tibbett, he sang soprano. They had a squad car of
paramedics by her joint, 1936, when she mouth-to-mouth breathed Thalberg
into Forest Lawn. You okay?"
"I just got hit by a ten-ton safe."
"Take more gin. Tallulah says so."
"You'll help us find Constance?"
"No one else can. I loaned her my whole wardrobe a million years back.
Gave her my makeup-box rejects, taught her perfumes, how to surprise her
eyebrows, lift her ears, shorten her upper lip, widen her smile, flatten
or bulge her bosom, walk taller than tall, or fall short. I was a mirror
she posed in front of, watching me stare, blink, pretend remorse, alert,
despair, delight, sing in a gilded cage, power-dive into pajamas,
breaststroke out. She trotted in a high school pony, swarmed out a nest
of ballerinas. By the time she left, she was someone else. That was ten
thousand vaudevilles ago. And all so she could compete with other
actresses for other roles in films, or maybe steal their men.
"Okay, doll," J. W. Bradford said as he scribbled on a pad. "Here's more
names of those who loved Constance. Nine producers, ten directors,
forty-five at-liberty actors, and a partridge in a pear tree."
"Did she never hold still?"
"Ever see those seals in Rattigan's surf? Slick as oil, quicker than
quicksilver, hit the bed like lightning. Number one in the L.A. Marathon
long before there was one. Could have been board chairman at three
studios, but wound up as Vampira, Madame Defarge, and Dolley Madison.
There!"
"Thanks." I scanned a list that would have filled the Bastille twice
over.
"Now if you'll forgive, Mata Hari must change.1"
Zip! He flourished his kimono.
Zip! I grabbed Henry's arm and we flew down the stairs and out onto the
street.
"Hey!" someone cried. "Wait!"
I turned and looked up. Jean Harlow-Dietrich-Colbert leaned over the top
rail, smiling wildly, waiting for Von Stroheim to shoot her close-up.
"There's someone else like me, even crazier. Quickly!"
"Alberto Quickly!" I called. "He's alive?"
"He does one nightclub a week, then hospital rehabs. When they sew him
up he repeats his farewell tour. Damn fool, in his nineties, said he
found Constance (a lie!) on Route 66 when he was, my God, forty, fifty.
Driving across country, he picked up this tomboy with suspicious
breasts. Made her a star while his act faded. Runs a theatre intime in
his parlor. Charges folks on Friday nights to see Caesar stabbed, Antony
on his sword, Cleopatra bitten." A piece of paper sailed down. "There!
And something else!"
"What?"
"Connie, Helen, Annette, Roberta. Constance didn't show up for more
lessons in changing lives! Last week. She was supposed to come back and
didn't."
"I don't understand," I yelled.
"I had taught her things, dark, light, loud, soft, wild, quiet, some
sort of new role she was looking for. She was coming back to me to learn
some more. She wanted to be a new person. Maybe like her old self. But I
didn't know how to help. Role-playing, Jesus, how do you get actors
unhooked? W. C. Fields learned to be W. C. Fields in vaudeville. He
never escaped those handcuffs. So here was Constance saying 'Help me to
find a new self.' I said, 'Constance, I don't know how to help you. Get
a priest to put a new skin around you.' "
A great bell rang in my head. Priest.
"Well, that's it," said Jean Harlow. "Did I confuse but amuse? Ciao."
Bradford vanished.
"Quickly," I gasped. "Let's call Crumley."
"What's the rush?" said Henry.
"No, no, Alberto Quickly, the rabbit in and out of the hat, Hamlet's
father's ghost."
"Oh, him," said Henry.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
WE dropped Henry off at some nice soft-spoken relatives on Central
Avenue and then Crumley delivered me to the home of Alberto Quickly,
ninety-nine years old, Rattigan's first "teacher."
"The first," he said. "The Bertillion expert, who fingerprinted
Constance toenail to elbow to knees."
In vaudeville he had been known as Mr. Metaphor, who acted all of Old
Curiosity Shop or every last one of Fagin's brood in Oliver Twist as
audiences cried "Mercy." He was more morbid than Marley, paler than Poe.
Quickly, the critics cried, orchestrated requiems to flood the Thames
with mournful tides when, as Tosca, he flung himself into forever.
All this Metaphor-Quickly said glibly, happily, as I sat in his small
theater-stage parlor. I waved away the box of Kleenex he offered before
he treated me to his Lucia, mad again.
"Stop," I cried at last. "What about Constance?"
"Hardly knew her," he said, "but I did know Katy Kelle-her, 1926, my
first Pygmalion child!"
"Pygmalion?" I murmured, pieces falling into place.
"Do you recall Molly Callahan, 1927?"
"Faintly."
"How about Polly Riordan, 1926?"
"Almost."
"Katy was Alice in Wonderland, Molly was Molly in Mad Molly O'Day. Polly
was Polly of the Circus, same year. Katy, Molly, Polly—all Constance. A
whirlwind blew in nameless, blew out famous. I taught her to shout, 'I'm
Polly!' Producers cried, 'You are, you are!' The film was shot in six
days. Then I revamped her to jump down Leo the Lion's throat. 'I'm
Pretty Katy Kelly.' 'You are!' the lion pride yelled. Her second film
done in four days! Kelly vanished, then Molly climbed the RKO radio
tower. So it was Molly, Polly, Dolly, Sally, Gerty, Connie . . . and
Constance rabbiting studio lawns!"
"No one ever guessed Constance played more than one part over the
years?"
"Only I, Alberto Quickly, helped her to grab onto fame, fortune, and
fondling! The golden greased pig! No one ever knew that some of the
marquee names on Hollywood Boulevard were names Constance made up or
borrowed. Could be she shuffled her tootsies in Grauman's forecourt with
four different shoe sizes!"
"And where is Molly, Polly, Sally, Gerty, Connie, now?"
"Even she doesn't know. Here are six different addresses in twelve
different summers. Maybe she drowned in deep grass. Years are a great
hiding place. God hides you. Duck! What's my name?!"
He did a flip-flop cartwheel across the room. I heard his old bones
scream.
"Ta-ta!" He grinned in pain.
"Mr. Metaphor!"
"You got it!" He dropped cold.
I leaned over him, terrified. He popped one eye wide.
"That was a close one. Prop me up. I scared Rattigan so, she ran." He
babbled on. "It was only fitting. After all, I'm Fagin, Marley, Scrooge,
Hamlet, Quickly. Someone like me had to be curious and try to figure out
what year she lived in, or if she ever existed at all. The older I got,
the more jealous I became of the gain and loss of Constance. I waited
too long over the years, just as Hamlet waited too long to slay the foul
fiend who killed his father's ghost! Ophelia and Caesar begged for
slaughter. The memory of Constance summoned bull stampedes. So when I
turned ninety all my voices raved for revenge. Like a damn fool I sent
her the Book of the Dead. So it must be that Constance ran from my
madness.
"Call an ambulance," Mr. Metaphor added. "I've got two broken tibias and
a herniated groin. Did you write all that down?"
"Later."
"Don't wait! Write it. An hour from now I'll be in Valhalla harassing
the statues. Where's my bed?"
I put him to bed.
"Slow down," I said. "That Book of the Dead, you say you sent that to
Constance?"
"There was a half-ass semi-garage sale of actors' junk at the Film
Ladies' League last month. I got some Fairbanks photos and a Crosby song
sheet, and there, by God, was Rattigan's thrown-away phonebook stuffed
with all her cat-litter-box lovers. My God, I was the snake in the
garden. Grabbed onto damnation for a dime, eyed the lists, drank the
poison. Why not give Rattigan bad dreams? Tracked her down, dropped the
Dead Book, ran. Did it scare the stuffings out of her?"
"Oh, my God, it did." I stared into Mr. Quickly's grinning face. "Then
you didn't have anything to do with that poor old soul lost on Mount
Lowe?"
"Constance's first sucker? That stupid old guy is dead?"
"Newspapers killed him."
"Critics do that."
"No. Tons of old Tribunes fell on him."
"One way or the other, they kill."
"And you didn't harass Queen Califia?"
"That old Noah's Ark, two of every kind of lie in her. High/low,
hot/cold. Camel dung and horse puckies. She told Constance where to go
and she went. She dead, too?"
"Fell downstairs."
"I didn't trip her."
"Then there was the priest..."
"Her brother? Same mistake. Califia told her where to go. But he, my
God, told her to go to hell. So Constance went. What killed him? God,
everyone's dead!"
"She yelled at him. Or I think it was she." "You know what she yelled?"
"No."
"I do."
"You?"
"Middle of the night, last night, I heard voices, thought I was
dreaming. That voice, it had to be her. Maybe what she yelled at that
poor damn priest, she yelled at me. Wanna hear?"
"I'm waiting."
"Oh, yeah. She yelled, 'How do I get back, where's the next place, how
do I get back?'"
"Get back to where?"
There was a quick spin of thought behind Quickly's eyelids. He snorted.
"Her brother told her where to go and she went. And at last she said,
'I'm lost, show me the way.' Constance wants to be found. That it?"
"Yes. No. God, I don't know."
"Neither does she. Maybe that's why she yelled. But my house is built of
bricks. It never fell."
"Others did."
"Her old husband, Califia, her brother?"
"It's a long story."
"And you have miles to go before you sleep?"
"Yeah."
"Don't wind up like this old mad hen that lays eggs any color you place
me on. Red scarf. Red eggs. Blue rug. Blue. Purple camisole. Purple.
That's me. Notice the plaid sheet here?"
It was all white and I told him so.
"You got bad eyes." He surveyed me. "You sure talk a lot. I'm pooped.
Bye." And he slammed his eyes shut. "Sir," I said.
"I'm busy," he murmured. "What's my name?" "Fagin, Othello, Lear,
O'Casey, Booth, Scrooge." "Oh, yeah." And then he snored.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
I TAXIED out to the sea, back to my little place. I needed to think.
And then: there was a blow against my oceanfront door like a
sledgehammer. Wham!
I jumped to get it before it fell in.
A flash of light blinded me from a single bright round crystal tucked in
a mean eye.
"Hello, Edgar Wallace, you stupid goddamn son of a bitch, you!" a voice
cried.
I fell back, aghast that he would call me Edgar Wallace, that
dime-a-dance el cheapo hack!
"Hello, Fritz," I yelled, "you stupid goddamn son of a bitch, you! Come
in!"
"I am!"
As if wearing heavy military boots, Fritz Wong clubbed the carpet. His
heels cracked as he seized his monocle to hold it in the air and focus
on me. "You're getting old!" he cried with relish.
"You already are!" I cried.
"Insults?"
"You get what you give!"
"Voice down, please."
"You first!" I yelled. "You hear what you called me?"
"Is Mickey Spillane better?"
"Out!"
"John Steinbeck?"
"Okay! Lower your voice."
"Is this okay?" he whispered.
"I can still hear you."
Fritz Wong barked a great laugh.
"That's my good bastard son."
"That's my two-timing illegitimate pa!"
We embraced with arms of steel in paroxysms of laughter.
Fritz Wong wiped his eyes. "Now that we've done the formalities," he
rumbled. "How are you.?"
"Alive. You?"
"Barely. Why the delay in delivering provender?"
I brought out Crumley's beer.
"Pig swill," said Fritz. "No wine? But..." He drank deep and grimaced.
"Now." He sat down heavily in my only chair. "How can I help?"
"What makes you think I need help?"
"You always will! Wait! I can't stand this." He stomped out into the
rain and lunged back with a bottle of Le Gorton, which, silently, he
opened with a fancy bright silver corkscrew that he pulled from his
pocket.
I brought out two old but clean jelly jars. Fritz eyed them with scorn
as he poured.
"1949!" he said. "A great year. I expect loud exclamations!"
I drank.
"Don't chugalug!" Fritz shouted. "For Christ's sake, inhale! Breathe!"
I inhaled. I swirled the wine. "Pretty good."
"Jesus Christ! Good?"
"Let me think."
"Goddammit. Don't think! Drink with your nose! Exhale through your
ears!"
He showed me how, eyes shut.
I did the same. "Excellent."
"Now sit down and shut up."
"This is my place, Fritz."
"Not now it isn't."
I sat on the floor, leaning against the wall, and he stood over me like
Caesar astride an ant farm.
"Now," he said, "spill the beans."
I lined them up and spilled them.
When I finished, Fritz refilled my jelly glass reluctantly.
"You don't deserve this," he muttered, "but yours was a fair performance
drinking the vintage. Shut up. Sip."
"If anyone can solve Rattigan," he said, sipping, "it's me. Or should I
say, I? Quiet."
He opened the front door on the lovely endless rain. "You like this?"
" Love it."
"Sap!" Fritz screwed his monocle in for a long glance up-shore.
"Rattigan's place up there, eh? Not home for seven days? Maybe dead?
Empress of the killing ground, yes, but she will never be caught dead.
One day she will simply disappear and no one will know what happened.
Now, shall I spill my beans?"
He poured the last of the Le Gorton, hating the jelly glass, loving the
wine.
He was at liberty, he said, unemployed. No films for two years. Too old,
they said.
"I'm the youngest acrobat in any bed on three continents!" he protested.
"Now I have got my hands on Bernard Shaw's play Saint Joan. But how do
you cast that incredible play? So, meanwhile I have a Jules Verne novel
in the public domain, free and clear, with a dumb-cluck fly-by-night
producer who says nothing and steals much, so I need a second-rate
science-fiction writer—you—to work for scale on this half-ass
masterwork. Say yes."
Before I could speak . . .
There was a huge deluge of rain and a crack of fire and thunder, during
which Fritz barked: "You're hired! Now. Do you have more to show and
tell?"
I showed and told.
The photos clipped from the ancient newspapers and Scotch-taped on the
wall over my bed. Fritz had to half lie down, cursing, to look at the
damned things.
"With one eye, the other destroyed in a duel—"
"A duel?" I exclaimed. "You never said—"
"Shut up and read the names under the pictures to the Cyclops German
director."
I read the names.
Fritz repeated them.
"Yes, I remember her." He reached to touch. "And that one. And, yes,
this one. My God, what a rogues' gallery."
"Did you work with all or some?"
"Some I did two falls out of three in a Santa Barbara motel. I do not
brag. A thing is either true or not."
"You've never lied to me, Fritz."
"I have, but you were too stupid to see. Polly. Molly. Dolly. Sounds
like a cheap Swiss bell ringers' act. Hold on. Can't be. Maybe. Yes!"
He was leaning up, adjusting his monocle, squinting hard. "Why didn't I
see? Dummkopf. But there was time between. Years. That one and that one,
and that. Good God!"
"What, Fritz?"
"They're all the same actress, the same woman. Different hair, different
hairdo, different color, different makeup. Thick eyebrows, thin
eyebrows, no eyebrows. Small lips, large lips. Eyelashes, no eyelashes.
Women's tricks. Woman came up to me last week on Hollywood Boulevard and
said, 'Do you know me?' 'No,' I said. 'I'm so-and-so,' she said. I
studied her nose. Nose job. Looked at her mouth. Mouth job. Eyebrows?
New eyebrows. Plus, she had lost thirty pounds and turned blond. How in
hell was I supposed to know who she was?
"These pictures, where did you get them?"
"Up on Mount Lowe—"
"That dumb newspaper librarian. I went up there once to do research.
Quit. Couldn't breathe in all those goddamn news stacks. Call me, I
yelled, when you have a clearance! Constance's dimwit first husband,
married when she rebounded off a manslaughter bomb scare. How I managed
to direct her in at least three films and never guessed at her changes!
Christ! An imp inside a devil inside Lucifer's flesh-eating wife."
"Maybe because," I said, "you were courting Marlene Dietrich one of
those years?"
"Courting? Is that what they call it?" Fritz barked a laugh and rocked
off the edge of the bed. "Take those damn things down. If I can help,
I'll need the junk."
"There's more like this," I said. "Grauman's Chinese, the old projection
booth, the old—"
"That crummy lunatic?"
"I wouldn't say that."
"Why not! He had a missing reel of my UFA film Atlantica. I went to see.
He tried to tie me to a chair and force-feed me old Rin Tin Tin serials.
I threatened to jump off the balcony, so he let me go with Atlantica.
So."
He spread the pictures out on the bed and gave them the fiery stare of
his monocle.
"You say there are more pictures like these upstairs at Grauman's?"
"Yes," I said.
"Would you mind traveling ninety-five miles an hour in an Alfa-Romeo to
get to Grauman's Chinese in less than five minutes?"
The blood drained from my face.
"You would not mind," said Fritz.
He blundered swiftly out into the rain. His Alfa-Romeo was in full
space-rocket throttle when I fell in.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN
"FLASHLIGHT, matches, pad and pencil should we need to leave a note." I
checked my pockets.
"Wine," Fritz added, "in case the damn dogs up there on the cliff don't
carry brandy."
We passed a bottle of wine between us as we scanned the avalanche of
dark stairs leading to the old projection booth.
Fritz smiled. "Me first. If you fall I don't want to catch."
"Some friendship."
Fritz plowed the dark. I plowed after, swiveling the flashlight beam.
"Why are you helping me?" I gasped.
"I called Crumley. He said he's hiding all day in bed. Me, being around
half-ass dimwits like you clears my blood and restarts my heart. Watch
that flashlight, I might fall."
"Don't tempt me." I bobbed the light.
"I hate to say," Fritz said, "but you give as good as you get. You're my
tenth bastard, out of Marie Dressier!"
We were higher now, in nosebleed territory.
We reached the top of the second balcony, Fritz raging at the altitude
but happy to hear himself rage.
"Explain again," Fritz said as we continued climbing. "Up here. Then
what?"
"Then we go as far down as we've come up. Basement mirror names. A glass
catacomb."
"Knock," said Fritz, at last.
I knocked and the projection room door swung inward on dim lights from
two projectors, one lit and working.
I swung my flash beam along the wall and sucked air.
"What?" said Fritz.
"They're gone!" I said. "The pictures. The walls have been stripped."
I played my flashlight beam along the empty spaces in dismay. All the
dark-room "ghosts" had indeed vanished.
"Goddamn! Jesus! Christ!" I stopped and swore. "My God, I sound like
you!"
"My son, my son," Fritz said, pleased. "Move the light!"
"Quiet." I inched forward, holding the beam unsteadily on what sat
between the projectors.
It was Constance's father, of course, erect and cold, one hand touching
a machine switch.
One projector was running full spin with a reel that looped through the
projector lens and down, around, a spiral that repeated images again and
again every ten seconds. The small door that could open to let the
images shoot down to fill the theater screen was shut, so the images
were trapped on the inside of the door, small, but if you bent close and
squinted, you could see—
Sally, Dolly, Molly, Holly, Gaily, Nellie, Roby, Sally, Dolly,
Molly—around about, on and on.
I studied old man Rattigan, frozen in place, and whether his grimace
showed triumph or need, I could not say.
I glanced beyond to those walls now empty of Sally, Dolly, Molly, but
whoever had seized them hadn't figured that the old man, seeing his
"family" snatched, had switched on this loop to save the past. Or—
My mind sank.
I heard Betty Kelly's voice shrieking what Constance had shrieked,
Forgive me, forgive me, forgive me. And Quickly recalling, How do I get
it back, back, back? Get what back? Her other self?
Did someone do this to you? I thought, standing over the old dead man.
Or did you do it to yourself?
The dead man's white marble eyes were still.
I cut the projector.
All the faces still flowed on my retina, the dancing daughter, the
butterfly, the Chinese vamp, the tomboy clown.
"Poor lost soul," I whispered.
"You know him?" said Fritz.
"No."
"Then he's no poor lost soul." "Fritz! Did you ever have a heart?"
"Simple bypass. I had it removed." "How do you live without it?"
"Because . . ." Fritz handed me his monocle. I fit the cold glass to my
eye and stared.
"Because," he said, "I'm a—"
"Stupid goddamn son of a bitch?"
"Bull's-eye!" Fritz said.
"Let's go," he added. "This place is a morgue."
"Always was," I said.
I called Henry, and told him to take a taxi to Grauman's. Pronto.
CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT
BLIND Henry was waiting for us in an aisle leading down to the orchestra
pit and from there to the hidden basement dressing rooms.
"Don't tell," Henry said.
"About what, Henry?"
"The pictures up in that projection booth. Kaput? That's Fritz Wong's
lingo."
"The same to you," said Fritz.
"Henry, how'd you guess?"
"I knew." Henry fixed his sightless eyes down at the pit. "I just
visited the mirrors. I don't need a cane, and sure as heck no
flashlight. Just reached when I was there and touched the glass. That's
how I knew the pictures upstairs had to be gone. Felt all along forty
feet of glass. Clean. All scraped away. So ..." He stared again at the
sightless uphill seats. "Upstairs. All gone. Right?"
"Right." I exhaled, somewhat stunned.
"Let me show you." Henry turned to the pit.
"Wait, I've got my flash."
"When you going to learn?" Henry mocked, and stepped down into the pit
in one silent motion.
I followed. Fritz glared at our parade.
"Well," I said, "what are you waiting for?"
Fritz moved.
CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE
"THERE." Henry pointed his nose at the long line of mirrors. "What did I
say?"
I moved along the aisle of glass, touching with my flash and then my
fingers.
"So?" Fritz growled.
"There were names and now no names, just like there were pictures and
now no pictures."
"Told you," said Henry.
"How come the sightless are never the wordless?" said Fritz.
"Got to do something to fill the time. Shall I recite the names?"
I said the names from memory.
"You left out Carmen Carlotta," said Henry.
"Oh, yeah. Carlotta."
Fritz glanced up.
"And whoever swiped the pictures upstairs?"
"Cleaned and scraped the mirrors."
"So all those ladies are like they never was," said Henry.
He leaned in along the line of mirrors and gave a last brush with his
blind fingertips to the glass here, there, and farther on down. "Yeah.
Empty. Damn. Those names were caked on. Took lots to scrub it off. Who?"
"Henrietta, Mabel, Gloria, Lydia, Alice ..."
"They all came down to clean up?"
"They did and they didn't. We've already said it, Henry, that all of
those women came and went, were born and died, and wrote their names,
like grave markers."
"So?"
"And those names were not written all at once. So starting back in the
twenties, those women, ladies, whatever, came down here for their
obsequies, a funeral of one. When they looked in their first mirror,
they saw one face, and when they moved to the next, the face was
changed."
"Now you're cooking."
"So, Henry, what's here is a grand parade of funerals, births, and
burials, all done with the same two hands and one spade."
"But the scribbles"—Henry reached out to emptiness— "were different."
"People change. She couldn't make up her mind to one life or how to live
it. So she stood in front of the mirror and wiped off her lipstick and
painted another mouth, and washed off her eyebrows and painted better
ones, or widened her eyes and raised her hairline and tilted her hat
like a lampshade or took it off and threw it, or took off her dress and
stood here starkers."
"Starkers." Henry smiled. "Now you got it."
"Hush," I said.
"That's work," Henry continued. "Scribbling those mirrors, looking to
see how she changed."
"Didn't happen overnight. Once a year, maybe two years, and she'd show
up with a smaller mouth or a thinner shape and liked what she saw and
went away to become that person for half a year or just one summer.
How's that, Henry?"
Henry moved his lips, whispering, "Constance.
"Sure," he murmured, "she never smelled the same way twice." Henry
shuffled, touching the mirrors until he reached the open manhole. "I'm
near, right?"
"One more step would do it, Henry."
We looked down at the round hole in the cement. From below came sounds
of winds blowing in from San Fernando, Glendale, and who knows where
else—Far Rock-away? The light rain runoff was sliding below, a mere
trickle, hardly enough to cool your ankles.
"Dead end," said Henry. "Nothing upstairs, nothing down. Clues to
somebody gone. But where?"
As if in answer, a most ungodly cry came from the dark hole in the cold
floor. We all jumped.
"Jesus!" Fritz cried.
"Christ!" I yelled.
"Lord!" said Henry. "That can't be Molly, Dolly, Holly, can it?"
I repeated that rosary in silence.
Fritz read my lips and cursed.
The cry came again, farther away, being carried downstream. Tears
exploded from my eyes. I jumped forward to sway over the manhole. Fritz
grabbed my elbow.
"Did you hear?" I cried.
"Nothing!" said Fritz.
"That scream!"
"That's just the water," Fritz said.
"Fritz!" "You calling me a liar?"
"Fritz!"
"The way you say Fritz, I lie. No lie. You don't really want to, hell,
go down there! Godammit!"
"Let me go!"
"If your wife was here, she'd push you in, dummkopf!"
I stared at the open manhole. Far away there was another cry. Fritz
cursed.
"You come with me," I said.
"No, no."
"You afraid?"
"Afraid?" Fritz plucked the monocle from his eye. It was like pulling
the spigot on his blood. His suntan paled. His eye watered. "Afraid? Of
a damn dark stupid underground cave, Fritz Wong?"
"Sorry," I said.
"Don't be sorry for the greatest UFA director in cinema history." He
planted his fiery monocle back in its groove.
"Well, what now?" he demanded. "I find a phone and call Crumley to drag
you out of this black hole? You goddamn teenage death-wisher!"
"I'm no teenager."
"No? Then why do I see crouched by that damn hole an Olympic chump
high-diving into a tide half an inch deep? Go on, break your neck, drown
in garbage!"
"Tell Crumley to drive into the storm drain and meet me halfway from the
sea. If he sees Constance, grab her. If he finds me, grab even quicker."
Fritz shut one eye to target me with fire from the other, contempt under
glass.
"You will take direction from an Academy Award-winning director?"
"What?"
"Drop quick. When you hit, don't stop. Whatever's down there can't grab
you if you run! If you see her, tell her to try to catch up. 'Stood?"
" 'Stood!"
"Now die like a dog. Or . . ."he added, scowling, "live like a stoop who
got the hell through."
"Meet you at the ocean?"
"I won't be there!"
"Oh yes you will!"
He lurched toward the basement door, and Henry.
"You want to follow that idiot?" he roared.
"No."
"You afraid of the dark?" "I am the dark!" said Henry. They were gone.
Cursing Germanic curses, I climbed down into mists, fogs, and rains of
night.
CHAPTER FORTY
QUITE suddenly I was in Mexico, 1945. Rome, 1950.
Catacombs.
The thing about darkness is you can imagine, in one direction,
wall-to-wall mummies torn from their graves because they couldn't pay
the funeral rent.
Or kindling by the thousand-bone-piles, polo heads of skulls to be
hammered downfield.
Darkness.
And me caught between ways that led to eternal twilights in Mexico,
eternity beneath the Vatican.
Darkness.
I stared at the ladder leading up to safety—Blind Henry and angry Fritz.
But they were long gone toward the light and the crazies out front of
Grauman's.
I heard the surf pounding like a great heart, ten miles downstream in
Venice. There, hell, was safety. But twenty thousand yards of dim
concrete floor stood between me and the salty night wind.
I gasped air because . . .
A pale man shambled out of the dark.
I don't mean he walked crazy-legs, but there was something about his
whole frame, his knees and elbows, the way his head toppled or his hands
flopped like shot birds. His stare froze me.
"I know you," he cried.
I dropped the flashlight.
He grabbed it and exclaimed, "What're you doing down here?" His voice
knocked off the concrete walls. "Didn't you used to be—?" He said my
name. "Sure! Jesus, you hiding? You down here to stay? Welcome, I
guess." His pale shadow arm waved my flashlight. "Some place, eh? Been
here horses' years. Came down to see. Never went back. Lotsa friends.
Want to meet 'em?"
I shook my head.
He snorted. "Hell! Why would you want to meet these lost underground
jerks?"
"How do you know my name?" I said. "Did we go to school together?"
"You don't remember? Hell and damn!"
"Harold?" I said. "Ross?"
There was just the drip of a lone faucet somewhere.
I added more names. Tears leaped to my eyes. Ralph, Sammy, Arnold,
school chums. Gary, Philip, off to war, for God's sake.
"Who are you? When did I know you?" "Nobody ever knows anyone," he said,
backing off. "Were you my best pal?"
"I always knew you'd get on. Always knew I'd get lost," he said, a mile
away.
"The war."
"I died before the war. Died after it. I was never born, so how come?"
Fading.
"Eddie! Ed. Edward. Eduardo, it's got to be!" My heart beat swiftly, my
voice rose.
"When did you last call? Did you get around to my funeral? Did you even
know?"
"I never knew," I said, inching closer.
"Come again. Don't knock. I'll always be here. Wait! You searching for
someone?" he cried. "What's she look like? You hear that? What's she
look like? Am I right? Yes, no?"
"Yes!" I blurted.
"She went that way." He waved my flash.
"When—?"
"Just now. What's she doing here in Dante's Inferno?"
"What did she look like?" I burst out.
"Chanel No. 5!"
"What?"
"Chanel! That'll bring the rats running. She'll be lucky if she makes it
to the surf. 'Stay off Muscle Beach!' I yelled."
"What?"
"'Stay!' I yelled. She's here somewhere. Chanel No. 5!"
I seized my flash from his hands, turned it back on his ghost face.
"Where?"
"Why?" He laughed wildly.
"God, I don't know."
"This way, yeah, this way."
His laugh caromed in all directions.
"Hold on! I can't see!"
"You don't have to. Chanel!"
More laughter.
I swiveled my flash.
Now, as he babbled, I heard something like weather, a seasonal change, a
distant rainfall. Dry wash, I thought, but not dry, a flash flood, this
damned place ankle-deep, knee-deep, then drowned all the way to the sea!
I whipped my flashlight beam up, around, back. Nothing. The sound grew.
More whispers coming, yes, not a change of season, dry weather becoming
wet, but whispers of people, not rain on the channel floor but the slap
of bare feet on cement, and the shuffled murmur of quiet discovery,
arguments, curiosity.
People, I thought, my God, more shadows like this one, more voices, the
whole damn clan, shadows and shadows of shadows, like the silent ghosts
on Rattigan's ceiling, specters that flowed up, around, and vanished
like rainfall.
But what if her film ghosts had blown free of her projector, and the
pale screens up above in Grauman's, and the wind blew and the phantoms
caught cobwebs and light and found voices, what if, dear God, what if?
Stupid! I cut the light, for the rain-channel-crazed man was still
mumbling and yammering close. I felt his hot breath on my cheek and I
lurched back, afraid to light his face, afraid to sluice the channel a
second time to freeze the floodwater of ghost voices, for they were
louder now, closer. The dark flowed, the unseen crowd gathered, as this
crazed fool grew taller, nearer, and I felt a plucking at my sleeves to
seize, hold, bind, and the rainfall voices far off blew nearer and I
knew that I should get, go, run like hell and hope they were all legless
wonders!
"I—" I bleated.
"What's wrong?" my friend cried.
"I—"
"Why are you afraid? Look. Look! Look there!"
And I was thrust and bumped through darkness to a greater mass of
darkness, which was a cluster of shadows and then flesh. A crowd
gathered around a shape that wept and lamented and yearned and it was
the sound of a woman drowning in darkness.
As the woman moaned and cried and wept and grew silent to mourn again, I
edged near.
And then someone thought to hold out a cigarette lighter, clicking it so
that the small blue flame extended toward a shawled and unkempt
creature, that fretting soul.
Inspired, another lighter drifted out of the night, hissing, and
breathed light to hold steady. And then another and another, small flame
after flame, like so many fireflies gathered in a circle until there was
illumination circling steadily. And floating within to reveal that
misery, that exaltation, that whispering, that sobbing, that voice of
sudden pronouncements, were six, twelve, twenty more small blue fires,
thrust and held to ignite the voice, to give it a shape, to shine the
mystery. The more firefly lights, the higher the voice shrilled, asking
for some unseen gift, recognition, asking for attention, demanding to
live, asking to solve that form, face, and presence.
"Only from my voices, I would lose all heart!" she lamented.
What? I thought. What's that? Familiar! I almost guessed. Almost knew.
What?
"The bells came down from heaven and their echoes linger in the fields.
Through the quiet of the countryside, my voices!" she cried.
What? Almost! Familiar, I thought. Oh God, what?
Then a thunderous flood of storm wind flashed from the far sea, drenched
with salt odor and a smash of thunder.
"You!" I cried. "You!"
And all the fires blew out to screams in utter darkness.
I called her name, but the only answer was a torrent of shouts in an
avalanche of feet in full stampede.
In the roar and rush and ranting, some soft flesh struck my arm, my
face, my knee, and then it was gone as I cried, "You!" and "You!" again.
There was an immense roundabout, a thousand millraces of darkness from
which a single flame ignited near my mouth and one of the strange beasts
cursed, seeing me, and shouted, "You, you scared her away! You!"
And hands were thrust to snatch at me until I fell back.
"No!" I turned and leaped, hoping to hell it was toward the sea and not
the ghosts.
I stumbled and fell. My flashlight skittered. Christ, I thought, if I
can't get it back—!
I scrambled on hands and knees. "Oh, please, please!"
And my fingers closed on the flashlight, which resurrected my flesh, got
me upright, swaying with the black flood behind, and I broke into a
drunken run. Don't fall, I thought, hold" the light like a rope to pull
you, don't fall, don't look back! Are they close, are they near, are
there others waiting? Great God!
At which moment the most glorious sound cracked the channel. There was
an illumination ahead like the sunrise at heaven's door, a loud chant of
car horn, an avalanche of thunder! A car.
People like me think in film-bit flashes, over in an instant, dumb in
retrospect, but a lightning bolt of exhilaration. John Ford, I thought,
Monument Valley! Indians! But now, the damn cavalry!
For ahead, in full plunge from the sea . . . My salvation, an old wreck.
And half standing up front. . . Crumley. Yelling the worst curses he had
ever yelled, cursing me with the foulest curses ever, but glad he had
found me and then cursing this damn fool again. "Don't kill me!" I
cried. The car braked near my feet. "Not till we get outta here!"
Crumley shrieked. The darkness, lit by headlights, reared back. I was
frozen with Crumley blaring the horn, waving arms, spitting teeth, going
blind.
"You're lucky this damn buggy made it in! What gives?"
I stared back into the darkness.
"Nothing."
"Then you won't be needing a lift!" Crumley gunned the gas.
I jumped in and landed so hard the jalopy shook.
Crumley grabbed my chin. "You okay?"
"Now, yes!"
"We gotta back out!"
"Back out!" I cried. The shadows loomed. "At fifty miles an hour?"
"Sixty!"
Crumley glared at the night.
"Satchel Paige said don't look back. Something may be gaining on you."
A dozen figures lurched into the light.
"Now!" I yelled.
We left ...
At seventy miles an hour, backward.
Crumley yelled, "Henry called, said where the damn dumb stupid Martian
was!"
"Henry," I gasped.
"Fritz called! Said you were twice as stupid as Henry said!"
"I am! Faster!"
Faster.
I could hear the surf.
CHAPTER FORTY-ONE
WE motored out of the storm drain and I looked south one hundred yards
and gasped. "Ohmigod, look!"
Crumley looked.
"There's Rattigan's place, two hundred feet away. How come we never
noticed the storm drain came out so close?"
"We never used the storm drain before as Route 66."
"So if we could take it from Grauman's Chinese all the way here,
Constance could have gone from here to Grauman's."
"Only if she was nuts. Hell. She was a Brazilian nut factory. Look."
There were a dozen narrow swerving marks in the sand. "Bicycle tracks.
Bike it in one hour, tops."
"God, no, I don't see her on a bike."
I stood up in the jalopy to peer back at the tunnel.
"She's there. I doubt she's moved. She's still in there, going somewhere
else, not here. Poor Constance."
"Poor?" Crumley erupted. "Tough as a rhino. Keep bellyaching about that
five-and-dime floozy, I'll phone your wife to come crack your dog
biscuits!"
"I haven't done anything wrong."
"No?" Crumley gunned the car the rest of the way out on the shore.
"Three days of maniac running in and out of lousy L.A. palmistry
parlors, upstairs Chinese balconies, climbing Mount Lowe! A parade of
losers, all because of an A-l skirt who gets the Oscar for loss-leading.
Wrong? Rip the roll from my pianola if I've played the wrong tune!"
"Crumley! In that storm drain, I think I saw her. Could I just say 'go
to hell'?"
"Sure!"
"Liar," I said. "You drink vodka, pee apple juice. I've got your
number."
Crumley gunned the motor. "What're you getting at?"
"You're an altar boy."
"Christ, let me move this wreck out front of that damn fool sailor's
delight!"
He drove fast, then slow, eyes half-shut, teeth gritted. "Well?"
I swallowed hard and said, "You're a boy soprano. You made your dad and
mom proud at midnight mass. Hell, I've seen the ghost under your skin,
in movies where you pretended your eyes weren't wet. A Catholic camel
with a broken back. Great sinners, Crum, make great saints. No one's so
bad they don't deserve a second chance."
"Rattigan's had ninety!"
"Would Jesus have kept count?"
"Damn, yes!"
"No, because some far-off late night, you'll call a priest to bless you
and he'll carry you back to some Christmas night when your dad was proud
and your ma cried and as you shut your eyes you'll be so damned glad to
be home again you won't have to go pee to hide your tears. You still
haven't given up hope. Know why?"
"Why, dammit?"
"Because I want it for you, Crum. Want you to be happy, want you to come
home to something, anything, before it's too late. Let me tell you a
story—"
"Why are you blabbing at a time like this? You just barely got away from
a tribe of lunatics. What did. you see in that flood channel?"
"I don't know, I'm not sure."
"Ohmigod, wait!" Crumley rummaged in the glove compartment and with a
cry of relief uncorked a small flask and drank. "If I have to sit here
with the tide going out and your hot air rising—speak."
I spoke: "When I was twelve a carnival magician, Mr. Electrico, came to
my hometown. He touched me with his flaming sword and yelled, 'Live
forever!' Why did he tell me that, Crumley? Was there something in my
face, the way I acted, stood, sat, talked, what? All I know is somehow,
burning me with his great eyes, he gave me my future. Leaving the
carnival, I stood by the carousel, heard the calliope playing 'Beautiful
Ohio,' and I wept. I knew something incredible had happened, something
wonderful and nameless. Within three weeks, twelve years old, I started
to write. I have written every day since. How come, Crumley, how come?"
"Here," said Crumley. "Finish this."
I drank the rest of the vodka.
"How come?" I said quietly again.
Now it was Crumley's turn: "Because he saw you were a romantic sap, a
Dumpster for magic, a cloud-walker who found shadows on ceilings and
said they were real. Christ, I don't know. You always look like you've
just showered even if you rolled in dog doo. I can't stand all your
innocence. Maybe that's what Electrico saw. Where's that vodka? Oh yeah,
gone. You done?"
"No," I said. "Since Mr. Electrico pointed me in the right direction,
shouldn't I pay back? Do I keep Mr. Electrico to myself, or let him help
me save her?"
"Psychic crap!"
"Hunches. I don't know any other way to live. When I got married friends
warned Maggie I wasn't going anywhere. I said, 'I'm going to the Moon
and Mars, want to come along?' And she said yes. So far, it hasn't been
so bad, has it? And on your way to a 'bless me, Father,' and a happy
death, can't you find it in your heart to bring Rattigan?"
Crumley stared straight ahead.
"You mean all that?"
He reached over and touched under my eyes and brought his fingers back
to his tongue.
"The real stuff," he murmured. "Salt. Your wife said you cry at phone
books," he said quietly.
"Phone books full of people lost in graveyards, maybe. If I quit now,
I'd never forgive myself. Or you, if you made me stop."
After a long moment Crumley shifted out of the car. "Wait," he said, not
looking at me. "I got to go pee."
CHAPTER FORTY-TWO
HE came back after a long while.
"You sure know how to hurt a guy," he said as he climbed back into the
jalopy.
"Just stir, don't shake."
Crumley cocked his head at me. "You're a queer egg."
"You're another."
We drove slowly along the shore toward Rattigan's. I was silent.
"You got another hairball?" Crumley said.
"Why is it," I said, "someone like Constance is a lightning bolt,
performing seal, high-wire frolicker, wild laughing human, and at the
same time she's the devil incarnate, an evil cheater at life's loaded
deck?"
"Go ask Alexander the Great," said Crumley. "Look at Attila the Hun, who
loved dogs; Hitler, too. Bone up on Stalin, Lenin, Mussolini, Mao,
hell's Anvil Chorus. Rommel, good family man. How do you cradle cats and
cut throats, bake cookies and people? How come we love Richard the
Third, who dumped kids in wine casks? How come TV is all Al Capone
reruns? God won't say."
"I don't ask. He turned us loose. It's up to us, once He took off the
leash. Who wrote, 'Malt does more than Milton can, to justify God's way
towards Man?' I rewrote it and added, And Freud spoils kids and spares
the rod, to justify Man's ways toward God.'"
Crumley snorted. "Freud was a nut loose in a fruit patch. I always
believed smart-ass punks need their teeth punched."
"My dad never broke my teeth."
"That's because you're a half-stale Christmas fruitcake, the kind no one
eats."
"But Constance is beautiful?
"You mistake energy for beauty. Overseas, French girls knocked me flat.
They blink, wave, dance, stand on their heads to prove they're alive.
Hell, Constance is all battery acid and short circuit. If she ever slows
down she'll get—"
"Ugly? No!"
"Gimme those!" He seized the glasses off my nose and peered through
them.
"Rose-colored! How do things look without them?"
"Nothing's there."
"Great! There's not much worth seeing!"
"There's Paris in the spring. Paris in the rain. Paris on New Year's
Eve."
"You been there?"
"I saw the movies. Paris. Gimme."
"I'll just keep these until you take waltz lessons from blind Henry."
Crumley shoved my glasses in his pocket.
As we pulled our jalopy up on the shore in front of the white chateau,
we saw two dark shapes by her oceanside pool, under the umbrella, to
keep off the moonlight.
Crumley and I trudged up the dune and peered in at Blind Henry and angry
Fritz Wong. There were martinis laid out on a tray.
"I knew," Henry said, "after that storm drain you'd seek refreshment.
Grab. Drink."
We grabbed and drank.
Fritz soaked his monocle in vodka, thrust it in his stare, and said,
"That's better!" And then he finished the drink.
CHAPTER FORTY-THREE
I WENT 'round, placing camp chairs by the pool.
Crumley watched with a dour eye and said, "Let me guess. This is the
finale of an Agatha Christie murder mystery, and Poirot's got all the
usual suspects stashed poolside."
"Bull s-eye."
"Proceed."
I proceeded.
"This chair here is for the Mount Lowe collector of old newspapers."
"Who will testify in absentia?"
"In absentia. This next chair is for Queen Califia, long gone, with her
palmistry and head bumps."
I kept moving. "Third chair: Father Rattigan. Fourth chair: Grauman's
Chinese mile-high projectionist. Fifth chair: J. W. Bradford, a.k.a.
Tallulah, Garbo, Swanson, Colbert. Sixth: Professor Quickly, a.k.a.
Scrooge, Nicholas Nickleby, Richard the Third. Seventh chair: me. Eighth
chair: Constance."
"Hold on."
Crumley got up and pinned his badge on my shirt.
"We going to sit here," said Fritz, "and listen to a fourth-rate Nancy
Drew—"
"Stash your monocle," said Crumley.
Fritz stashed his monocle.
"Now," said Crumley, "junior?"
Junior moved behind the chairs.
"For starters, I'm Rattigan running in the rain with two Books of the
Dead. Some already dead, some about to die."
I laid the two books on the glass-top table.
"We all know now that Quickly, in a spurt of nostalgic madness, sent the
one book, with all the dead people, to frighten Constance. She came
running from her past, her memories of a fast, furious, and destructive
life."
"You can say that again," said Crumley.
I waited.
"Sorry," said Crumley.
I picked up the second book, Constance's more personal, recent phone
lists.
"But what if Constance, hit by the old Book of the Dead, got wired back
into her griefs, her losses in that past, and decided, in order to make
do with it, she had to destroy it, person by person, one by one. What if
she red-lined the names and forgot she had done it?"
"What if?" Crumley sighed.
"Let the idiot express his delight." Fritz Wong tucked his monocle back
in his eye and leaned forward. "So the Ratti-gan goes to kill, maim, or
at least threaten her own past, ja?" he said with heavy Germanic
concern.
"Is that the way the next scene plays?" I asked.
"Action," said Fritz, amused.
I swayed behind the first empty chair.
"Here we are at the dead end of the old trolley-tram line on Mount
Lowe."
Fritz and Crumley nodded, seeing the mummy there, wrapped in headlines.
"Wait." Blind Henry squinted. "Okay, I'm there."
"Her first husband is there, her first big mistake. So she goes up to
swipe the newspapers with all her old selves filed away. She grabs the
papers, like I did, and gives a final yell. Whether she pushed the
landslide of newsprint, or gave one last shriek, who knows? Regardless,
the Mount Lowe trolley master drowned in a bad-news avalanche. Okay?"
I looked over at Crumley, whose mouth gaped with his "okay." He nodded,
as did Fritz. Henry sensed this and gave the go-ahead.
"Chair number two. Bunker Hill. Queen Califia. Predictor of futures,
insurer of fates."
I held on to the chair as if I pushed that massive elephant on roller
skates.
"Constance shouted outside her door. Califia wasn't murdered any more
than that Mount Lowe Egyptian relic was. Yelled at, sure, by Rattigan,
telling Califia to take back all her lousy predictions that insured the
future. Califia had unrolled a papyrus road map, Constance followed,
blind as a bat—sorry, Henry—all enthusiasm. Would Califia lie? No! Was
the future wondrous? You betcha! Now, late in the game, Constance wanted
retractions. Califia would have retracted, told new lies, and gone on
living, but alarmed, fell downstairs into her grave. Not murder, but
panic."
"So much for Califia," said Crumley, trying to hide his approval.
"Scene three, take one," said Fritz.
"Scene three, take one, chair number three." I moved. "This here is the
confessional booth, St. Vibiana's."
Fritz scooched his chair closer, his monocle a lighthouse flash,
searching my small private stage. He chopped his head at me to continue.
"And here's Rattigan's bighearted brother, trying to lead her along the
straight and narrow. When Califia said 'left,' he yelled 'right,' and
maybe after years of storms of brutal sin, he threw up his hands, tossed
her out of the church. But she came back, raving, demanding absolution,
screaming her demands, purify me, forgive me, your own flesh, give way,
give in, but he clapped his hands over his ears and yelled against her
yell, and his yells, not hers, struck him dead."
"So you say," said Fritz, one eye shut, the fire from his monocle
stabbing. "Prove it. If we're going to shoot this like a goddamn film,
write me the moment of truth. Tell how you know the priest killed
himself with his own rage, yes?"
"Who the hell's the detective here?" Crumley cut in.
"The boy wonder is," drawled Fritz, not looking at him, still shooting
lightning bolts of optical glass at me. "He gets hired or fired by what
he next claims."
"I'm not applying for a job," I said.
"You've already got it," said Fritz. "Or get thrown out on your ass. I'm
the studio head and you're plea-bargaining. How do you know the priest
was self-murdered?"
I exhaled.
"Because I heard him breathe, watched his face, saw him run. He couldn't
stand Constance diving in the surf one way, to come out another. She was
hot desert air, he was fog. Collision. Lightning. Bodies."
"All from one priest and one bad sister?"
"Saint. Sinner," I said.
Fritz Wong stiffened with a glow in his face and a most ungodly smile.
"You got the job. Crumley?"
Crumley reared back from Fritz but at last nodded. "As proof? It'll do.
Next?"
I moved on to the next chair.
"Here we are at Grauman's Chinese, up high, late night, film running,
figures on the screen, pictures on the wall. All of Rattigan's former
selves nailed, ready to be nabbed. And the one man who really knows her,
bum to belly button, her dad, keeper of the unholy flame, but he doesn't
want her either, so she busts in and swipes the pictures that prove her
past. She's got to burn those, too, because she doesn't like all her
former selves. The final bust-in puts her pa in shock, like all the
rest. Torn both ways—after all, it is his daughter—he lets the pictures
go but runs the film on a continuous roundabout reel, Molly, Dolly,
Sally, Holly, Gala, Willa, Sue . . . The reel's still running and the
faces lit when we arrive too late to save him or the swiped photos.
Unmurder number four ..."
"So J. Wellington Bradford a.k.a. Tallulah Bankhead cum Crawford cum
Colbert is still alive, and he's not a victim?" said Crumley. "The same
goes for quick-change artist Quickly?"
"Alive but not for long. They're as flimsy as kites in a long storm.
Constance ranted at them—"
"Because?" said Crumley.
"They taught her all the ways to not be herself," said Fritz, proud of
his insight. "Don't do this, do that, don't do that, do this. Richard
the Third tells you how to be Lear's daughter, Lady Macbeth, Medea. One
size fits all. So she became Electra, Juliet, Lady Godiva, Ophelia,
Cleopatra. Bradford said. Rattigan did. Same with Quickly. See Connie
run! She had to show up on both their doorsteps to disrobe, junk her
lines, burn her notices. Can teachers unteach? Constance demanded. 'Who
is Constance, what is she?' was the essence of her declaration. Being
only forward teachers, they didn't know how to teach backward. So,
Constance was driven to—"
"The basement dressing rooms," I said. "Snatch the pictures from
upstairs, sure, but then wipe out the evidence of her former selves on
the mirrors. Scrape, erase, eliminate, name by name, year by year."
I finished and sipped my drink and shut up.
"Is the train in Murder on the Orient Express pulling into the station?"
said Fritz, lying back full-length like Caesar in his bath.
"Yes."
"Furthermore," said Fritz Wong in his fine Germanic guttural, "are you
free to accept work on a screenplay titled The Many Deaths of Rattigan,
starting Monday, five hundred a week, ten weeks, twenty thousand bonus
if we finally shoot the goddamn film?"
"Take the money and run," said Henry.
"Crumley, you want me to take his offer?" I said.
"It's dumb thinking but a great film," said Crumley.
"You don't believe me?" I cried.
"Nobody could be as nuts as you just said," said Crumley.
"Good God, why have I stood here upchucking my guts?" I sank in my
chair.
"I don't want to live," I said.
"Yes, you do." Fritz leaned forward, scribbling on a pad.
Five hundred a week was there.
He threw a five-dollar bill on top.
"Your first ten minutes' salary!"
"Then you almost believe? No." I pushed the paper away. "Got to be one
of you here gets my idea."
"Me," a voice said.
We all looked at Blind Henry.
"Sign the contract," he said, "but make him sign saying he really
believes every word you say!"
I hesitated, then scribbled my own manifesto.
Rumbling, Fritz signed.
"That Constance," he growled. "Damn! She shows up at your door, flings
herself on you like a goddamn snake. Hell! Who cares if she kills
herself? Why should she run scared of her own phone books and look up
all the stupid people who led her down the garden path? Would phone
books scare you? Christ, no! There had to be a reason for her setting
out to run, to seek. Motivation. Why, goddammit, why all that work, to
get what? Hold on."
Fritz stopped, his face suddenly pale, then slowly suffusing with color.
"No. Yes. No, couldn't be. No. Yes. Is!"
"Is what, Fritz?"
"I'm glad I talk to myself," said Fritz. "I'm glad I listen. Did anyone
hear?"
"You haven't said, Fritz."
"I'll talk to myself, and you eavesdrop, ja?"
"Ja," I said.
Fritz shot me through the heart with one glare. He doused his irritation
with a swallow of his martini and said, "A month ago, two months, she
threw herself across my desk, with heavy breaths. Was it true, she
cried, I was starting some new film? A movie yet nameless? 'Ja,' I said.
'Yes, maybe.' And is there a part for me?' she said, on my shoulder, in
my lap. 'No, no,' I said. 'Yes, there must be. There has to be. Tell me,
Fritz, what is it?' I should have never told her. But I did, God help
me!"
"What was the film, Fritz?"
"'What I'm planning is beyond you,' I said."
"Yes, but for God's sake, Fritz. Name the film!"
Fritz ignored me, staring through that monocle into the starry sky,
still talking to himself while we eavesdropped.
"'You can't do it,' I said. She wept. 'Please,' she begged. ' Try me.' I
said, 'Constance, it's something you can never be, something you never
were.'" Fritz took another swig from his glass. "The Maid of Orleans."
"Joan of Arc!"
"'Oh, my God,' she cried. 'Joan! If it's the only thing I ever do, I
must do that!'"
Must do that! came the echo.
Joan!
A voice cried in my ears. Rain fell. Water ran.
A dozen lighters took fire and were thrust out toward the sad, weeping
woman.
"Only for my voices, I would lose all heart! The bells came down from
heaven and their echoes linger in the fields. Through the quiet of the
countryside, my voices!"
The subterranean audience gasped with: Joan.
Joan of Arc.
"Ohmigod, Fritz," I cried. "Say that again!"
"Saint Joan?"
I leaped back, my chair fell.
Fritz went on: "I said, 'Constance, it's too late.' She said, 'It's
never too late.' And I said, 'Listen, I'll give you a test. If you pass,
if you can do the scene from Shaw's Saint Joan . . . impossible, but if
you can, you get the job.' She fell apart. She cried, 'Wait! I'm dying!
Wait, I'll be back.' And she ran away."
I said, "Fritz, do you know what you've just said?"
"Gottdammit, yes! Saint Joan!"
"Oh, Christ, Fritz, don't you see? We've been thrown off by what she
said to Father Rattigan. 'I've killed, I've murdered! Help me bury
them,' she cried. We thought she meant old Rattigan up on Mount Lowe,
Queen Califia on Bunker Hill, but no, dammit, she didn't murder them,
she was out to get help to murder Constance!"
"How's that again?" said Crumley.
'"Help me kill Constance,' said Constance. Why? For Joan of Arc! That's
the answer. She has to have that role. All this month she's been
preparing for it. Isn't that it, Fritz?"
"Just a moment while I take my monocle out and put it back in." Fritz
stared at me.
"Fritz, look! She's not right for the part. But there is one way she can
be Saint Joan!"
"Dammit to hell, say it!"
"Dammit, Fritz, she had to get away from you, fall back, take a long,
hard look at her life. She had to, one by one, kill all her selves, lay
all the ghosts, so that when all those Constances were dead, she could
come for her test, and maybe, just maybe, land the part. She hasn't had
a role like that ever in her life. This was her big chance. And the only
way she could do it was to kill the past. Don't you see, Fritz? That
must be the answer to what's been going on during the last week, with
all these people, with Constance appearing, disappearing, and
reappearing again."
Fritz said, "No, no!"
I said, "Yes, yes. The answer's been lying right in front of us, but
it's only when you said the name. Saint Joan is the motive for every
woman who ever lived. Impossible dream. Can't be attained."
"I'll be gottdammed."
"Oh, no, Fritz!" I said. "Blessed! You've solved it! Now, if we find
Constance and say to her, maybe, just maybe, she has a chance. Maybe,
maybe—" I broke off. "Fritz," I said. "Answer me."
"What?"
"If Constance should suddenly appear as the Maid of Orleans, if she were
incredibly young, changed in some strange way, would you give her the
job?"
Fritz scowled. "Don't push me, dammit!"
I said, "I'm not. Look. Was there ever a time when she could have played
the Maid?"
"Yes," he said after a moment. "But that was then and this is now!"
"Hear me out. What if, by some miracle, she should show up? When you
think of her, just standing there, don't think of her past at all. When
you remember the woman you once knew, if she asked, would you give her
the role?"
Fritz pondered, took his glass, downed it, refilled it from a frosted
crystal pitcher, and then said, "God help me, I think I might. Don't
press me, don't press!"
"Fritz," I said, "if we could find that Constance and she asked you,
would you at least consider taking a chance on her?"
"Oh, God," Fritz rumbled. "Jesus! Yes! No! I don't know!"
"Fritz!"
"Don't yell, goddammit! Yes! A qualified yes!"
"Okay! All right! Wonderful! Now, if only—"
My eyes strayed, scanning the length of shore to the distant storm-drain
entrance. Too late, I glanced away.
Both Crumley and Fritz had caught the look.
"Junior knows where Medea is, right now," said Crumley.
Yes, God, I thought, I know! But my yell had scared her away!
Fritz focused his monocle on that storm-drain entrance.
"Is that where you came out?" he said.
"No thanks to junior here," said Crumley.
"I rode shotgun," I said guiltily.
"Like hell! Shouldn't have been in that sinkhole to start with. Probably
found Rattigan, then lost her again."
Probably! I thought. Oh, God, probably!
"That storm drain," Fritz Wong mused. "Maybe, just maybe, you ran the
wrong way?"
"I what?" I said, stunned.
"Here in crazy Hollywood," said Fritz, "is there not more than one way
to go? The storm drains, they head in all directions?"
"South, north, west, and—" I slowed down. "East," I said slowly. It's
not easy to say "east" slowly, but I did.
"East!" Fritz cried. "Ja, east, east!"
We let our thoughts roam over the hills and down toward Glendale. No one
ever went to Glendale, except. . .
If someone was dead.
Fritz Wong twisted his monocle in his fierce right eye and probed the
eastern skyline, smiling a wonderfully vicious smile.
"Gottdamn!" he said. "This will make the great finale. No script needed.
Shall I tell you where Rattigan is? East! Gone to earth!"
"Gone to what*. " said Crumley.
"Sly fox, swift cat. Rattigan. Gone to earth. Tired, ashamed of all her
lives! Hide them all in one final Cleopatra's carpet, roll them up,
deposit them in Eternity's bank. Fade out. Darkness. Plenty of earth
there to go to."
He made us wait.
"Forest Lawn," he said.
"Fritz, that's where they bury people!"
"Who's directing this?" Fritz said. "You took the wrong turn toward open
air, the sea, life. Rattigan headed east. Death called her by all two
dozen names. She answered with one voice."
"BS!" said Crumley.
"You're fired," said Fritz.
"I was never hired," said Crumley. "What's next?"
"Go and prove I am right!" said Fritz.
"So," said Crumley. "Rattigan climbed down into that storm drain and
walked east, or drove, or was driven east?"
"That," said Fritz, "is how I would shoot it. Film! Delii" cious!
"But why would she go to Forest Lawn?" I protested weakly, thinking
perhaps I had sent her there.
"To die!" said Fritz triumphantly. "Go read Ludwig Bemelmans' tale of
the old man, dead, put a lit candle on his head, hung flowers around his
neck, and walked, a one-man funeral, to his own grave! Constance, she
does the same. She's gone to die a last time, yes? Now, do I put my car
in gear? Will someone follow? And do we go aboveground or take the storm
drain direct?"
I looked at Crumley, he looked at me, and we both looked at Blind Henry.
He felt our gaze, nodded.
Fritz was already gone, the vodka with him.
"Lead the way," said Henry. "Swear a little now and then to give me
direction."
Crumley and I headed for Crumley's old jalopy, Henry in our wake.
Fritz, in his car ahead, banged his motor, blew his horn.
"Okay, you damn Kraut!" cried Crumley.
He thrummed his engine, exploding.
"Which way to the nearest road rage, dammit?"
We paused by the storm drain, stared in, then out at the open road.
"Which is it, smart-ass?" said Crumley. "Dante's Inferno or Route 66?"
"Let me think," I said.
"Oh, no you don't!" Crumley cried.
Fritz was gone. We looked along the beach and couldn't see his car
anywhere.
We looked to our right. There, speeding off down the tunnel, were two
red lights. "Christ!" Crumley yelled. "He's heading in on the flood
channel! Damned fool!"
"What are we going to do?" I said.
"Nothing," cried Crumley. "Just this!" He rammed the gas. We swerved and
plunged into the tunnel.
"Madness!" I cried.
"Damn tootin'," said Crumley. "Goddamn!"
"I'm glad I can't see this," Henry said from the backseat, speaking to
the wind in his face.
We raced up the flood channel, heading inland.
"Can we do it?" I cried. "How high is the flood channel?"
"Most places it's ten feet high," Crumley shouted. "The farther in we
get, the higher the ceilings. Floods come down the mountains in
Glendale, then the channel has to be really big to take the flood. Hold
on!"
Ahead of us, Fritz's car had almost vanished. "Idiot!" I said. "Does he
really know where he's going?"
"Yes!" said Crumley. "All the way to Grauman's Chinese then left to the
goddamn marble orchard."
The sound of our motor was shattering. In that thunder we saw ahead of
us a tide of those lunatics who had assaulted me. "My God," I cried.
"We'll hit them! Don't slow down! Those crazies! Keep going!"
We raced along the channel. Our engine roared. The history of LA.
streamed past us on the walls: pictographs, graffiti, crazed
illustrations left by wandering homeless in 1940, 1930, 1925, faces and
images of terrible things and nothing alive.
Crumley floored the gas. We plunged at the crazed underground mob who
shrieked and screamed a horrible welcome. But Crumley didn't slow. We
cut through them, tossed them aside.
One ghost rose up flailing, gibbering.
Ed, Edward, Eddie, oh Eduardo! I thought. Is that you?
"You never said good-bye!" the ghost raved and fell away.
I wept and we raced on, outpacing my guilt. We left all behind and the
farther we went, the more terrified I became.
"How in hell do we know where we are?" I said. "There aren't any
directions down here. Or we can't see them."
Crumley said, "I think that maybe, yeah, let's see." For there were
signs on the walls, scribbled in chalk, some in black painted letters.
Crumley slowed the car. On the wall ahead of us someone had etched a
bunch of crucifixes and cartoon tombstones.
Crumley said, "If Fritz is any guide, we're in Glendale."
"That means ..." I said.
"Yeah," he said. "Forest Lawn."
He put on his high beams and swerved the car right and left as we moved
slowly, and we saw a ladder leading up to a grate covered by a manhole
in the tunnel ceiling and Fritz's car beneath it, and him out of the car
and climbing the ladder. A series of crosses ran alongside the ladder
leading up.
We got out of the car and crossed the dry wash and began to climb the
ladder. There was a thundering clang above us. We saw Fritz's shape and
the manhole shoved aside, and the beginnings of a gentle rain pelting
his shoulders.
We climbed the ladder in silence. Above us, Fritz was directing and
shouting. "Get the hell up here, you damn fools!"
We looked down.
Blind Henry was not about to be left behind.
CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR
THE storm was over but the drizzle stayed. The sky was a loon
sky—promising much, delivering little.
"Are we there yet?" said Henry.
We all looked in the gates at Forest Lawn Cemetery, a sweeping hillside
covered with a cannonade of memorial stones embedded like meteors in its
grass.
"They say that place," said Crumley, "has a greater voting population
than Paducah, Kentucky, Red River, Wyoming, or East End, Azusa."
"I like old-fashioned graveyards," said Henry. "Things you can run your
hands over. Tombs you can lie on like statues or bring your lady in late
hours to play doctor."
"Anyone ever gone in just to check the boy Davids fig leaf?" said Fritz.
"I hear tell," said Henry, "when they shipped him over, there was no
leaf, so he lay around the north forty a year, under canvas, so old
ladies in tennis shoes wouldn't be offended. Day before the fig leaf was
glued on to spoil the fun, they had to beat off a gloveless Braille
Institute convention. Live folks doing gymnastics in midnight graveyards
is called foreplay. Dead folks doing the same is afterplay."
We stood there in the drizzle looking across the way to the mortuary
offices.
"Gone to earth," I heard someone murmur. Me.
"Move!" said Crumley. "In thirty minutes the rain from the hills hits
below. The flood will wash our cars down to the sea."
We stared at the gaping manhole. We could hear the creek whispering
below.
"My God!" said Fritz. "My classic car!"
"Move!" said Crumley.
We ducked across the street and into the mortuary building.
"Who do we ask?" I said. "And what do we ask?"
There was a moment of colliding looks, pure confusion. "Do we ask for
Constance?" I said.
"Talk sense," said Crumley. "We ask about all those newspaper headlines
and names. All those lipstick aliases on the basement dressing-room
mirrors."
"Say again," said Henry.
"I'm talking pure circumstantial metaphor," said Crumley. "Double time!"
We double-timed it into the vast halls of death, or to put it another
way, the land of clerks and file cabinets.
We did not have to take a number and wait, for a very tall man with
ice-blond hair and an oyster complexion glided to the front desk and
disdained us as if we were discards from a steam laundry.
He laid a card on the desktop and dared Crumley to take it. "You Grey?"
he said.
"Elihu Phillips Grey, as you see."
"We're here to buy gravesites and plots."
A late-winter smile appeared on Elihu P. Grey's mouth and hung there,
like a mist. With a magician's gesture, he manifested a chart and price
sheet.
Crumley ignored it. "First, I got a list."
He pulled out all the names I had put together but placed it upside down
in front of Grey, who scanned the list in silence.
So Crumley pulled forth a rolled wad of one-hundred-dollar bills.
"Hold that, will you, junior?" he said, tossing the wad to me. And then,
to Grey: "You know those names?"
"I know all the names." Grey relapsed into silence.
Crumley swore under his breath. "Recite them, junior."
I recited the names, one by one.
"Holly Morgan."
Grey flicked through his file.
"She's here. Buried 1924."
"Polly Starr?"
Another quick run-through.
"Here. 1926."
"How about Molly Circe?"
"Right. 1927."
"Emily Danse?"
"1928."
"All buried here, for sure?"
Grey looked sour. "I have never once in all my life been wrong. Strange,
however." He rescanned the items he had drawn out of the file. "Odd. Are
they all related, all one family?"
"How do you mean?"
Grey fixed his arctic stare at the names. "Because, see here, they're
all entombed in the same aboveground Gothic stone hut."
"How's that again?" Crumley lurched from his boredom and grabbed the
file cards. "What?"
"Odd, all those different surnames, put to rest in one tomb, a memorial
dwelling with eight shelves for eight family members."
"But they aren't family!" said Fritz.
"Odd," said Grey. "Strange."
I stood as if struck by lightning.
"Hold on," I whispered.
Fritz and Crumley and Henry turned to me.
Grey lifted his snowy eyebrows. "Ye-e-ss." He made two long syllables
out of it. "Well?"
"The tomb house? The family vault? There must be a name on the portico.
The name chiseled in marble?"
Grey scanned his cards, making us wait.
"Rattigan," he said.
"Are you sure?"
"I have never—"
"Yes, I know! The name again!"
We all held our breath.
"Rattigan." His cold voice issued from a steel-trap mouth.
We let our air out.
At last I said, "They can't all be there in that one vault."
Grey shut his eyes. "I—"
"I know, I know," I said quickly. I stared at my friends.
"Are you thinking what I'm thinking?"
"Jesus Christ," murmured Crumley. "Goddamn. Can you give us directions
to the Rattigan tomb?"
Grey scribbled on a notepad map. "Easy to find. There're fresh flowers
out front. The tomb door is open. There will be a memorial service there
tomorrow."
"Who's being entombed?"
We all waited, eyes shut, guessing the answer.
"Rattigan," said Grey, almost smiling. "Someone named Constance
Rattigan."
CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE
THE rain was so thick the graveyard disappeared. All we could see as we
drove uphill in an electric runabout were monuments on the side of the
road. The path ahead vanished in the downpour. I carried a map on my
lap, marked with an arrow and the name of the area. We stopped.
"It's there," said Crumley. "Azalia Gardens? Plot sixteen. Neo-Palladian
edifice."
The rain blew back like a curtain and a flicker of lightning showed us a
slender tomb with Palladian pillars on each side of a tall metal door,
which stood ajar.
"So if she wants out," said Henry, "she's out. Or invite folks in.
Rattigan!"
The rain lifted and blew away and the tomb waited while thunder ran
along the far brim of the graveyard. The open door trembled.
Crumley spoke almost to himself: "Jesus! Constance buried herself. Name
after name. Year after year. When she was done with one act, one face,
one mask, she hired a tomb and stashed herself away. And now, to get the
job, maybe, from Fritz, she's killing all her selves again. Don't go in
there, Willie."
"She's in there now," I said.
"Horse apples," said Crumley. "Goddamn intuition?"
"No." I shivered. "Goddamn hunch. She's got to be saved." I climbed out.
"She's dead!"
"I'll save her anyway?
"Like hell you will!" said Crumley. "You're under arrest! Get back in
here!"
"You're the law, sure, but you're my friend."
I was flooded with cold rain.
"Dammit, dammit all to hell. Go on! Run, you stupid idiot! We'll be
waiting downhill. I'll be goddamned if I'll sit and watch your head come
flying out that goddamn door. Come find us! Damn you!"
"Hold on!" Fritz cried.
"Hold goddamn nothing!"
Fritz threw a small flask that hit me in the chest.
I stood shivering in the cold downpour and gave Fritz a long look as
Crumley, cursing, got out of the runabout slowly. We stood in the big
mortuary field with an open iron gate and open tomb door and the rain
threatening to wash the bodies out of the earth. I shut my eyes and
drank the vodka.
"Ready or not," I whispered. "Here goes."
"Goddammit," said Crumley.
CHAPTER FORTY-SIX
it was a dark and stormy night.
My God, I thought, again?
Feet running. A cry. Lightning, thunder, a few nights back.
And here, my God, the same again!
The gates of heaven burst, a flood poured in darkness, with me near a
cold tomb with someone crazed and maybe dead deep in the dark.
Stop, I told myself.
Touch.
The outer gate creaked. The inner door squealed.
We stood in the entry of the marble tomb with the sun gone, never to
return, and the rain to rain forever.
It was dark, but there were three small blue votive candles lit and
wavering in the draft from the door.
We all looked at the sarcophagus down below on our right.
Holly's name was there. But there was no lid on the sarcophagus and it
was empty, save for a powdering of dust.
Our eyes looked up to the next shelf.
Lightning flickered outside in the rain. Thunder mumbled.
On the next shelf Molly's name was cut in marble. But again no lid, and
the sarcophagus was empty.
Rain drenched the open door behind us as we looked at the next-to-top
and topmost shelves and marble cases. We saw the names of Emily and
Polly. We could see one was unoccupied. Trembling, I reached up to probe
the top casement. My fingers touched only empty air.
Holly, Polly, Molly, and Emily, but in the flickers of lightning no
bodies, no remains.
I stared up at that final enclosure and began to reach up when there was
the faintest gasp and something like a cold weeping, far away.
I took my hand down and looked at Crumley. He looked up at the last
sarcophagus and at last said, "Junior, it's all yours." There was a
final intake of breath above in the shadows.
"Okay," said Crumley, "everyone out."
Everyone backed out into the whispering rain. At the door Crumley looked
back at his lunatic child, handed me a flashlight, nodded good luck, and
was gone.
I was alone.
I pulled back. The flashlight fell. I almost collapsed. It took a long
while before I found and raised its beam, my heartbeat quaked with it.
"You," I whispered, "there."
Jesus, what did that mean?
"It's," I whispered, "me."
Louder.
"I came to find you," I whispered.
"So?" the shadow murmured. The rain behind me fell in a solid sheet.
Lightning shimmered. But still no thunder.
"Constance," I said at last to the dark shape on the tall shelf with the
shadows of rain curtaining it. "Listen."
And at last I said my name.
Silence.
I spoke again.
Oh God, I thought, she's really dead!
No more of this! Get out, damn, go! But even in turning, the slightest
shrug, it happened. The shadow above with a faceless face quickened with
the merest breath.
I hardly heard, I only sensed the shadow.
"What?" it exhaled.
I quickened, glad for life, any life, any pulse.
"My name." I gave it again.
"Oh," someone murmured.
Which hammered me to quicker life. I leaned away from rain into cold
tomb air.
"I've come to save you," I whispered.
"So?" the voice murmured.
It was the merest mosquito dance in the air, not heard, no, not there.
How could a dead woman speak?
"Good," the whisper said. "Night."
"Don't sleep!" I cried. "Sleep and you won't come back! Don't die."
"Why?" came the murmur.
"Because," I gasped. "Because. I say so."
"Say." A sigh.
Jesus, I thought, say something!
"Say!" said the faintest shadow.
"Come out!" I murmured. "This isn't your place!"
"Yes." The faintest brush of sound.
"No!" I cried.
"Mine," came the breath in the shadow.
"I'll help you get away," I said.
"From what?" the shadow said. And then, in terrible fear: "Gone. They
are gone!"
"They?"
"Gone? They've got to be! Are they?"
Lightning struck the dark acres at last, thunder knocked the tomb. I
spun to stare out at the meadows of stone, the hills of shining slabs
with names being sluiced away. And the slabs and stones were lit by the
fires in the sky and became names on mirror glass, photos on walls,
inked names on papers, and again mirror names and dates being washed
away down a storm drain while the pictures fell from the walls and the
film slithered through the projector to dance faces on a silver screen
ten thousand miles below. Pictures, mirrors, films. Films, mirrors,
pictures. Names, dates, names.
"Are they still there?" said the shadow on the top shelf of the tomb.
"Out there in the rain?"
I looked out at the long hill of the mortuary place. The rain was
falling on a dozen and a hundred and a thousand stones.
"They mustn't be there," she said. "I thought they were gone forever.
But then they began to knock at the door, wake me. I swam out to my
friends, the seals. But no matter how far I swam, they were waiting for
me on the shore. The whisperers who want to remember what I want to
forget."
She hesitated. "So if I couldn't outrun them, I'd have to kill them one
by one, one by one. Who were they? Me? So I chased them instead of them
me, and one by one I found where they were buried and buried them again.
1925, then 1928, 1930, '35. Where they would stay forever. Now it's time
to lie down and sleep forever, or they might call me again at three in
the morning. So, where am I?
The rain fell outside the crypt. There was a long moment of silence and
I said, "You're here, Constance, and I'm here, listening."
After a while she said, "Are they all gone, is the shore clear now, can
I swim back in and not be afraid?"
I said, "Yes, Constance, they're really buried. You did the job. Someone
had to forgive you, that someone had to be Constance. Come out."
"Why?" said the voice from the top shelf of the tomb.
"Because," I said, "this is all crazy, but you're needed. So, please,
rest for a moment, and then put your hand out and let me help you down.
Do you hear me, Constance?"
The sky went dark. The fires died. The rain fell, erasing the stones and
slabs and the names, the names, the terrible names cut to last but
dissolving in grass.
"Are they?" came the frantic whisper.
And I said, my eyes filled with cold rain, "Yes."
"Yes?"
"Yes," I said. "The yard's empty. The picture's dropped. The mirrors are
clean. Now there's only you and me."
The rain washed the unseen stones sinking deep in the flooded grass.
"Come out," I said quietly.
Rain fell. Water slid on the road. The monuments, stones, slabs, and
names were lost.
"Constance, one final thing."
"What?" she whispered.
After a long pause I said, "Fritz Wong is waiting. The screenplay is
finished. The sets are built and ready."
I shut my eyes and agonized to remember.
Then, at last, I remembered: " 'Only for my voices, I would lose all
heart.' "
I hesitated, then continued: " 'It is in the bells I hear my voices. The
bells come down from heaven and the echoes linger. In the quiet of the
countryside, my voices are there. Without them I would lose heart.' "
Silence.
A shadow moved. A white shape motioned.
The tips of her fingers came out into the shadows and then her hand and
then the slender arm.
Then, after a long silence, a deep breath, an exhalation, Constance
said: "I'm coming down."
CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN
THE storm was gone. It was as if it had never been. The sky was clean,
not a cloud anywhere, and a fresh breeze was blowing as if to clean a
slate, or a mirror, or a mind.
I stood on the beach in front of Rattigan's Arabian fort with Crumley
and Henry, mostly silent, and Fritz Wong surveying the scene for long
shots and close-ups.
Inside the house two men in white coveralls moved like shadows and I was
put in mind of altar attendants somehow, the mind of a crazed writer
freely associating, and I wished that somehow, wild as it seemed, Father
Rattigan could be there, could be one of those white figures cleaning
the house with a censer of incense and a rain of holy water, to
re-sanctify a place that had probably never been anywhere near
sanctified. Good God, I thought, bring a priest to cleanse a den of
iniquity! The housepainters, inside, scraping the walls clean in order
to apply fresh paint, worked steadily, not knowing whose house it was
and what had lived there. Outside on a table by the pool were some beers
for Crumley, Fritz, Henry, and myself, and vodka, if our mood changed.
The smell of fresh paint was invigorating; it promised a lunatic
redemption, and an echo of forgiveness. New paint, new life? Please,
God.
"How far out does she go?" Crumley stared at the breakers a hundred
yards off shore.
"Don't ask me," said Henry.
"Out with the seals," I said, "or sometimes in close. She has a lot of
friends out there. Hear?"
The seals were barking, louder or softer I couldn't say, I only heard.
It was a glad sound to go with the fresh paint in an old house made new.
"Tell the painters when they paint her mailbox," said Fritz, "to leave
room for just one name, ja?"
"Right," said Henry. He cocked his head to one side, and then frowned.
"She's been swimming a long time. What if she don't come in?"
"That wouldn't be so bad," I said. "She loves the water offshore."
"Swells after a storm, fine for surfing. Hey! That was loud!"
The kind of loud that made for a theatrical entrance.
With superb timing, a cab roared up in the alley behind Rattigan's.
"God!" I said. "I know who that is!"
A door slammed. A woman came slogging across the sand that ran between
the house and seaside pool, her hands clenched in tight balls. She stood
before me like a blast furnace and raised her fists.
"What have you got to say for yourself?" Maggie cried.
"Sorry?" I bleated.
"Sorry!"
She hauled off and struck me a terrible blow on the nose.
"Hit him again," Crumley suggested.
"Once more for luck," offered Fritz.
"What's going on?" said Henry.
"Bastard!"
"I know."
"Son of a bitch!"
"Yes," I said.
She struck a second time.
The blood gushed. It flooded my chin and drenched my upraised hands.
Maggie pulled back.
"Oh, God," she cried, "what have I done!"
"Hit a son of a bitch and bastard," Fritz answered.
"Right," said Crumley.
"You keep out of this!" Maggie yelled. "Someone get a Band-Aid."
I looked at the bright flow on my hands. "Band-Aids won't work."
"Shut up, you stupid womanizer!"
"Only one" I bleated.
"Hold still!" she cried, and raised her fist again.
I held still and she collapsed.
"No, no, enough, enough," she wept. "Oh God, this is terrible."
"Go ahead, I deserve it," I said.
"Do you, do you?"
"Yeah," I said.
Maggie glared at the far surf. "Where is she? Out there?"
"Somewhere."
"I hope she never comes in!"
"Me, too."
"What in hell does that mean?"
"I don't know," I said as quietly as possible. "Maybe she belongs out
there. Maybe she has friends, dumb friends, and maybe she should stay
with them and never come in again."
"If she does, I'll kill her."
"Then she's better off staying way out."
"Are you defending her, damn you?"
"No, just saying she should never have come in. She was always happier
on days like this, after a storm, when the waves are right and the
clouds are gone. I saw her a few times like that. She didn't drink all
day, just kept going out, and there was always the promise she wouldn't
come back."
"What got into you? What got into her?"
"Nobody knows. It happens all the time. No alibis. It's just things
happen, and next thing you know it's all gone to hell."
"Keep talking, maybe you'll make sense."
"No, the more talk the less sense. She was lost for a long time. Now,
maybe, she's found. A lot of bull, a lot of malarkey, I don't know. I
promised her if she swam out with all those names, she might swim back
in as just one. Promises, promises. We'll know when she comes ashore."
"Shut up. You know I love you, don't you, you dumb bastard?"
"I know."
"In spite of all this, you rat, I still love you, God help me. Is this
what all women put up with?"
"Most," I said. "Most. No explanations. No reason. Awful truths. The dog
wanders. The dog comes home. The dog smiles. You hit him. He forgives
you for forgiving him. And it's back home to the kennel or a lonely
life. I don't want a lonely life. Do you?"
"Jesus help me, no I don't. Wipe your nose."
I wiped it. More blood.
"I'm sorry," she cried.
"Don't be. That's the last thing for you to be. Don't."
"Hold it!" said Henry. "Listen."
"What?" said everyone at once.
"Feel it?" said Henry.
"What, what, dammit?"
"The big surf, the biggest wave, coming in, now," murmured Henry. "And
bringing something with it."
Way out, the seals barked.
Way out, a huge wave curled.
Crumley, Fritz, Henry, Maggie, and I held our breath.
And the wave came in.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