antiqueRayBradburyFarewell SummerundRayBradburycalibre
0.8.6522.8.201276f1315e-717e-4cd7-afeb-b584553fc1481.0
With love to John Huff, alive many years after Dandelion Wine
I. ALMOST ANTIETAM
CHAPTER ONE
There are those days which seem a taking in of breath which, held,
suspends the whole earth in its waiting. Some summers refuse to end.
So along the road those flowers spread that, when touched, give down a
shower of autumn rust. By every path it looks as if a ruined circus had
passed and loosed a trail of ancient iron at every turning of a wheel.
The rust was laid out everywhere, strewn under trees and by riverbanks
and near the tracks themselves where once a locomotive had gone but went
no more. So flowered flakes and railroad track together turned to
moulderings upon the rim of autumn.
“Look, Doug,” said Grandpa, driving into town from the farm. Behind them
in the Kissel Kar were six large pumpkins picked fresh from the patch.
“See those flowers?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Farewell summer, Doug. That’s the name of those flowers. Feel the air?
August come back. Farewell summer.”
“Boy,” said Doug, “that’s a sad name.”
***
Grandma stepped into her pantry and felt the wind blowing from the west.
The yeast was rising in the bowl, a sumptuous head, the head of an alien
rising from the yield of other years. She touched the swell beneath the
muslin cap. It was the earth on the morn before the arrival of Adam. It
was the morn after the marriage of Eve to that stranger in the garden
bed.
Grandma looked out the window at the way the sunlight lay across the
yard and filled the apple trees with gold and echoed the same words:
“Farewell summer. Here it is, October 1st. Tem perature’s 82. Season
just can’t let go. The dogs are out under the trees. The leaves won’t
turn. A body would like to cry and laughs instead. Get up to the attic,
Doug, and let the mad maiden aunt out of the secret room.”
“Is there a mad maiden aunt in the attic?” asked Doug.
“No, but there should be.”
Clouds passed over the lawn. And when the sun came out, in the pantry,
Grandma almost whispered, Summer, farewell.
On the front porch, Doug stood beside his grandfather, hoping to borrow
some of that far sight, beyond the hills, some of the wanting to cry,
some of the ancient joy. The smell of pipe tobacco and Tiger shaving
tonic had to suffice. A top spun in his chest, now light, now dark, now
moving his tongue with laughter, now filling his eyes with salt water.
He surveyed the lake of grass below, all the dandelions gone, a touch of
rust in the trees, and the smell of Egypt blowing from the far east.
“Think I’ll go eat me a doughnut and take me a nap,” Doug said.
CHAPTER TWO
Laid out in his bed at his own house next door with a powdered-sugar
moustache on his upper lip, Doug contemplated sleep, which lurked around
in his head and gently covered him with darkness.
A long way off, a band played a strange slow tune, full of muted brass
and muffl ed drums.
Doug listened.
It was as if the faraway band had come out of a cave into full sunlight.
Somewhere a mob of irritable blackbirds soared to become piccolos.
“A parade!” whispered Doug, and leapt out of bed, shaking away sleep and
sugar.
The music got louder, slower, deeper, like an immense storm cloud full
of lightning, darkening rooftops.
At the window, Douglas blinked.
For there on the lawn, lifting a trombone, was Charlie Woodman, his best
friend at school, and Will Arno, Charlie’s pal, raising a trumpet, and
Mr. Wyneski, the town barber, with a boa-constrictor tuba and––wait!
Doug turned and ran through the house.
He stepped out on the porch.
Down among the band stood Grandpa with a French horn, Grandma with a
tambourine, his brother Tom with a kazoo.
Everyone yelled, everyone laughed.
“Hey,” cried Doug. “What day is this?”
“Why,” Grandma cried, “ your day, Doug!”
“Fireworks tonight. The excursion boat’s waiting!”
“For a picnic?”
“Trip’s more like it.” Mr. Wyneski crammed on his corn-flake-cereal
straw hat. “Listen!”
The sound of a far boat wailed up from the lake shore.
“March!”
Grandma shook her tambourine, Tom thrummed his kazoo, and the bright mob
drew Doug off along the street with a dog pack yipping at their heels.
Downtown, someone threw a torn telephone book off the Green Town Hotel
roof. When the confetti hit the bricks the parade was gone.
At the lake shore fog moved on the water.
Far out, he could hear a foghorn’s mournful wail.
And a pure white boat loomed out of the fog and nudged the pier.
Doug stared. “How come that boat’s got no name?”
The ship’s whistle shrieked. The crowd swarmed, shoving Douglas to the
gangplank.
“You first, Doug!”
The band dropped a ton of brass and ten pounds of chimes with “For He’s
a Jolly Good Fellow,” as they thrust him on the deck, then leapt back on
the dock.
Wham!
The gangplank fell.
The people weren’t trapped on land, no.
He was trapped on water.
The steamboat shrieked away from the dock. The band played “Columbia,
Gem of the Ocean.”
“Goodbye, Douglas,” cried the town librarians.
“So long,” whispered everyone.
Douglas stared around at the picnic put by in wicker hampers on the deck
and remembered a museum where he had once seen an Egyptian tomb with
toys and clumps of withered fruit placed around a small carved boat. It
flared like a gunpowder fl ash.
“So long, Doug, so long . . .” Ladies lifted their handkerchiefs, men
waved straw hats.
And soon the ship was way out in the cold water with the fog wrapping it
up so the band faded.
“Brave journey, boy.”
And now he knew that if he searched he would fi nd no captain, no crew
as the ship’s engines pumped belowdecks.
Numbly, he sensed that if he reached down to touch the prow he would
find the ship’s name, freshly painted:
FAREWELL SUMMER.
“Doug . . .” the voices called. “Oh, goodbye . . . oh, so long . . .”
And then the dock was empty, the parade gone as the ship blew its horn a
last time and broke his heart so it fell from his eyes in tears as he
cried all the names of his loves on shore.
“Grandma, Grandpa, Tom, help !”
Doug fell from bed, hot, cold, and weeping.
CHAPTER THREE
Doug stopped crying.
He got up and went to the mirror to see what sadness looked like and
there it was, colored all through his cheeks, and he reached to touch
that other face, and it was cold.
Next door, baking bread filled the air with its late- afternoon aroma.
He ran out across the yard and into his grandma’s kitchen to watch her
pull the lovely guts out of a chicken and then paused at a window to see
Tom far up in his favorite apple tree trying to climb the sky.
Someone stood on the front porch, smoking hi s favorite pipe.
“Gramps, you’re here ! Boy, oh boy. The house is here. The town’s here!”
“It seems you’re here, too, boy.”
“Yeah, oh, yeah.”
The trees leaned their shadows on the lawn. Somewhere, the last
lawnmower of summer shaved the years and left them in sweet mounds.
“Gramps, is—”
Douglas closed his eyes, and in the darkness said: “Is death being on a
ship sailing and all your folks left back on the shore?”
Grandpa read a few clouds in the sky.
“That’s about it, Doug. Why?”
Douglas eyed a high cloud passing that had never been that shape before
and would never be that shape again.
“Say it, Gramps.”
“Say what? Farewell summer?”
No, thought Douglas, not if    I  can help it!
And, in his head, the storm began.
CHAPTER FOUR
There was a great rushing sliding iron sound like a guillotine blade
slicing the sky. The blow fell. The town shuddered. But it was just the
wind from the north.
And down in the center of the ravine, the boys listened for that great
stroke of wind to come again.
They stood on the creek-bank making water in the cool sunlight and among
them, preoccupied, stood Douglas. They all smiled as they spelled their
names in the creek sand with the steaming lemon water.
CHARLIE, wrote one. WILL, another. And then :
BO, PETE, SAM, HENRY, RALPH, and TOM.
Doug inscribed his initials with flourishes, took a deep breath, and
added a postscript: WAR.
Tom squinted at the sand. “What?”
“War of course, dummy. War!”
“Who’s the enemy?”
Douglas Spaulding glanced up at the green slopes above their great and
secret ravine.
Instantly, like clockwork, in four ancient gray-flaked mansion houses,
four old men, shaped from leaf-mold and yellowed dry wicker, showed
their mummy faces from porches or in coffi n-shaped windows.
“Them,” whispered Doug. “Oh, them !”
Doug whirled and shrieked, “Charge!”
“Who do we kill?” said Tom.
CHAPTER FIVE
Above the green ravine, in a dry room at the top of an ancient house,
old Braling leaned from a window like a thing from the attic, trembling.
Below, the boys ran.
“God,” he cried. “Make them stop their damned laughing !”
He clutched faintly at his chest as if he were a Swiss watchmaker
concerned with keeping something running with that peculiar
self-hypnosis he called prayer.
“Beat, now; one, two !”
Nights when he feared his heart might stop, he set a metronome ticking
by his bed, so that his blood would continue to travel on toward dawn.
Footsteps scraped, a cane tip tapped, on the downstairs porch. That
would be old Calvin C. Quarter-main come to argue school board policy in
the husking wicker chairs. Braling half fell down the stairs, emerging
onto the porch.
“Quartermain!”
Calvin C. Quartermain sat like a wild mechanical toy, oversized, rusty,
in a reed easy chair.
Braling laughed. “I made it!”
“Not forever,” Quartermain observed.
“Hell,” said Braling. “Some day they’ll bury you in a California
dried-fruit tin. Christ, what’re those idiot boys up to?”
“Horsing around. Listen !”
“Bang!”
Douglas ran by the porch.
“Get off the lawn!” cried Braling.
Doug spun and aimed his cap-pistol.
“Bang!”
Braling, with a pale, wild look, cried, “Missed!”
“Bang!” Douglas jumped up the porch steps.
He saw two panicked moons in Braling’s eyes . “Bang! Your arm! ”
 “Who wants an arm?" Braling snorted.
“Bang! Your heart ! ”
 “What? ”
“Heart—bang! ”
 “Steady . . . One, two !” whispered the old man .
“Bang! ”
“One, two!" Braling called to his hands clutchin ghis ribs. “Christ!
Metronome!”
“What?”
“Metronome! ”
 “Bang! You’re dead! ”
“One, two!” Braling gasped . And dropped dead .
Douglas, cap-gun in hand, slipped and fell back down the steps onto the
dry grass.
CHAPTER SIX
The hours burned in cold white wintry flashes, as people scuttled in and
out of Braling’s mansion, hoping against hope that he was Lazarus.
Calvin C. Quartermain careened about Braling’s porch like the captain of
a wrecked ship.
“Damn! I saw the boy’s gun!”
“There’s no bullet-hole,” said Dr. Lieber, who’d been called.
“Shot dead, he was! Dead!”
The house grew silent as the people left, bearing away the husk that had
been poor Braling. Calvin C.
Quartermain abandoned the porch, mouth salivating.
“I’ll find the killer, by God!”
Propelling himself with his cane, he turned a corner.
A cry, a concussion! “No, by God, no!” He flailed at the air and fell.
Some ladies rocking on the nearest porch leaned out. “Is that old
Quartermain?”
“Oh, he can’t be dead, too— can he?”
Quartermain’s eyelids twitched.
Far off, he saw a bike, and a boy racing away.
Assassin, he thought. Assassin!
CHAPTER SEVEN
When Douglas walked, his mind ran, when He ran, his mind walked. The
houses fell aside, the sky blazed.
At the rim of the ravine, he threw his cap-pistol far out over the gulf.
An avalanche buried it. The echoes died.
Suddenly, he needed the gun again, to touch the shape of killing, like
touching that wild old man.
Launching himself down the side of the ravine, Doug scrambled among the
weeds, eyes wet, until he found the weapon. It smelled of gunpowder, fi
re, and darkness.
“Bang,” he whispered, and climbed up to fi nd his bike abandoned across
the street from where old Braling had been killed. He led the bike away
like a blind beast and at last got on and wobbled around the block, back
toward the scene of awful death.
Turning a corner, he heard “No!” as his bike hit a nightmare scarecrow
that was flung to the ground as he pumped off, wailing, staring back at
one more murder strewn on the walk. Someone cried, “Is that old
Quartermain?!”
“Can’t be,” Douglas moaned.
Braling fell, Quartermain fell. Up, down, up, down, two thin hatchets
sunk in hard porch and sidewalk, frozen, never to rise.
Doug churned his bike through town. No mobs rushed after him.
It seemed the town did not even know that someone had been shot, another
struck. The town poured tea and murmured, “Pass the sugar.”
Doug slam-braked at his front porch. Was his mother waiting in tears,
his father wielding the razor strop . . .?
He opened the kitchen door. “Hey. Long time no see.” Mother kissed his
brow. “They always come home when they’re hungry.”
“Funny,” said Doug. “I’m not hungry at all.”
CHAPTER EIGHT
At dinner, the family heard pebbles ping ing against the front door.
“Why,” said Mother, “don’t boys ever use the bell?”
“In the last two hundred years,” said Father, “there is no recorded case
in which any boy under fi fteen ever got within ten feet of a doorbell.
You fi nished, young man?”
“Finished, sir!”
Douglas hit the front door like a bomb, skidded, jumped back in time to
catch the screen before it slammed. Then he was off the porch and there
was Charlie Woodman on the lawn, punching him great friendly punches.
“Doug! You did it! You shot Braling! Boy!”
“Not so loud, Charlie!”
“When do we shoot everyone on the school board? For gosh sakes, they
started school a week early this year! They deserve to be shot. My gosh,
how’d you do it, Doug?”
“I said, ‘Bang! You’re dead!’”
“And Quartermain?!”
“Quartermain?”
“You broke his leg! Sure was your busy day, Doug!”
“I didn’t break no leg. My bike . . .”
“No, a machine ! I heard old Cal screaming when they lugged him home.
‘Infernal machine!’ What kind of infernal machine, Doug?”
Somewhere in a corner of his mind, Doug saw the bike fling Quartermain
high, wheels spinning, while Douglas fled, the cry of Quartermain
following close.
“Doug, why didn’t you crack both his legs with your infernal machine?”
“What?”
“When do we see your device, Doug? Can you set it for the Death of a
Thousand Slices?”
Doug examined Charlie’s face, to see if he was joking, but Charlie’s
face was a pure church altar alive with holy light.
“Doug,” he murmured. “Doug, boy, oh boy.”
“Sure,” said Douglas, warming to the altar glow. “Him against me, me
against Quartermain and the whole darn school board, the town
council—Mr. Bleak, Mr. Gray, all those dumb old men that live at the
edge of the ravine.”
“Can I watch you pick ’em off , Doug?”
“What? Sure. But we got to plan, got to have an army.”
“Tonight, Doug?”
“Tomorrow . . .”
“No, tonight ! Do or die. You be captain.”
“General!”
“Sure, sure. I’ll get the others. So they can hear it from the horse’s
mouth! Meet at the ravine bridge, eight o’clock! Boy!”
“Don’t yell in the windows at those guys,” said Doug. “Leave secret
notes on their porches. That’s an order!”
“Yeah!”
Charlie sped off, yelling. Douglas felt his heart drown in a fresh new
summer. He felt the power growing in his head and arms and fi sts. All
this in a day! From plain old C-minus student to full general!
Now, whose legs should be cracked next? Whose metronome stopped? He
sucked in a trembling breath.
All the fiery-pink windows of the dying day shone upon this
arch-criminal who walked in their brilliant gaze, half smile-scowling
toward destiny, toward eight o’clock, toward the camptown gathering of
the great Green Town Confederacy and everyone sitting by firelight
singing, “Tenting tonight, tenting tonight, tenting on the old camp
grounds . . . ”
We’ll sing that one, he thought, three times.
CHAPTER NINE
Up in the attic, Doug and Tom set up head quarters. A turned-over box
became the general’s desk; his aide-de-camp stood by, awaiting orders.
“Get out your pad, Tom.”
“It’s out.”
“Ticonderoga pencil?”
“Ready.”
“I got a list, Tom, for the Great Army of the Republic. Write this down.
There’s Will and Sam and Charlie and Bo and Pete and Henry and Ralph.
Oh, and you, Tom.”
“How do we use the list, Doug?”
“We gotta find things for them to do. Time’s running out. Right now
we’ve gotta figure how many captains, how many lieutenants. One general.
That’s me.”
“Make it good, Doug. Keep ’em busy.”
“First three names, captains. The next three, lieutenants. Everybody
else, spies.”
“Spies, Doug?”
“I think that’s the greatest thing. Guys like to creep around, watch
things, and then come back and tell.”
“Heck, I want to be one of those.”
“Hold on. We’ll make them all captains and lieutenants, make everyone
happy, or we’ll lose the war before it gets started. Some will do
double-duty as spies.”
“Okay, Doug, here’s the list.”
Doug scanned it. “Now we gotta fi gure the fi rst sockdolager thing to
do.”
“Get the spies to tell you.”
“Okay, Tom. But you’re the most important spy. After the ravine meeting
tonight . . .” Tom frowned, shook his head. “What?”
“Heck, Doug, the ravine’s nice but I know a bette r place. The
graveyard. The sun’ll be gone. It’ll remind ’em if they’re not careful,
that’s where we’ll all wind up.”
“Good thinking, Tom.”
“Well, I’m gonna go spy and round up the guys. First the bridge, then
the graveyard, yup?”
“Tom, you’re really somethin’.”
“Always was,” said Tom. “Always was.”
He jammed his pencil in his shirt pocket, stashed his nickel tablet in
the waistband of his dungarees, and saluted his commander.
“Dismissed!”
And Tom ran.
CHAPTER TEN
The green acreage of the old cemetery was filled with stones and names
on stones. Not only the names of the people earthed over with sod and fl
owers, but the names of seasons. Spring rain had written soft, unseen
messages here. Summer sun had bleached granite. Autumn wind had softened
the lettering. And snow had laid its cold hand on winter marble. But now
what the seasons had to say was only a cool whisper in the trembling
shade, the message of names: “TYSON! BOWMAN! STEVENS!”
Douglas leap-frogged TYSON, danced on BOWMAN, and circled STEVENS.
The graveyard was cool with old deaths, old stones grown in far Italian
mountains to be shipped here to this green tunnel, under skies too
bright in summer, too sad in winter.
Douglas stared. The entire territory swarmed with ancient terrors and
dooms. The Great Army stood around him and he looked to see if the
invisible webbed wings in the rushing air ran lost in the high elms and
maples. And did they feel all that? Did they hear the autumn chestnuts
raining in cat-soft thumpings on the mellow earth? But now all was the
fi xed blue lost twilight which sparked each stone with light specules
where fresh yellow butterflies had once rested to dry their wings and
now were gone.
Douglas led his suddenly disquieted mob into a further land of stillness
and made them tie a bandanna over his eyes; his mouth, isolated, smiled
all to itself.
Groping, he laid hands on a tombstone and played it like a harp,
whispering.
“Jonathan Silks. 1920. Gunshot.” Another: “Will Colby. 1921. Flu.”
He turned blindly to touch deep-cut green moss names and rainy years,
and old games played on lost Memorial Days while his aunts watered the
grass with tears, their voices like windswept trees.
He named a thousand names, fixed ten thousand fl owers, flashed ten
million spades. “Pneumonia, gout, dyspepsia, TB. All of ’em taught,”
said Doug. “Taught to learn how to die. Pretty dumb lying here, doing
nothing, yup?”
“Hey Doug,” Charlie said, uneasily. “We met here to plan our army, not
talk about dying. There’s a billion years between now and Christmas.
With all that time to fill, I got no time to die. I woke this morning
and said to myself, ‘Charlie, this is swell, living. Keep doing it!’”
“Charlie, that’s how they want you to talk!”
“Am I wrinkly, Doug, and dog-pee yellow? Am I fourteen, Doug, or fifteen
or twenty? Am I?”
“Charlie, you’ll spoil everything!”
“I’m just not worried." Charlie beamed. “I fi gure everyone dies, but
when it’s my turn, I’ll just say no thanks. Bo, you goin’ to die
someday? Pete?”
“Not me!”
“Me either!”
“See?” Charlie turned to Doug. “Nobody’s dyin’ like flies. Right now
we’ll just lie like hound-dogs in the shade. Cool off , Doug.”
Douglas’s hands fisted in his pockets, clutching dust, marbles, and a
piece of white chalk. At any moment Charlie would run, the gang with
him, yapping like dogs, to flop in deep grape-arbor twilight, not even
swatting flies, eyes shut.
Douglas swiftly chalked their names, CHARLIE, TOM, PETE, BO, WILL, SAM,
HENRY, AND RALPH, on the gravestones, then jumped back to let them spy
themselves, so much chalk-dust on marble, fl aking, as time blew by in
the trees.
The boys stared for a long, long time, silent, their eyes moving over
the strange shapes of chalk on the cold stone. Then, at last, there was
the faintest exhalation of a whisper.
“Ain’t going to die!” cried Will. “I’ll fi ght!”
“Skeletons don’t fight,” said Douglas.
“No, sir!” Will lunged at the stone, erasing the chalk, tears springing
to his eyes.
The other boys stood, frozen.
“Sure,” Douglas said. “They’ll teach us at school, say, here’s your
heart, the thing you get attacks with!
Show you bugs you can’t see ! Teach you to jump off buildings, stab
people, fall and not move.”
“No, sir,” Sam gasped.
The great meadow of graveyard rippled under the last fingers of fading
sunlight. Moths fl uttered around them, and the sound of a graveyard
creek ran over all their cold moonlit thoughts and gaspings as Douglas
quietly finished:“Sure, none of us wants to just lie here and never play
kick-the-can again. You want all that?”
“Heck no, Doug . . .”
“Then we stop it! We find out how our folks make us grow, teach us to
lie, cheat, steal. War? Great! Murder? Swell! We’ll never be so well off
as we are right now ! Grow up and you turn into burglars and get shot,
or worse, they make you wear a coat and tie and stash you in the First
National Bank behind brass bars! We gotta stand still! Stay the age we
are. Grow up? Hah! All you do then is marry someone who screams at you!
Well, do we fight back? Will you let me tell you how to run?”
“Gosh,” said Charlie. “Yeah!”
“Then,” said Doug, “talk to your body: Bones, not one more inch!
Statues! Don’t forget, Quartermain owns this graveyard. He makes money
if we lie here, you and you and you ! But we’ll show him. And all those
old men who own the town! Halloween’s almost here and before then we got
to sour their grapes! You wanna look like them? You know how they got
that way? Well, they were all young once, but somewhere along the way,
oh gosh, when they were thirty or forty or fifty, they chewed tobacco
and phlegm-hocked up on themselves and that phlegm-hock turned all gummy
and sticky and then the next thing you know there was spittle all over
them and they began to look like, you know, you’ve seen, caterpillars
turned into chrysalis, their darned skin hardened, and the young guys
turned old, got trapped inside their shells, by God. Then they began to
look like all those old guys. So, what you have is old men with young
guys trapped inside them. Some year soon, maybe, their skin will crack
and the old men will let the old young men out. But they won’t be young
anymore, they’ll be a bunch of death’s-head moths or, come to think of
it, I think the old men are going to keep the young men inside them
forever, so they’re trapped in all that glue, always hoping to get free.
It’s pretty bad, isn’t it? Pretty bad.”
“Is that it, Doug?” said Tom.
“Yeah,” said Pete. “You sure you know what you’re talking about?”
“What Pete is trying to say is that we gotta know with precision, we
gotta know what’s accurate,” said Bo.
“I’ll say it again,” said Doug. “You listen close. Tom, you taking this
down?”
“Yup,” said Tom, his pencil poised over his note-pad. “Shoot.”
They stood in the darkening shadows, in the smell of grass and leaves
and old roses and cold stone and raised their heads, sniffling, and
wiped their cheeks on their shirtsleeves.
“Okay, then,” said Doug. “Let’s go over it again. It’s not enough just
seeing these graves. We’ve got to sneak under open windows, listen,
discover what those old geezers are sick with. Tom, go get the pumpkins
out of Grandma’s pantry. We’re gonna have a contest, see which of us can
carve the scariest pumpkin. One to look like old man Quartermain, one
like Bleak, one like Gray. Light them up and put them out. Later tonight
we start our first attack with the carved pumpkins. Okay?”
“Okay!” everyone shouted.
They leapt over WHYTE, WILLIAMS, and NEBB, jumped and vaulted SAMUELS
and KELLER, screamed the iron gate wide, leaving the cold land behind
them, lost sunlight, and the creek running forever below the hill. A
host of gray moths followed them as far as the gate where Tom braked and
stared at his brother accusingly.
“Doug, about those pumpkins. Gosh almighty, you’re nuts!”
“What?” Doug stopped and turned back as the other boys ran on.
“It ain’t enough. I mean, look what you’ve done. You’ve pushed the
fellas too far, got ’em scared. Keep on with this sort of talk you’re
going to lose your army. You’ve got to do something that will put
everything back together again. Find something for us to do or else
everyone will go home and stay there, or go lie down with the dogs and
sleep it off. Think of something, Doug. It’s important.”
Doug put his hands on his hips and stared at Tom. “Why do I got this
feeling you’re the general and I’m just a buck private?”
“What do you mean, Doug?”
“I mean here I am, almost fourteen, and you’re twelve going on a hundred
and ordering me around and telling me what to do. Are things so bad?”
“Bad, Doug? They’re terrible. Look at all those guys running away. You
better catch up and think of something between here and the middle of
town. Reorganize the army. Give us something to do besides carving
jack-o’-lanterns. Think, Doug, think.”
“I’m thinking,” said Doug, eyes shut.
“Well then, get going! Run, Doug, I’ll catch up.”
And Doug ran on.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
On the way into town, on a street near the school stood the nickel
emporium where all the sweet poisons hid in luscious traps.
Doug stopped, stared, and waited for Tom to catch up and then yelled,
“Okay, gang, this way. In!”
Around him all the boys came to a halt because he said the name of the
shop, which was pure magic.
Doug beckoned and they all gathered and followed, orderly, like a good
army, into the shop.
Tom came last, smiling at Doug as if he knew something that nobody else
knew.
Inside, honey lay sheathed in warm African chocolate. Plunged and
captured in the amber treasure lay fresh Brazil nuts, almonds, and
glazed clusters of snowy coconut. June butter and August wheat were
clothed in dark sugars. All were crinkled in folded tin foil, then
wrapped in red and blue papers that told the weight, ingredients, and
manufacturer. In bright bouquets the candies lay, caramels to glue the
teeth, licorice to blacken the heart, chewy wax bottles fi lled with
sickening mint and strawberry sap, Tootsie Rolls to hold like cigars,
red-tipped chalk-mint cigarettes for chill mornings when your breath
smoked on the air.
The boys, in the middle of the shop, saw diamonds to crunch, fabulous
liquors to swig. Persimmon-colored pop bottles swam, clinking softly, in
the Nile waters of the refrigerated box, its water cold enough to cut
your skin. Above, on glass shelves, lay cordwood piles of gingersnaps,
macaroons, chocolate bits, vanilla wafers shaped like moons, and
marshmallow dips, white surprises under black masquerades. All of this
to coat the tongue, plaster the palate.
Doug pulled some nickels from his pocket and nodded at the boys.
One by one they chose from the sweet treasure , noses pressed against
glass, breath misting the crystal vault.
Moments later, down the middle of the street they ran and soon stood on
the edge of the ravine with the pop and candy.
Once they were all assembled, Doug nodded again and they started the
trek down into the ravine. Above them, on the other side, stood the
looming homes of the old men, casting dark shadows into the bright day.
And above those, Doug saw, as he shielded his eyes, was the hulking
carapace of the haunted house.
“I brought you here on purpose,” said Doug.
Tom winked at him as he flipped the lid off his pop.
“You must learn to resist, so you can fight the good fight. Now,” he
cried, holding his bottle out. “Don’t look so surprised. Pour!”
“My gosh!” Charlie Woodman slapped his brow. “That’s good root beer,
Doug. Mine’s good Orange Crush !”
Doug turned his bottle upside down. The root beer froth hissed out to
join the clear stream rushing away to the lake. The others stared, the
spectacle mir rored in each pair of eyes.
“You want to sweat Orange Crush?” Douglas grabbed Charlie’s drink. “You
want root beer spit, to be poisoned forever, to never get well? Once
you’re tall, you can’t un- grow back, can’t stab yourself with a pin and
let the air out.”
Solemnly, the martyrs tilted their bottles.
“Lucky crawfish.” Charlie Woodman slung his bottle at a rock. They all
threw their bottles, like Germans after a toast, the glass crashing in
bright splinters.
They unwrapped the melting chocolate and butter chip and almond
frivolities. Their teeth parted, their mouths watered. But their eyes
looked to their general.
“I solemnly pledge from now on: no candy, no pop, no poison.”
Douglas let his chocolate chunk drop like a corpse into the water, like
a burial at sea.
Douglas wouldn’t even let them lick their fi ngers.
Walking out of the ravine, they met a girl eating a vanilla ice cream
cone. The boys stared, their tongues lolling. She took a cold dollop
with her tongue. The boys blinked. She licked the cone and smiled.
Perspiration broke out on a half dozen faces. One more lick, one more
jut of that rare pink tongue, one more hint of cool vanilla ice cream
and his army would revolt. Sucking in a deep breath, Douglas cried:
“Git!”
The girl spun around and ran.
Douglas waited for the memory of the ice cream to fade, then said,
quietly, “There’s ice water at Grandma’s. March!”
II: SHILOH AND BEYOND
CHAPTER TWELVE
Calvin C. Quartermain was an edifice as tall, long, and as arrogant as
his name.
He did not move, he stalked.
He did not see, he glared.
He spoke not, but fired his tongue, point-blank, at any target come to
hand.
He orated, he pronounced, he praised not, but heaped scorn.
Right now he was busy shoving bacteria under the microscope of his
gold-rimmed spectacles. The bac teria were the boys, who deserved
destruction. One boy, especially. “A bike, sweet Christ, a damn blue
bike! That’s all it was!” Quartermain bellowed, kicking his good leg.
“Bastards! Killed Braling! Now they’re after me !” A stout nurse trussed
him like a cigar store Indian while Dr. Lieber set the leg. “Christ!
Damned fool. What was it Braling said about a metronome? Jesus!” “Leg’s
broke, easy!” “He needs more than a bike! A damned hell-fi re device
won’t kill me, no!” The nurse shoved a pill in his mouth. “Peace, Mr.
C., peace.”
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Night, in Calvin C. Quartermain’s lemon- sour house, and him in bed,
discarded long ago, when his youth breeched the carapace, slid between
his ribs, and left his shell to flake in the wind.
Quartermain twisted his head and the sounds of the summer night breathed
through the air. Listening, he chewed on his hatred.
“God, strike down those bastard fiends with fi re!” Sweating cold, he
thought: Braling lost his brave fight to make them human, but I will
prevail. Christ, what’s happening? He stared at the ceiling where
gunpowder blew in a spontaneous combustion, all their lives exploded in
one day at the end of an unbelievably late summer, a thing of weather
and blind sky and the surprise miracle that he still lived, still
breathed, amidst lunatic events. Christ! Who ran this parade and where
was it going? God, stand alert! The drummer-boys are killing the
captains.
“There must be others,” he whispered to the open window. “Some who
tonight feel as I do about these infi dels!”
He could sense the shadows trembling out there, the other old rusted
iron men hidden in their high towers, sipping thin gruels and snapping
dog- biscuits. He would summon them with cries, his fever like
heat-lightning across the sky.
“Telephone,” gasped Quartermain. “Now, Calvin, line them up!”
There was a rustling in the dark yard. “ What?" he whispered.
The boys clustered in the lightless ocean of grass below. Doug and
Charlie, Will and Tom, Bo, Henry, Sam, Ralph, and Pete all squinted up
at the window of Quartermain’s high bedroom.
In their hands they had three beautifully carved and terrible pumpkins.
They carried them along the sidewalk below while their voices rose among
the starlit trees, louder and louder: “The worms crawl in, the worms
crawl out.”
Quartermain turned each of his spotted papyrus hands into fists and
clenched the telephone.
“Bleak!”
“Quartermain? My God, it’s late!”
“Shut up! Did you hear about Braling?”
“I knew one day he’d get caught without his hourglass.”
“This is no time for levity!”
“Oh, him and his damn clocks; I could hear him ticking across town. When
you hold that tight to the edge of the grave, you should just jump in.
Some boy with a cap-pistol means nothing. What can you do? Ban
cap-pistols?”
“Bleak, I need you!”
“We all need each other.”
“Braling was school board secretary. I’m chairman ! The damn town’s
teeming with killers in embryo."
“My dear Quartermain,” said Bleak dryly, “you re mind me of the
perceptive asylum keeper who claimed that his inmates were mad. You’ve
only just discovered that boys are animals?”
“Something must be done!”
“Life will do it.”
“The damned fools are outside my house singing a funeral dirge!”
“‘The Worms Crawl In’? My favorite tune when I was a boy. Don’t you
remember being ten? Call their folks.”
“Those fools? They’d just say, ‘Leave the nasty old man alone.’”
“Why not pass a law to make everyone seventy-nine years old?” Bleak’s
grin ran along the telephone wires. “I’ve two dozen nephews who sweat
icicles when I threaten to live forever. Wake up, Cal. We are a
minority, like the dark African and the lost Hittite. We live in a
country of the young. All we can do is wait until some of these sadists
hit nineteen, then truck them off to war. Their crime? Being full up
with orange juice and spring rain. Patience. Someday soon you’ll see
them wander by with winter in their hair. Sip your revenge quietly.”
“Damn! Will you help?”
“If you mean can you count on my vote on th e school board? Will I
command Quartermain’s Grand Army of Old Crocks? I’ll leer from the
sidelines, with an occasional vote thrown to you mad dogs. Shorten
summer vacations, trim Christmas holidays, cancel the Spring Kite
Festival—that’s what you plan, yes?”
“I’m a lunatic, then?!”
“No, a student-come-lately. I learned at fifty I had joined the army of
unwanted men. We are not quite Africans, Quartermain, or heathen
Chinese, but our racial stigmata are gray, and our wrists are rusted
where once they ran clear. I hate that fellow whose face I see, lost and
lonely in my dawn mirror! When I see a fine lady, God! I know outrage.
Such spring cartwheel thoughts are not for dead pharaohs. So, with
limits, Cal, you can count me in. Good night.”
The two phones clicked.
Quartermain leaned out his window. Below, in the moonlight, he could see
the pumpkins, shining with a terrible October light.
Why do I imagine, he wondered, that one is carved to look like me,
another one just like Bleak, and the other just like Gray? No, no. It
can’t be. Christ, where do I find Braling’s metronome?
“Out of the way!” he yelled into the shadows.
Grabbing his crutches, he struggled to his feet , plunged downstairs,
tottered onto the porch, and somehow found his way down to the sidewalk
and advanced on the flickering line of Halloween gourds.
“Jesus,” he whispered. “Those are the ugliest damned pumpkins I ever
saw. So!”
He brandished a crutch and whacked one of the orange ghouls, then
another and another until the lights in the pumpkins winked out.
He reared to chop and slash and whack until the gourds were split open,
spilling their seeds, orange fl esh flung in all directions.
“Someone!” he cried.
His housekeeper, an alarmed expression on her face, burst from the house
and raced down the great lawn.
“Is it too late,” cried Quartermain, “to light the oven?”
“The oven, Mr. Cal?”
“Light the god-damned oven. Fetch the pie pans. Have you recipes for
pumpkin pie?”
“Yes, Mr. Cal.”
“Then grab these damn pieces. Tomorrow for lunch: Just Desserts!”
Quartermain turned and crutched himself upstairs.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
The emergency meeting of the Green Town
Board of Education was ready to begin.
There were only two there beside Calvin C. Quartermain: Bleak and Miss
Flynt, the recording secretary.
He pointed at the pies on the table.
“What’s this?” said the other two.
“A victory breakfast, or maybe a lunch.”
“It looks like pie to me, Quartermain.”
“It is, idiot! A victory feast, that’s what it is. Miss Flynt?”
“Yes, Mr. Cal? ”
“Take a statement. Tonight at sunset, on the edge of the ravine, I will
make a few remarks.” “Such as?” “Rebellious rapscallions, hear this: The
war is not done, nor have you lost nor have you won. It seems a draw.
Prepare for a long October. I have taken your measure. Beware.”
Quartermain paused and shut his eyes, pressed his fingers to his
temples, as if trying to remember. “Oh, yes. Colonel Freeleigh, sorely
missed. We need a colonel. How long was Freeleigh a colonel?”
“Since the month Lincoln was shot.”
 “Well, someone must be a colonel. I’ll do that.
Colonel Quartermain. How does that sound?”
 “Pretty fine, Cal, pretty fi ne.”
“All right. Now shut up and eat your pie.”
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The boys sat in a circle on the porch of
Doug and Tom’s house. The pale blue painted ceiling mirrored the blue of
the October sky.
“Gosh,” said Charlie. “I don’t like to say it, Doug— but I’m hungry.”
“Charlie! You’re not thinking right!”
“I’m thinkin’ fine,” said Charlie. “Strawberry shortcake with a big
white summer cloud of whipped cream.”
“Tom,” said Douglas, “in the by-laws in your nickel tablet, what’s it
say about treason?”
“Since when is thinking about shortcake treason? ”
Charlie regarded some wax from his ear with great cu riosity.
“It’s not thinking, it’s saying !”
“I’m starved," said Charlie. “And the other guys, look, touch ’em and
they’d bite. It ain’t workin’, Doug.”
Doug stared around the circle at the faces of his soldiers, as if daring
them to add to Charlie’s lament.
“In my grandpa’s library there’s a book that says Hindus starve for
ninety days. Don’t worry. After the third day you don’t feel nothing!”
“How long’s it been? Tom, check your watch. How long?”
“Mmmm, one hour and ten minutes.”
“Jeez!”
“Whatta you mean ‘jeez’? Don’t look at your watch! Look at calendars.
Seven days is a fast!”
They sat a while longer in silence. Then Charlie said, “Tom, how long’s
it been now?”
“Don’t tell him, Tom!”
Tom consulted his watch, proudly. “One hour and twelve minutes!”
“Holy smoke!” Charlie squeezed his face into a mask. “My stomach’s a
prune ! They’ll have to feed me with a tube. I’m dead. Send for my
folks. Tell ’em I loved ’em.” Charlie shut his eyes and fl ung himself
backward onto the fl oorboards.
“Two hours,” said Tom, later. “Two whole hours we’ve been starving,
Doug. That’s sockdolager! If only we can throw up after supper, we’re
set.”
“Boy,” said Charlie, “I feel like that time at the dentist and he jammed
that needle in me. Numb! And if the other guys had more guts, they’d
tell you they’re bound for Starved Rock, too. Right, fellas? Think about
cheese! How about crackers?”
Everyone moaned.
Charlie ran on. “Chicken à la king!”
They groaned.
“Turkey drumsticks!”
“See.” Tom poked Doug’s elbow. “You got ’em writhing! Now where’s your
revolution?!”
“Just one more day!”
“And then?”
“Limited rations.”
“Gooseberry pie, apple-butter, onion sandwiches?”
“Cut it out, Charlie.”
“Grape jam on white bread!”
“Stop!”
“No, sir!” Charlie snorted. “Tear off my chevrons, General. This was fun
for the fi rst ten minutes. But there’s a bulldog in my belly. Gonna go
home, sit down real polite, wolf me half a banana cake, two liverwurst
sandwiches, and get drummed outta your dumb old army, but at least I’ll
be a live dog and no shriveled-up mummy, whining for leftovers.”
“Charlie,” Doug pleaded, “you’re our strong right arm."
Doug jumped up and made a fist, his face blood-red. All was lost. This
was terrible. Right before his face his plan unraveled and the grand
revolt was over.
At that very instant the town clock boomed twelve o’clock, noon, the
long iron strokes which came as salvation because Doug leapt to the edge
of the porch and stared toward the town square, up at that great
terrible iron monument, and then down at the grassy park, where all the
old men played at their chessboards.
An expression of wild surmise filled Doug’s face.
“Hey,” he murmured. “Hold on. The chessboards!” he cried. “Starvation’s
one thing, and that helps, but now I see what our real problem is. Down
outside the courthouse, all those terrible old me n playing chess.”
The boys blinked.
“What?” said Tom.
“Yeah, what?” echoed the boys.
“We’re on the chessboard!” cried Douglas. “Those chess pieces, those
chessmen, those are us! The old guys move us on the squares, the
streets! All our lives we’ve been there, trapped on the chessboards in
the square, with them shoving us around.”
“Doug,” said Tom. “You got brains!”
The clock stopped booming. There was a great wondrous silence.
“Well,” said Doug, exhaling, “I guess you know what we do now!”
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
In the green park below the marble shadow of the courthouse, under the
great clock tower’s bulk, the chess tables waited.
Now under a gray sky and a faint promise of rain, a dozen chessboards
were busy with old men’s hands. Above the red and black battlefields,
two dozen gray heads were suspended. The pawns and castles and horses
and kings and queens trembled and drifted as monarchies fell in ruin.
With the leaf shadows freckling their moves, the old men chewed their
insunk mouths and looked at each other with squints and coldnesses and
sometimes twinkles. They talked in rustles and scrapings a few feet
beyond the monument to the Civil War dead.
Doug Spaulding snuck up, leaned around the monument, and watched the
moving chess pieces with apprehension. His chums crept up behind him.
Their eyes lolled over the moving chess pieces and one by one they moved
back and drowsed on the grass. Doug spied on the old men panting like
dogs over the boards. They twitched. They twitched again.
Douglas hissed back at his army. “Look!” he whispered. “That knight’s
you, Charlie! That king’s me!” Doug jerked. “Mr. Weeble’s moving me now,
ah! Someone save me!” He reached out with stiff arms and froze in place.
The boys’ eyes snapped open. They tried to seize his arms. “We’ll help
you, Doug!”
“Someone’s moving me. Mr. Weeble!”
“Darn Weeble!”
At which moment there was a strike of lightning and a following of
thunder and a drench of rain.
“My gosh!” said Doug. “Look.”
The rain poured over the courthouse square and the old men jumped up,
momentarily forgetting the chess pieces, which tumbled in the deluge.
“Quick, guys, now. Each of you grab as many as you can!” cried Doug.
They all moved forward in a pack, to fall upon the chess pieces.
There was another strike of lightning, another burst of thunder.
“Now!” cried Doug.
There was a third strike of lightning and the boys scrambled, they
seized.
The chessboards were empty.
The boys stood laughing at the old men hiding under the trees.
Then, like crazed bats, they rushed off to fi nd shelter.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
“Bleak!” Quartermain barked into his tele phone.
“Cal?”
“By God, they got the chess pieces that were sent from Italy the year
Lincoln was shot. Shrewd damn idiots! Come here tonight. We must plan
our counterattack. I’ll call Gray.”
“Gray’s busy dying.”
“Christ, he’s always dying! We’ll have to do it ourselves.”
“Steady now, Cal. They’re just chess pieces.”
“It’s what they signify, Bleak! This is a full rebellion.”
“We’ll buy new chess pieces.”
“Hell, I might as well be speaking to the dead. Just be here. I’ll call
Gray and make him put off dying for one more day.”
Bleak laughed quietly.
“Why don’t we just chuck all those Bolshevik boys into a pot, boil them
down to essence of kid?”
“So long, Bleak!”
He rang off and called Gray. The line was busy. He slammed the receiver
down, picked it up, and tried again. Listening to the signal, he heard
the tapping of tree branches on the window, faintly, far away.
My God, Quartermain thought, I can hear what he’s up to. That’s dying
all right.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
There was this old haunted house on the far edge of the ravine.
How did they know it was haunted?
Because they said so. Everyone knew it.
It had been there for close on to one hundred years and everybody said
that while it wasn’t haunted during the day, at nighttime strange things
happened there.
It seemed a perfectly logical place for the boys to run, Doug leading
them and Tom bringing up the rear, carrying their wild treasure, the
chess pieces.
It was a grand place to hide because no one—except for a pack of wild
boys—would dare come to a haunted house, even if it was full daytime.
The storm still raged and if anyone had looked close at the haunted
house, chanced walking through the creaky old doors, down the musty old
hallways, up even creakier old stairs, they would have found an attic
full of old chairs, smelling of ancient bamboo furniture polish and full
of boys with fresh faces who had climbed up in the downfall sounds of
the storm, accompanied by intermittent cracks of lightning and
thunderclaps of applause, the storm taking delight in its ability to
make them climb faster and laugh louder as they leapt and settled, one
by one, Indian style, in a circle on the fl oor.
Douglas pulled a candle stub, lit it, and stuff ed it in an old glass
candlestick holder. At last, from a burlap gunnysack, he pulled forth
and set down, one by one, all the captured chess pieces, naming them for
Charlie and Will and Tom and Bo and all the rest. He tossed them forth
to settle, like dogs called to war.
“Here’s you, Charlie.” Lightning cracked.
“Yeah!”
“Here’s you, Willie.” Thunder boomed.
“Yeah!”
“And you, Tom.”
“That’s too small and plain,” Tom protested. “Can’t I be king?”
“Shut up or you’re the queen.”
“I’m shut,” said Tom.
Douglas finished the list and the boys clustered round, their faces
shining with sweat, eager for the next lightning bolt to let loose its
electric shower. Distant thunder cleared its throat.
“Listen!” cried Doug. “We’ve almost got it made. The town’s almost ours.
We got all the chess pieces, so the old men can’t shove us around. Can
anyone do better?”
Nobody could and admitted it, happily.
“Just one thing,” said Tom. “How’d you work that lightning, Doug?”
“Shut up and listen,” said Douglas, aggrieved that central intelligence
had almost been wormed away from him.
“The thing is, one way or another, I got the lightning to knock the
bellybuttons off the old sailors and Civil War vets on the lawn. They’re
all home now, dying like fl ies. Flies.”
“Only one thing wrong,” said Charlie. “The chess pieces are ours right
now, sure. But—I’d give anything for a good hot dog.”
“Don’t say that!”
At which moment lightning struck a tree right outside the attic window.
The boys dropped fl at.
“Doug! Heck! Make it stop!”
Eyes shut, Douglas shouted, “I can’t! I take it back. I lied!”
Dimly satisfied, the storm went away, grumbling.
As if announcing the arrival of someone or something important, a final
distant strike of lightning and a rumble of thunder caused the boys to
look toward the stairwell, leading down to the second floor of the
house.
Far below, someone cleared his throat.
Douglas pricked his ears, moved to the stairwell, and intuitively called
down.
“Grandpa?”
“Seems to be,” a voice said from the bottom of the stairs. “You boys are
not very good at covering your tracks. You left footprints in the grass
all the way across town. I followed along, asking questions along the
way, getting directions, and here I am.”
Doug swallowed hard and said again: “Grandpa?”
“There seems to be a small commotion back in town,” said Grandpa, far
below, out of sight.
“Commotion?”
“Something like that,” said Grandpa’s voice.
“You coming up?”
“No,” said Grandpa. “But I have a feeling you’re coming down. I want you
to come see me for a visit and we’re gonna have a little talk. And then
you’ve got to run an errand because something has been purloined.”
“Purloined?”
“Mr. Poe used that word. If need be, you can go back and check the story
and refresh your memory.”
“Purloined,” said Douglas. “Oh, yeah.”
“Whatever was purloined—and right now I’m not quite sure what it was,”
said Grandpa, far away, “—but whatever it was, I think, son, that it
should be returned to where it belongs. There are rumors that the town
sheriff has been called, so I think you should hop to it.”
Douglas backed off and stared at his companions, who had heard the voice
from below and were now frozen, not knowing what to do.
“You got nothing more to say?” called Grandpa from down below. “Well,
maybe not here. I’m gonna get going; you know where to find me. I’ll
expect you there soon.”
“Yeah, yes, sir.”
Doug and the boys were silent as they listened to Grandpa’s footsteps
echo throughout the haunted house, along the hall, down the stairs, out
onto the porch. And then, nothing.
Douglas turned and Tom held up the burlap sack.
“You need this, Doug?” he whispered.
“Gimme.”
Doug grabbed the gunnysack and scraped all the chess pieces up and
dropped them, one by one, into the sack. There went Pete and Tom and Bo
and all the rest.
Doug shook the gunnysack; it made a dry rattling sound like old men’s
bones.
And with a last backward glance at his army, Doug started down.
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Grandpa’s library was a fine dark place bricked with books, so anything
could happen there and always did. All you had to do was pull a book
from the shelf and open it and suddenly the darkness was not so dark
anymore.
Here it was that Grandpa sat in place with now this book and now that in
his lap and his gold specs on his nose, welcoming visitors who came to
stay for a moment and lingered for an hour.
Even Grandmother paused here, after some burdensome time, as an aging
animal seeks the watering place to be refreshed. And Grandfather was
always here to offer cups of good clear Walden Pond, or shout down the
deep well of Shakespeare and listen, with satisfaction, for echoes.
Here the lion and the hartebeest lay together, here the jackass became
unicorn, here on Saturday noon an elderly man could be found underneath
a not too imaginary bough, eating bread in the guise of sandwiches and
pulling briefly at a jug of cellar wine.
Douglas stood on the edge of it all, waiting.
“Step forward, Douglas,” said Grandfather.
Douglas stepped forward, holding the gunnysack in one hand behind his
back.
“Got anything to say, Douglas?”
“No, sir.”
“Nothing at all about anything?”
“No, sir.”
“What you been up to today, son?”
“Nothing.”
“A busy nothing or a nothing nothing?”
“A nothing nothing, I guess.”
“Douglas.” Grandpa paused to polish his gold-rimmed specs. “They say
that confession is good for the soul.”
“They do say that.”
“And they must mean it or they wouldn’t say it.”
“I guess so.”
“Know it, Douglas, know it. Got anything to confess?”
“About what?” said Douglas, keeping the gunnysack behind him.
“That’s what I’m trying to fi nd out. You going to help?”
“Maybe you could give me a hint, sir.”
“All right. Seems there was flood tide down at the City Hall courthouse
today. I hear a tidal wave of boys inundated the grass. You know any of
them?”
“No, sir.”
“Any of them know you?”
“If I don’t know them, how could they know me, sir?”
“Is that all you got to say?”
“Right now? Yes, sir.”
Grandpa shook his head. “Doug, I told you, I know about the purloineds.
And I’m sorry you think you can’t tell me about them. But I remember
being your age, and getting caught red-handed at doing something I knew
I shouldn’t do, but I did anyway. Yes, I remember.” Grandpa’s eyes
twinkled behind his specs. “Well, I think I’m holding you up, boy. I
think you got somewhere to go.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Well, try to hurry it up. The rain’s still coming down, lightning all
over town, and the town square is empty. If you run and let the
lightning strike, maybe you’ll do a fast job of what you should be
doing. Does that sound reasonable, Doug?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Well then, get to it.”
Douglas started to back away.
“Don’t back off, son,” said Grandpa. “I’m not royalty. Just turn around
and skedaddle.”
“Skedaddle. Was that originally French, Gram pa?”
“Hell.” The old man reached for a book. “When you get back, let’s look
it up!”
CHAPTER TWENTY
Just before midnight, Doug woke to that terrible boredom that only sleep
ensures.
It was then, listening to Tom’s chuffi ng breath, deep in an ice-floe
summer hibernation, that Doug lifted his arms and wiggled his fi ngers,
like a tuning fork; a gentle vibration ensued. He felt his soul move
through an immense timberland.
His feet, shoeless, drifted to the floor and he leaned south to pick up
the gentle radio waves of his uncle, down the block. Did he hear the
elephant sound of Tantor summoning an ape-boy? Or, half through the
night, had Grandpa, next door, fallen in a grave of slumber, dead to the
world, gold specs on his nose, with Edgar Allan Poe shelved to his right
and the Civil War dead, truly dead, to his left, waiting in his sleep,
it seemed, for Doug to arrive?
So, striking his hands together and wiggling his fingers, Doug made one
final vibration of his literary tuning fork and moved with quiet
intuition toward his grandparents’ house.
Grandpa, in his grave of sleep, whispered a call.
Doug was out the midnight door so fast he almost forgot to catch the
screen before it slammed.
Ignoring the elephant trumpet behind, he barefooted into his
grandparents’ house.
There in the library slept Grandpa, awaiting the breakfast resurrection,
open for suggestions.
Now, at midnight, it was the unlit time of the special school, so Doug
leaned forward and whispered in Grandpa’s ear, “1899.”
And Gramps, lost in another time, murmured of that year and how the
temperature was and what the people were like moving in that town.
Then Douglas said, “1869.”
And Grandpa was lost four years after Lincoln was shot.
Standing there, watching, Douglas realized that if he visited here night
after night and spoke to Grandpa, Grandpa, asleep, would be his teacher
and that if he spent six months or a year or two years coming to this
special long-after-midnight school, he would have an education that
nobody else in the world would have. Grandpa would give his knowledge as
a teacher, without knowing it, and Doug would drink it in and not tell
Tom or his parents or anybody.
“That’s it,” whispered Doug. “Thank you, Grandpa, for all you say,
asleep or awake. And thanks again for today and your advice on the
purloineds. I don’t want to say any more. I don’t want to wake you up.”
So Douglas, his ears full up and his mind full brimmed, left his grandpa
sleeping there and crept toward the stairs and the tower room because he
wanted to have one more encounter with the night town and the moon.
Just then the great clock across town, an immense moon, a full moon of
stunned sound and round illumination, cleared its ratchety throat and
let free a midnight sound.
One.
Douglas climbed the stairs.
Two. Three . Four. Five.
Reaching the tower window, Douglas looked out upon an ocean of rooftops
and the great monster clock tower as time summed itself up.
Six. Seven.
His heart fl oundered.
Eight. Nine.
His flesh turned to snow.
Ten. Eleven.
A shower of dark leaves fell from a thousand trees.
Twelve ! Oh my God, yes, he thought . The clock! Why hadn’t he thought
of that? The clock!
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
The last vibration of the great clock bell faded. A wind swayed the
trees outside and the pekoe cur tain hung out on the air, a pale ghost.
Douglas felt his breath siphon. You, he thought. How come I never
noticed? The great and terrible courthouse clock. Just last year, hadn’t
Grandpa laid out the machin ery’s blueprint, lecturing? The huge round
lunar clock was a gristmill, he’d said. Shake down all the grains of
Time—the big grains of centuries, and the small grains of years, and the
tiny grains of hours and minutes—and the clock pulverized them, slid
Time silently out in all directions in a fine pollen, carried by cold
winds to blanket the town like dust, everywhere. Spores from that clock
lodged in your flesh to wrinkle it, to grow bones to monstrous size, to
burst feet from shoes like turnips. Oh, how that great machine at the
town’s center dispensed Time in blowing weathers.
The clock!
That was the thing that bleached and ruined life, jerked people out of
bed, hounded them to schools and graves! Not Quartermain and his band of
old men, or Braling and his metronome; it was the clock that ran this
town like a church.
Even on the clearest of nights it was misted, glowing, luminous, and
old. It rose above town like a great dark burial mound, drawn to the
skies by the summoning of the moon, calling out in a grieved voice of
days long gone, and days that would come no more, whispering of other
autumns when the town was young and all was beginning and there was no
end.
“So it’s you,” whispered Douglas.
Midnight, said the clock. Time, it said, Darkness. Flights of night
birds flew up to carry the final peal away, out over the lake and into
the night country, gone.
Doug yanked down the shade so Time could not blow through the screen.
The clock light shone on the sidings of the house like a mist breathing
on the windows.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
“Boy, I just heard the craziest things.”
Charlie strolled up, chewing on a clover-blossom. “I got me a secret
service report from some girls.”
“Girls!”
Charlie smiled at how his ten-inch fi recracker had blown the laziness
off his pals’ faces. “My sister said way back last July they got old
lady Bentley to admit she never was young. I thought you’d like that
news.”
“Charlie, Charlie !”
“Burden of proof,” said Charlie. “The girls told me that old lady
Bentley showed some pictures, junk and stuff, which didn’t prove
nothin’. Fact is, when you think on it, fellas, none of these old ginks
look like they were ever young.”
“Why didn’t you think of that, Doug?” said Tom.
“Why don’t you shut up?” said Douglas.
“I guess this makes me a lieutenant,” said Charlie.
“You just moved up to sergeant yesterday !”
Charlie stared hard at Douglas for a long moment.
“Okay, okay, you’re a lieutenant,” said Douglas.
“Thanks,” said Charlie. “What’ll we do about my sister? She wants to be
part of our army—a special spy.”
“To heck with her!”
“You got to admit that’s great secret stuff she turned in.”
“Boy, Charlie, you sure think of things,” said Tom. “Doug, why don’t you
think of things?”
“Darn it!” cried Douglas. “Whose idea was the graveyard tour, the candy,
the food, the chess pieces, all that?”
“Hold on,” said Tom. “The graveyard tour, I said that. The candy, yeah,
was yours, but I gotta tell ya, the food experiment was a failure. Heck,
you haven’t said anything new in a coupla hours. And all the chessboards
are full of chess pieces again and those old men are busy pushing the
pieces—us—around. Any moment now we’ll feel ourselves grabbed and moved
and we won’t be able to live our own lives anymore.”
Douglas could feel Charlie and Tom creeping up on him, taking the war
out of his hands like a ripe plum. Private, corporal, sergeant,
lieutenant. Today, lieutenant; tomorrow captain. And the day after?
“It’s not just ideas that count.” Douglas wiped his brow. “It’s how you
stick ’em together. Take this fact of Charlie’s—it’s secondhand. Heck,
girls thought of it fi rst !”
Everybody’s eyebrows went up.
Charlie’s face fell.
“And anyway,” Douglas went on, “I’m puttin’ ideas together for a real
bang-up revelation.”
They all looked at him, waiting.
“Okay, Doug, go on,” said Charlie.
Douglas shut his eyes. “And the revelation is: Since old people don’t
look like they were ever kids, they never were ! So they’re not humans
at all !”
“What are they, Doug?”
“Another race ! ”
Everybody sat, stunned by the vast sunburst caused by this explosion,
this incredible revelation. It rained upon them in fire and fl ames.
“Yes, another race,” said Douglas. “Aliens. Evil. And we, we’re the
slaves they keep for nefarious odd jobs and punishments!”
Everybody melted with the after-effects of this announcement.
Charlie stood up solemnly and announced: “Doug, old pal, see this beanie
on my head? I’m taking my beanie off to you !” Charlie raised his beanie
to applause and laughter.
They all smiled at Doug, their general, their leader, who took out his
pocketknife and casually started a philosophical game of one-fi nger
mumblety-peg.
“Yeah, but . . .” said Tom, and went on. “The last thing you said didn’t
work out. It’s okay to say the old people are from another planet, but
what about Grandpa and Grandma? We’ve known them all our lives. Are you
saying that they’re aliens, too?”
Doug’s face turned red. He hadn’t quite worked this part out, and here
was his brother—his second in-command, his junior officer—questioning
his theory.
“And,” Tom went on, “what do we have new in the way of action, Doug? We
can’t just sit here. What do we do next?”
Doug swallowed hard. Before he had a chance to speak, Tom, now that
everybody was looking at him, said slowly, “The only thing that comes to
mind right now is maybe we stop the courthouse clock. You can hear that
darned thing ticking all over town. Bong! Midnight! Whang! Get outta
bed! Boom! Jump into bed! Up down, up down, over and over.”
Ohmigosh, thought Douglas. I saw it last night. The clock! Why in heck
didn’t I say so first?
Tom picked his nose calmly. “Why don’t we just lambaste that darn old
clock—kill it dead! Then we can do whatever we want to do whenever we
want to do it. Okay?”
Everyone stared at Tom. Then they began to cheer and yell, even Douglas,
trying to forget it was his younger brother, not himself, who was saving
the day.
“Tom!” they all shouted. “Good old Tom!”
“Ain’t nothin’,” said Tom. He looked to his brother. “When do we kill
the blasted thing?”
Douglas bleated, his tongue frozen. The soldiers stared, waiting.
“Tonight?” said Tom.
“I was just going to say that!” Douglas cried.
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE
The courthouse clock somehow knew they were coming to kill it.
It loomed high above the town square with its great marble façade and
sun-blazed face, a frozen avalanche, waiting to bury the assassins.
Simultaneously, it allowed the leaders of its religion and philosophy,
the ancient gray-haired messengers of Time and dissolution, to pass
through the thundering bronze doors below.
Douglas, watching the soldiery of death and mummification slip calmly
through the dark portals, felt a stir of panic. There, in the
shellac-smelling, paper-rustling rooms of Town Hall, the Board of
Education slyly unmade destinies, pared calendars, devoured Saturdays in
torrents of homework, instigated reprimands, tortures, and
criminalities. Their dead hands pulled streets straighter, loosed rivers
of asphalt over soft dirt to make roads harder, more confi ning, so that
open country and freedom were pushed further and further away, so that
one day, years from now, green hills would be a distant echo, so far off
that it would take a lifetime of travel to reach the edge of the city
and peer out at one lone small forest of dying trees.
Here in this one building, lives were slotted, alphabetized in files and
fingerprints; the children’s destinies put under seal! Men with blizzard
faces and lightning-colored hair, carrying Time in their briefcases,
hurried by to serve the clock, to run it with great sprockets and gears.
At twilight they stepped out, all smiles, having found new ways to
constrict, imprison, or entangle lives in fees and licenses. You could
not even prove your death without these men, this building, this clock,
and a certificate duly inked, stamped, and signed.
“Here we are,” whispered Douglas, all his pals clustered around him.
“It’s almost quittin’ time. We gotta be careful. If we wait too long
it’ll be so shut up there’ll be no way to get in. Right at twilight,
when the last doors are being locked, that’s when we make our move,
right? As they come out, we go in.”
“Right,” said everyone.
“So,” said Douglas. “Hold your breath.”
“It’s held,” said Tom. “But Doug, I got something to say.”
“What?” said Doug.
“You know that no matter when we go in, if we go in all together,
someone’s going to see us and they’re going to remember our faces and
we’re going to get in trouble. It was bad enough with the chess pieces
out front of the courthouse. We were seen, and we had to give everything
back. So, why don’t we wait until it’s all locked up?”
“We can’t do that. I just said why.”
“Tell you what,” said Tom. “Why don’t I go in now and hide in the men’s
until everyone’s gone home? Then I’ll sneak upstairs and let you in one
of the windows near the clock tower. Up there, on the third fl oor.” He
pointed to a spot high up the ancient brick walls.
“Hey!” said all the gang.
“That won’t work,” said Doug.
“Why not?” said Tom.
Before Doug had time to think of a reason, Charlie piped up.
“Sure it’ll work,” said Charlie. “Tom’s right. Tom, you want to go in
and hide now?”
“Sure,” said Tom.
Everyone was looking at Doug, still their general, and he had to give
his approval.
“What I don’t like,” said Doug, “is smart alecks who think they know
everything. Okay, go in and hide. When it gets dark, let us in.”
“Okay,” said Tom.
And he was gone.
People were coming out through the big bronze doors and Doug and the
others pulled back around the corner of the building and waited for the
sun to go down.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR
The courthouse was finally completely quiet and the night was dark and
the boys climbed up the fire escape on the side of the building, very
quietly, until they got up to the third floor, near the clock tower.
They stopped at the window where Tom was supposed to appear, but no one
was there.
“Gosh,” said Doug. “I hope he didn’t get locked in the men’s room.”
“They never lock the men’s room,” said Charlie. “He’ll be here.”
And sure enough, all of a sudden, there was Tom behind the glass pane,
waving to them and opening and shutting his mouth, but they couldn’t
hear what he was saying.
At long last he raised the window and the smell of the courthouse rushed
out into the night around them.
“Get in,” commanded Tom.
“We are,” said Doug, angrily.
One by one the boys crawled inside the courthouse and snuck along the
hallways till they reached the clock machinery door.
“I bet you,” said Tom, “this darned door’s locked, too.”
“No bets,” said Doug, and rattled the doorknob. “Good grief! Tom, I hate
to say it, but you’re right. Has anybody got a fi recracker?”
Suddenly six hands reached into six dungaree pockets and just as
suddenly reappeared with three four-inchers and a few fi ve-inch
crackers.
“It’s no good,” said Tom, “unless someone has matches.”
More hands reached out with matches in each.
Doug stared at the door.
“How can we fix the crackers so they’ll really do some good when they go
off?”
“Glue,” said Tom.
Doug shook his head, scowling.
“Yeah, glue, right,” he said. “Does anyone just happen to have any glue
on them?”
A single hand reached out on the air. It was Pete’s.
“Here’s some Bulldog glue,” he said. “Bought it for my airplane models
and because I like the great picture of the bulldog on the label.”
“Let’s give it a try.”
Doug applied glue along the length of one of the five-inchers and
pressed it against the outside of the machinery room door.
“Stand back,” he said, and struck a match.
With his mob back in the shadows and his hands over his ears, Doug
waited for the cracker to go off . The orange flame sizzled and zipped
along the fuse.
There was a beautiful explosion.
For a long moment they all stared at the door in disappointment and
then, very slowly, it drifted open.
“I was right,” said Tom.
“Why don’t you just shut up,” said Doug. “C’mon.”
He pulled the door and it opened wide.
There was a sound below.
“Who’s there?” a voice cried from deep down in the courthouse.
“Ohmigosh,” whispered Tom. “I bet that’s the janitor.”
“Who’s up there?” the voice cried again.
“Quick!” said Doug, leading his army through the door.
And now, at last, they were inside the clock.
Here, suddenly, was the immense, frightening machinery of the Enemy, the
Teller of Lives and Time. Here was the core of the town and its
existence. Doug could feel all of the lives of the people he knew moving
in the clock, suspended in bright oils and meshed in sharp cogs and
ground down in clamped springs that clicked onward with no stopping. The
clock moved silently. And now he knew that it had never ticked. No one
in the town had ever actually heard it counting to itself; they had only
listened so hard that they had heard their own hearts and the time of
their lives moving in their wrists and their hearts and their heads. For
here was only cold metal silence, quiet mo tion, gleams and glitters,
murmurs and faint whispers of steel and brass.
Douglas trembled.
They were together at last, Doug and the clock that had risen like a
lunar face throughout his life at every midnight. At any moment the
great machine might uncoil its brass springs, snatch him up, and dump
him in a grinder of cogs to mesh its endless future with his blood, in a
forest of teeth and tines, waiting, like a music box, to play and tune
his body, ribboning his fl esh.
And then, as if it had waited just for this moment, the clock cleared
its throat with a sound like July thunder. The vast spring hunched in
upon itself as a cannon prepares for its next concussion. Before Douglas
could turn, the clock erupted.
One! Two! Three!
It fired its bells! And he was a moth, a mouse in a bucket being kicked,
and kicked again. An earthquake shook the tower, jolting him off his
feet.
Four! Five! Six!
He staggered, clapping his hands over his ears to keep them from
bursting.
Again, again— Seven! Eight!— the tempest tore the air.
Shaken he fell against the wall, eyes shut, his heart stopped with each
storm of sound.
“Quick!” Douglas shouted. “The crackers!”
“Kill the darn thing!” shouted Tom.
“I’m supposed to say that,” said Doug. “Kill it!”
There was a striking of matches and a lighting of fuses and the crackers
were thrown into the maw of the vast machine.
Then there was a wild stomping and commotion as the boys fl ed.
They bolted through the third-floor window and almost fell down the fire
escape and as they reached the bottom great explosions burst from the
courthouse tower; a great metal racketing clangor. The clock struck
again and again, over and over as it fought for its life. Pigeons blew
like torn papers tossed from the roof. Bong! The clock voice chopped
concussions to split the heavens. Ricochets, grindings, a last desperate
twitch of hands. Then . ..
Silence.
At the bottom of the fire escape all the boys gazed up at the dead
machine. There was no ticking, imagined or otherwise, no singing of
birds, no purr of motors, only the soft exhalations of sleeping houses.
At any moment the boys, looking up, expected the slain tower face,
hands, numerals, guts, to groan, slide, and tumble in a grinding
avalanche of brass intestines and iron meteor showers, down, down upon
the lawn, heaping, rumbling, burying them in minutes, hours, years, and
eternities.
But there was only silence and the clock, a mindless ghost, hanging in
the sky with limp, dead hands, saying naught, doing nothing. Silence and
yet another long silence, while all about lights blinked on in houses,
bright winks stretching out into the country, and people began to come
out on porches and wonder at the darkening sky.
Douglas stared up, all drenched with sweat, and was about to speak when:
“I did it!” cried Tom.
“Tom!” cried Doug. “ We! All of us did it. But, good grief, what did we
do?”
“Before it falls on us,” said Tom, “we’d better run.”
“Who says?” said Douglas.
“Sorry,” said Tom.
“Run!” cried Doug.
And the victorious army ran away into the night.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE
It was the middle of the night and Tom still couldn’t sleep.
Doug knew this because several times he heard Tom’s bedclothes fall to
the floor, as if he were tossing and turning, and each time he heard the
sound of the sheets and coverlet being reassembled.
At about two in the morning Doug went down to the icebox and brought a
dish of ice cream up to Tom, which, he figured, might cause Tom to speak
more freely.
Tom sat up in bed and hardly touched the ice cream. He sat there staring
at it as it melted and then said, “Doug, an awful thing has happened.”
“Yeah, Tom,” said Doug.
“We thought if we stopped the big courthouse clock we might stop the old
people from holding on to— stealing—our time. But nothing’s been
stopped, has it?”
“No, sir,” said Doug.
“I mean,” said Tom, “Time’s still moving. Nothing’s changed. Running
home, I looked at all the lights around us and none of them had gone
out. I saw some policemen in the distance, down the street, and they
hadn’t been stopped. I kept waiting for all the lights to go out or
something to happen to show that we’d really done something. But instead
it looks as if someone might have been hurt. I mean, when you think
about Will and Bo and the others, kinda limping home from the
courthouse. I’ve got a feeling nobody’s gonna sleep tonight and maybe
when they do get to sleep, they’ll sleep late, my gosh, they’re gonna
lie around, doing nothin’, staying in bed, keeping quiet, and here I am
for the first time in years, wide awake. I can’t even shut my eyes. What
are we going to do about it, Doug?
I mean, you kept saying we had to kill the clock, but How do we make it
live again, if we have to?”
“The clock wasn’t alive,” said Doug softly.
“But you said,” said Tom. “Well, I said. I guess I started it. We all
kept saying that we had to do it in, so we did, but what now? It looks
like we’ll all be in trouble now,” Tom fi nished.
“Only me,” said Doug. “Grandpa will give me a talking-to.”
“But we went along, Doug. It was swell. We liked it. We had fun. But
now, if the clock was never alive, how do we bring it back from the
dead? We can’t have it both ways, but something’s got to be done. What’s
next?”
“Maybe I’ve got to go down to the courthouse and sign some sort of
paper,” said Doug. “I could tell ’em I’ll give them my allowance for
eight or ten years, so they can fix that clock.”
“Ohmigosh, Doug!”
“That’s about the size of it,” said Doug, “when you want to revive a big
thing like that. Eight or ten years. But what the heck, I guess I
deserve it. So maybe tomorrow I’ll go down and turn myself in.”
“I’ll go with you, Doug.”
“No, sir,” said Doug.
“Yes, I will. You’re not going anywhere without old Tom.”
“Tom,” said Doug. “I got only one thing to say to you.”
“What?”
“I’m glad I’ve got you for a younger brother.”
Doug turned, his face flushed, and started to walk out of the room.
“I think I can make you gladder,” said Tom.
Doug halted.
“When you think about the money,” said Tom. “What if the whole gang of
us, the whole mob, went up in the clock tower and cleaned it up, if we
did the whole machine over somehow? We couldn’t repair the whole darned
thing, no, but we could spend a couple hours and make it look right and
maybe run right, maybe we could save all the expenses and save you from
being a slave for the rest of your life.”
“I don’t know,” said Doug.
“We could give it a try,” said Tom. “Ask Grandpa. He’ll ask the
courthouse people if they’ll let us up there again, this time with lots
of polish and oil and sweat, and maybe we could bring the darn dead
machine back to life. It’s gotta work. It’s gonna work, Doug. Let’s do
it.”
Doug turned and walked back to Tom’s bed and sat on the edge. “Dibs on
some of that ice cream,” he said.
“Sure,” said Tom. “You get the fi rst bite.”
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX
The next day, at noon, Douglas walked Home from school to have lunch.
When he got there, his mother sent him straight next door to his
grandparents’ house. Grandpa was waiting, sitting in his favorite chair
in a pool of light from his favorite lamp, in the library, where all was
stillness and all the books on the shelves were standing alert and ready
to be read.
Hearing the front door open, Grandpa, without looking up from his book,
said, “Douglas?”
“Yeah.”
“Come in, boy, and sit down.”
It wasn’t often that Grandpa offered you a chance to sit down, which
meant there was very serious business ahead.
Douglas entered quietly and sat on the sofa across from Grandpa and
waited.
Finally Grandpa put aside his book, which was also a sign of the serious
nature of things, and took off his gold-rimmed specs, which was even
more serious, and looked at Douglas with what could only be called a
piercing stare.
“Now, Doug,” he said, “I’ve been reading one of my favorite authors, Mr.
Conan Doyle, and one of my favorite characters in all the books by Conan
Doyle is Mr. Sherlock Holmes. He has honed my spirit and sharpened my
aspects. So on a day like today, I woke up feeling very much like that
detective on Baker Street in London a long time ago.”
“Yes, sir,” said Douglas, quietly.
“I’ve been putting together bits and pieces of information and it seems
to me that right now the town is afflicted by lots of boys who are
suddenly staying home from school, sick, they say, or something or
other. Number one is this: I heard tell from Grandma this morning a full
report from your house next door.
It seems that your brother Tom is doing poorly.”
“I wouldn’t say that exactly,” said Doug.
“Well, if you won’t, I will,” said Grandpa. “He feels poorly enough to
stay home from school. It’s not often Tom feels poorly. He’s usually so
full of pep and energy, I rarely see him when he isn’t running. You have
any idea about his affl iction, Doug?”
“No, sir,” said Doug.
“I would hate to contradict you, boy, but I think you do know. But wait
for me to add up all the other clues. I got a list here of the boys in
your group, the ones I regularly see running under the apple trees, or
climbing in them, or kicking the can down the street. They’re usually
the ones with firecrackers in one hand and a lit match in the other.”
At this Douglas shut his eyes and swallowed hard.
“I made it my business,” said Grandpa, “to call the homes of all those
boys and, strange to say, they’re all in bed. That seems most peculiar,
Doug. Can you give me any reason why? Those boys are usually like
squirrels on the sidewalk, you can’t see ’em they move so fast. But
they’re all feeling sick, sleeping late. How about you, Doug?”
“I’m fi ne.”
“Really?”
“Yes, sir.”
“You don’t look so fine to me. In fact, you look a little bit under the
weather. Taking that together with the boys missing school and Tom
feeling poorly and here you are, looking kind of pale around the gills,
I figure there must have been some great commotion somewhere last
night.”
Grandpa stopped and picked up a piece of paper he’d been holding on his
lap.
“I got a phone call a little earlier from the courthouse clerk. It seems
they found a whole lot of firecracker paper somewhere in the City Hall
this morning. Now that is a most peculiar place to fi nd burnt
firecracker paper. The clerk told me they’re going to have to do quite a
lot of repairs in City Hall. They don’t say quite what it is they have
to fi x, but the bill is sizeable and I figure if we apportion it out to
various homesteads in the town, it will come to about . . .” Here
Grandpa put his glasses back on his fine big nose before continuing. “.
. . $70.90 per homestead. Now, most of the people I know around here
don’t have that kind of money. In order to get it, the people in those
homes will have to work quite a few days or maybe weeks or, who knows,
months. Would you like to see the list of repairs that have to be done
in City Hall, Doug? I’ve got it right here.”
“I don’t think so,” said Doug.
“I think you’d better look and study, boy. Here goes.” He handed the
piece of paper to Doug.
Doug stared at the list. His eyes were so fogged that he couldn’t read
it. The numbers were immense and they seemed to extend far into the
future, not just weeks or months, but ohmigosh, years.
“Doug, I want you to do me a favor,” said Grandpa. “I want you to take
this list and play the part of doctor. I want you to make a series of
house calls when school lets out for the day. First of all, go over to
your house and see how Tom is doing. Tell him that Grandpa wants him to
buy a couple of Eskimo Pies and come over and eat them on the front
porch with me this afternoon. Say that to Tom, Doug, and see if his face
doesn’t brighten up.”
“Yes, sir,” said Doug.
“Then, later, I want you to go to all the other boys’ houses and see how
your friends are doing. Afterward, come back and give me a report,
because all those boys who are lying low need something to make them sit
up in bed. I’ll be waiting for you. Does that seem fair to you?”
“Yes, sir,” said Doug, and stood up. “Grandpa, can I say something?”
“What’s that, Doug?”
“You’re pretty great, Grandpa.”
Grandpa mused over that for a few moments before saying, “Not great,
Doug, just perceptive. Have you ever looked that word up in Webster’s
Dictionary?”
“No, sir.”
“Well, before you leave, open Mr. Webster and see what he has to say.”
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN
It was getting late and they were still up in the clock tower, nine boys
working and cleaning out the firecracker dust and bits of burnt paper.
It made a neat little pile outside the door.
It was a hot evening and all the boys were perspiring and talking under
their breath and wishing they were somewhere else, almost wishing they
were in school, which would be better than this.
When Doug looked out the clock tower window, he could see Grandpa
standing down below, looking up, very quietly.
When Grandpa saw Doug looking down, he nodded at him and gave him the
merest wave with the stub of his cigar.
Finally the last twilight was gone and full darkness descended and the
janitor came in. There was lubricant to be put on the big cog and wheels
of the clock. The boys watched with a mixture of fascination and fear.
Here was their nemesis, which they thought they’d defeated, being
brought back to life. And, they’d helped. In the weak light from a naked
ceiling bulb they watched as the janitor wound up the great spring and
stood back. There was a rasping shudder from deep within the great
clock’s innards, and as if afflicted, the boys moved away, shivering.
The big clock began to tick and the boys knew it wouldn’t be long till
the hour would strike, so they backed off and fled out the door, down
the stairs, with Doug following and Tom leading the way.
The mob met Grandpa in the middle of the courthouse lawn and he gave
each of them a pat on the head or the shoulder. Then the other boys ran
to their homes, leaving Tom and Doug and Grandpa to walk a block to the
corner where the United Cigar Store still stood open because it was
Saturday night.
The last of the Saturday night strollers were starting to drift home and
Grandpa picked out the fi nest cigar he could find, cut it, and lit it
from the eternal flame that stood on the cigar store counter. He puff ed
contentedly and looked with quiet satisfaction upon his two grandsons.
“Well done, boys,” he said. “Well done.”
Then the sound that they didn’t want to hear came.
The great clock was clearing its throat in the tower and struck its fi
rst note.
Bong!
One by one the town lights began to go out.
Bong!
Grandpa turned and nodded, and gestured with his cigar for the boys to
follow him home.
They crossed the street and walked up the block as the great clock
struck another note, and another, which shivered the air and trembled
their blood.
The boys grew pale.
Grandpa looked down and pretended not to notice.
All the town’s lights were now out and they had to find their way in the
dark, with only the merest sliver of moon in the sky to lead the way.
They walked away from the clock and its terrible sound, which echoed in
their blood and compelled all the people in the town toward their
destinies.
They went down past the ravine where, maybe, a new Lonely One was hiding
and might come up at any moment and grab hold.
Doug looked out and saw the black silhouette of the haunted house,
perched on the edge of the ravine, and wondered.
Then, at last, in the total dark, as the last peal of the great clock
faded away, they ambled up the sidewalk and Grandpa said, “Sleep well,
boys. God bless.”
The boys ran home to their beds. They could feel, though they did not
hear, the great clock ticking and the future rushing upon them in the
black night.
In the dark Doug heard Tom say from his room across the hall, “Doug?”
“What?”
“That wasn’t so hard after all.”
“No,” said Doug. “Not so hard.”
“We did it. At least we put things back the way they should be.”
“I don’t know about that,” said Doug. “But I know,” said Tom, “because
that darned clock is going to make the sun rise. I can hardly wait.”
Then Tom was asleep and Doug soon followed.
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT
Bong!
Calvin C. Quartermain stirred in his sleep and slowly rose to an upright
position.
Bong!
The great clock, striking midnight.
He felt himself, half-crippled, making it to the window and opening it
wide to the sound of the great clock.
Bong!
“It can’t be,” he murmured to himself. “Not dead.
Not dead. They fixed the damned thing. Call the others first thing in
the morning. Maybe it’s over. Maybe it’s done. Anyway, the town’s
running again the way it’s supposed to, and tomorrow I have to figure
out what to do next.”
He reached up and found an odd thing on his mouth. A smile. He put his
hand up to catch it, and, if possible, examine it.
Could be the weather, he thought. Could be the wind, it’s just right. Or
maybe I had some sort of twisted dream—what was I dreaming?—and now that
the clock is alive again . . . I’ve got to figure it out. The war is
almost over. But how do I finish it? And how do I win ?
Quartermain leaned out the window and gazed at the moon, a silver sliver
in the midnight sky. The moon, the clock, his creaking bones.
Quartermain recalled numberless nights spent looking out the window at
the sleeping town, although in years past his back was not stooped, his
joints not stiff ; in years past, looking out this very window, he was
young, fit as a fiddle, full of piss and vinegar, just like those boys .
..
Wait a minute! Whose birthday’s next? he won dered, trying to call up
school record sheets in his mind. One of the monsters? What a chance
that would be. I’ll kill them with kindness, change my spots, dress in a
dog suit, hide the mean cat inside!
They won’t know what hit them.
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
It was such a day that all the doors stood open and all the window
sashes had been up since dawn. No one could stay in, everyone was out,
nobody would die, everyone would live forever. It was more spring than
farewell summer, more Eden than Illinois. During the night a rain had
come to quench the heat, and in the morning, with the clouds hastened
off, each tree in all the yards gave off a separate and private rain if
you shook it in passing.
Quartermain, out of bed and whirring through the house in hand-propelled
trajectories, again found that odd thing, a smile, on his mouth.
He kicked the kitchen door wide and fl ung himself, eyes glittering, the
smile pinned to his thin lips, into the presence of his servants and—
The cake.
“Good morning, Mr. Cal,” said the cook.
The cake stood like a magnificent Alp upon the kitchen table. To the
odors of morning were added the smells of snow upon a white mountain,
the aroma of frosted blossoms and candied roses, of petal pink candles
and translucent icing. There it was, like a distant hill in a dream of
the future, the cake as white as noon clouds, the cake in the shape of
collected years, each candle ready for the lighting and blowing out.
“That,” he whispered, “oh, my God, that will do it! Take it down to the
ravine. Get.”
The housekeeper and the gardener picked up the white mountain. The cook
led the way, opening the door.
They carried it out the door and down the porch and across the garden.
Who could resist a sweet thing like that, a dream? thought
Quartermain.
“Watch it! ”
The housekeeper slipped on the dew-wet grass.
Quartermain shut his eyes.
“No, God, no!”
When he opened his eyes again, the servants were still marching
steadily, perspiring, down the hill, into the green ravine, toward the
clear waters, under the high cool shadowy trees, toward the birthday
table.
“Thank you,” murmured Quartermain, and added, “God.”
Below, in the ravine, the cake was set upon the table, and it was white
and it glowed and it was perfect.
CHAPTER THIRTY
“There,” said Mother, fixing his tie.
“Who cares about a darn girl’s birthday party?” said Douglas. “It sounds
awful.”
“If Quartermain can go to all the trouble to have a cake made for
Lisabell, you can take an hour and go. Especially since he sent
invitations. Be polite is all I ask.”
“Come on, Doug, aw come on!” cried Tom, from the front porch.
“Hold your horses! Here I go.”
And the screen door slammed and he was in the street and he and Tom were
walking in the fresh day.
“Boy,” whispered Tom, smiling, “I’m gonna eat till I get sick.”
“There’s a deep and dire plot in here somewhere,” said Douglas. “How
come all of a sudden Quarter-main isn’t making a commotion? How come,
just like that, he’s all smiles?”
“I never in my life,” said Tom, “argued with a piece of cake or a bowl
of ice cream.”
Halfway down the block they were joined by Charlie, who fell into step
beside them and looked like he was going to a funeral.
“Hey, this tie’s killing me.” Charlie walked with them in a solemn line.
Moments later they were joined by Will and the others.
“As soon as the party’s over, let’s all go skinny-dipping out at Apple
Crick. Might be our last chance before it gets too cold. Summer’s gone.”
Doug said, “Am I the only one who thinks there’s somethin’ fishy goin’
on here? I mean, why’s old man Quartermain giving Lisabell a birthday
party? Why’d He invite us? I smell a rat, fellas. ”
Charlie tugged at his tie and said, “I hate to say this, Doug, but it
looks like any day now, whatever’s left of our war ain’t going to be
nothing. There doesn’t seem to be any reason to fight them anymore.”
“I don’t know, Charlie. Something just doesn’t add up.”
They came to the ravine and stopped.
“Well, here we are,” said Douglas. “Keep your eyes peeled. If I give the
word, break and scatter. You fellas go ahead,” said Douglas. “I’ll be
down in a minute. I’ve got some strategizing to do.”
Reluctantly they left him and started down the hill. After they had gone
a hundred feet they began to shuffle and then lope, and then run,
yelling. They pulled up below, by the tables, and from a distance, here
and there through the ravine, like white birds skimming the grass, came
the girls, running too, all gathered in one place, and there was Calvin
C. Quartermain, reeling down the pathway in a wheelchair, calling out in
a high and cheerful voice.
“Hell,” said Douglas, standing back alone. “I mean, heck.”
The children gathered, shoving and pushing and laughing. Seen from a
distance they were like little figures on a beautiful stage. Their
laughter came drifting up to Douglas and his mouth twitched.
And then, beyond the children, resplendent on its own white-clothed
table, was the birthday cake. Douglas stared.
It rose, tier upon tier, of such a size that it towered like a snowman,
magnificent and shining in the sun.
“Doug, hey, Doug!” voices drifted up to him.
But he didn’t hear.
The cake, the white and beautiful cake, a piece of winter saved from
years ago, cool and snowy now in the late summer day. The cake, the
white and magnifi cent cake, frost and rime and snowfl akes,
apple-flower and lily-bud. And the voices laughing and the laughter
rolling up to him where he stood alone and separate and their voices
calling, “Doug, come on, aw, Doug, come down. Hey, Doug, aw come on . .
.”
His eyes were blinded by the frost and the snow of it. He felt his feet
propelling him down into the ravine and he knew he was moving toward the
table and the white vision, and there was no way to stop his feet, no
way to turn his eyes away, and all thoughts of battle plans and troop
movements fled from his mind. He began to shuffle and he began to lope
and then he ran faster and faster, and reaching a large tree, he grabbed
hold to catch his breath. He heard himself whisper, “Hi.”
And everyone, looking at him, in the light of the snow mountain, in the
glare of the wintry hill, replied, “Hi.” And he joined the party.
There was Lisabell. Among the others she stood, her face as delicate as
the curlicues on the frosted cake, her lips soft and pink as the
birthday candles. Her great eyes fixed him where he stood. He was
suddenly conscious of the grass under his shoes. His throat was dry. His
tongue filled his mouth. The children milled round and round, with
Lisabell at the center of their carousel.
Quartermain came hurtling along the rough path, his wheelchair almost
flying, and nearly crashed into the table. He gave a cry and sat on the
outer edge of the milling crowd, a look of immense satisfaction on his
creased yellow face.
And then Mr. Bleak appeared and stood behind the wheelchair, smiling an
altogether diff erent kind of smile.
Douglas watched as Lisabell bent toward the cake.
The soft scent of the candles wafted on the breeze.
And there was her face, like a summer peach, beautiful and warm, and the
light of the candles refl ected in her dark eyes. Douglas held his
breath. The entire world waited and held its breath. Quartermain was
frozen, gripping his chair as if it were his own body threatening to run
off with him. Fourteen candles. Fourteen years to be snuffed out and a
goal set toward one more as good or better. Lisabell seemed happy. She
was floating down the great river of Time and enjoying the trip,
blissful with her journeying. The happiness of the insane was in her eye
and hand.
She exhaled a great breath, the smell of a summer apple.
The candles snuff ed out.
The boys and girls crowded to the cake as Lisabell picked up a great
silver knife. The sun glinted off its edge in flashes that seared the
eyes. She cut the cake and pushed the slice with the knife and slipped
it onto a plate. This plate she picked up and held with two hands. The
cake was white and soft and sweet- looking. Everyone stared at it. Old
man Quartermain grinned like an idiot. Bleak smiled sadly.
“Who shall I give the first piece to?” Lisabell cried.
She deliberated so long it seemed she must be put ting a part of herself
into the soft color and spun suga r of the frosting.
She took two slow steps forward. She was not smiling now. Her face was
gravely serious. She held out the cake upon the plate and handed it to
Douglas.
She stood before Doug and moved her face so close to his that he could
feel her breath on his cheeks.
Douglas, startled, jumped back.
Shocked, Lisabell opened her eyes as she cried softly a word he could
not at fi rst hear.
“Coward,” she cried. “And not only that,” she added. “Scaredy-cat!”
“Don’t listen, Doug,” said Tom.
“Yeah, you don’t have to take that,” said Charlie.
Douglas moved back another step, blinking.
Douglas held the plate in his hands and the children stood around him.
He did not see Quartermain wink at Bleak and jab him with his elbow. He
saw only Lisabell’s face. It was a face with snow in it, with cherries,
and water and grass, and it was a face like this late afternoon. It was
a face that looked into him. He felt as if, somehow, she had touched
him, here, there, upon the eyelids, the ears, the nose. He shivered. He
took a bite of cake.
“Well,” said Lisabell. “Got nothing to say? If you’r e scared down here,
I bet you’re even more scared up there.” She pointed upward, toward the
far edge of the ravine. “Tonight,” she said, “we’re all going to be
there. I bet you won’t even show up.”
Doug looked from her up to the top of the ravine and there stood the
haunted house where, in the daytime, the boys sometimes gathered, but
where they never dared to go at night.
“Well,” said Lisabell. “What are you waiting for? Will you be there or
not?”
“Doug,” said Tom. “You don’t have to take that. Give her what for,
Doug.”
Doug looked from Lisabell’s face up to the heights of the ravine and
again to the haunted house.
The cake melted in Douglas’s mouth. Between looking at the house and
trying to decide, with the cake in his mouth, sugar melting on his
tongue, he didn’t know what to do. His heart was beating wildly and his
face was a confusion of blood.
“I’ll . . .” he blurted.
“You’ll what?” taunted Lisabell.
“. . . be there,” he said.
“Thatta boy, Doug,” said Tom.
“Don’t let her fool you,” said Bo.
But Doug turned away from his friends.
Suddenly a memory came to him. Years ago, he had killed a butterfly on a
bush, smashing it with a stick, for no reason at all, other than it
seemed like the thing to do. Glancing up, he had seen his grandfather,
like a framed picture, startled, on the porch above him. Douglas dropped
the stick and picked up the shattered flakes of butterfly, the bright
pieces of sun and grass. He tried to fit it back together again and
breathe a spell of life into it. But at last, crying, he said, “I’m
sorry.”
And then Grandpa had spoken, saying, “Remember, always, everything
moves.” Thinking of the butterfly, he was reminded of Quartermain. The
trees shook with wind and suddenly he was looking out of Quartermain’s
face, and he knew how it felt to be inside a haunted house, alone. He
went to the birthday table and picked up a plate with the largest piece
of cake on it, and began to walk toward Quartermain. There was a
starched look in the old man’s face, then a searching of the boy’s eyes
and chin and nose with a sunless gaze.
Douglas stopped before the wheelchair.
“Mr. Quartermain,” he said.
He pushed the plate out on the warm air into Quartermain’s hands.
At first the old man’s hands did not move. Then as if wakened, his fi
ngers opened with surprise. Quartermain regarded the gift with utter
bewilderment.
“Thank you,” he said, so low no one heard him. He touched a fragment of
white frosting to his mouth.
Everyone was very quiet.
“Criminy, Doug!” Bo hissed as he pulled Doug away from the wheelchair.
“Why’d you do that? Is it Armistice Day? You gonna let me rip off your
epaulettes? Why’d you give that cake to that awful old gink?”
Because, Douglas thought but didn’t say, because, well, I could hear him
breathe .
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE
I’ ve lost, thought Quatermain.  I've lost the game. Check. Mate.
Bleak pushed Quartermain in his wheelchair, like a load of dried
apricots and yellow wicker, around the block under the dying afternoon
sun. He hated the tears that brimmed in his eyes.
“My God!” he cried. “What happened?”
Bleak said he wasn’t sure whether it was a significant loss or a small
victory.
“Don’t small victory me !” Quartermain shouted.
“All right,” said Bleak. “I won’t.”
“All of a sudden,” said Quartermain, “in the boy’s—”
He stopped, for he could not breathe.
“Face,” he continued. “In the boy’s face.” Quartermain touched his mouth
with his hands to pull the words out. He had seen himself peer forth
from the boy’s eyes, as if from an opened door. “How did I get in there,
how?”
Bleak said nothing, but pushed Quartermain on through sun and shadow,
quietly.
Quartermain did not touch the hand-wheels of his moving chair. He
slumped, staring rigidly beyond the moving trees, the flowing white
river of sidewalk.
“What happened?”
“If you don’t know,” said Bleak, “I won’t tell you.”
“I thought I’d defeated them. I thought I was mean and smart and clever.
But I didn’t win.”
“No,” said Bleak.
“I don’t understand. Everything was set up for me to win.”
“You did them a favor. You made them put one foot in front of the
other.”
“Is that what I did? So it’s their victory.”
“They might not know it, but yes. Every time you take a step, even when
you don’t want to,” said Bleak. “When it hurts, when it means you rub
chins with death, or even if it means dying, that’s good. Anything that
moves ahead, wins. No chess game was ever won by the player who sat for
a lifetime thinking over his next move.”
Quartermain let himself be pushed another block in silence and then
said: “Braling was a fool.”
“The metronome? Yes.” Bleak shook his head. “He might be alive today if
he hadn’t scared himself to death. He thought he could stand still or
even run backward. He thought he could trick life. Tricked himself right
into a fine oration and a quick burial.”
They turned a corner.
“Oh, it’s hard to let go,” said Quartermain. “All my life I’ve held on
to everything I ever touched. Preach to me, Bleak!”
Bleak, obediently, preached: “Learning to let go should be learned
before learning to get. Life should be touched, not strangled. You’ve
got to relax, let it happen at times, and at others move forward with
it. It’s like boats. You keep your motor on so you can steer with the
current. And when you hear the sound of the waterfall coming nearer and
nearer, tidy up the boat, put on your best tie and hat, and smoke a
cigar right up till the moment you go over. That’s a triumph. Don’t
argue with the cataract.”
“Take me around the block again.”
“Here we go.”
The leaf-light flickered on the paper-thin skin of the old men’s wrists,
the shadows alternating with fading sunlight. They moved in a soft
whisper.
“All of a sudden. In that boy’s face . . . He gave me a piece of cake,
Bleak.”
“I saw him.”
“Why, why did he do it? He kept looking at me as if I were someone new.
Was that it? Or what? Why did he do it? And there I was, me, staring out
of his face. And I knew I’d lost.”
“Let’s say you didn’t win, maybe. But you didn’t lose.”
“What broke me down all of a sudden? I hated that monster, and then,
suddenly, I hated myself. Why?”
“Because he wasn’t your son.”
“Ridiculous!”
“Nevertheless. You never got married that I knew . . .”
“Never!”
“Never had children?”
“Never!”
“And the children never had children.”
“Of course not. Impossible!”
“You cut yourself off from life. The boy has recon nected you. He is the
grandson you should have had, to keep the juices flowing, life staying
alert.”
“Hard to believe.”
“You’re coming around. You can’t cut all the phone lines and still be on
speaking terms with the world. Instead of living inside your son and
your son’s son, you were really heading for the junkyard. The boy
reminded you of your utter and complete fi nish.”
“No more, no more!” Quartermain grabbed the hard rubber wheels of his
chair, causing them to stop short.
“Face up to it,” Bleak said. “We’re both dumb old fools. A little late
for wisdom, but better an ironic recognition than none at all.”
Uncurling his friend’s fingers from the spider web wheels, Bleak pushed
the chair around a corner so the light of the dying sun stained their
faces a healthy red, and added, “Look, life gives us everything. Then it
takes it away. Youth, love, happiness, friends. Darkness gets it all in
the end. We didn’t have enough sense to know you can will it—life—to
others. Your looks, your youth. Pass it on. Give it away. It’s lent to
us for only a while. Use it, let go without crying. It’s a very fancy
relay race, heading God knows where. Except now, in your last lap of the
race, you find no one waiting for you on the track ahead. Nobody for you
to hand the stick to. You’ve run the race for no reason. You’ve failed
the team.”
“Is that what I’ve done?”
“Yes. You weren’t hurting the boy. Actually, what you were trying to do
was make him grow up. You were both wrong for a while. Now you’re both
winning. Not because you want to, but because you have to.”
“No, it’s only he who’s ahead. The idea was to grow them as fruit for
the grave. But all I did was give them—”
“Love,” said Bleak.
Quartermain could not say the word. That dreadful sweet, candy-sickening
word. So trite, so true, so irritating, so wonderful, so frightening,
and, in the end, so lost to himself.
“They won. I did them a favor, my God, a favor! I was blind! I wanted
them to race about, like we run about, and wither, and be shocked by
their withering, and die, like I’m dying. But they don’t realize, they
don’t know, they’re even happier, if that’s possible.”
“Yes.” Bleak pushed the chair. “Happier. Because growing old isn’t all
that bad. None of it is bad if you have one thing. If you have the one
thing that makes it all all right.”
That dreadful word again!
“Don’t say it!”
“But I’m thinking it,” said Bleak, trying mightily to keep an
unaccustomed smile from creasing his lips.
“So you’re right, so I’m miserable, and here I sit, crying like a
goddamn idiot fool!”
The freckled leaf-shadows passed over his liver-spotted hands. They
fitted, for a moment, like a jigsaw and made his hands look muscled,
tanned, and young. He stared at them, as if delivered free of age and
corruption. Then the freckling, twinkling motion of passing trees went
on.
“What do I do now, what do I do? Help me, Bleak.”
“We can help ourselves. You were heading for the cliff. I tried to warn
you. You can’t hold them back now. If you’d had any sense, you might
have encouraged the children to continue their damned revolu tion, never
grow up, to be egocentrics. Then they really would have been unhappy!”
“A fine time to tell me.”
“I’m glad I didn’t think of it. The worst thing is never to grow up. I
see it all around. I see children in every house. Look there, that’s
Leonora’s house, poor woman. And here’s where those two old maids live,
and their Green Machine. Children, children without love. And over
there, take a look. There’s the ravine. The Lonely One. There’s a life
for you, there’s a child in a man’s body. That’s the ticket. You could
make Lonely Ones of them all, given time and patience. You used the
wrong strategy. Don’t force people to grow. Baby them. Teach them to
nurse their grievances and grow their private poison gardens. Little
patches of hate and prejudice. If you wanted them unhappy, how much
better to say, ‘Revolt, I’m with you, charge! Ignorance, I’m for you!
Down with the slob and the swine forever!’”
“Don’t rub it in. I don’t hate them anymore, anyway. What a strange
afternoon, how odd. There I was, in his face. There I was, in love with
the girl. It was as if time had never passed. I saw Liza again.”
“It’s still possible, of course, you can reverse the process. The child
is in us all. It’s not hard to keep the child locked there forever. Give
it another try.”
“No, I’m done with it. I’m done with wars. Let them go. If they can earn
a better life than I did, let them earn it. I wouldn’t be so cruel as to
wish them my life now. I was in his face, remember, and I saw her. God,
what a beautiful face! Suddenly I felt so young. Now, turn me around and
roll me home. I want to think about the next year or so. I’ll have to
start fi guring.”
“Yes, Ebenezer.”
“No, not Ebenezer, not Scrooge. I’m not anything. I haven’t decided to
be anything. You can’t be anything that quickly. All I know is I’m not
quite the same. I’ve got to figure what I want to be.”
“You could give to charity.”
“You know me better than that.”
“You’ve got a brother.”
“Lives in California.”
“How long’s it been since you’ve seen him?”
“Oh, God, thirty years.”
“He has children, right?”
“Yes, I think so. Two girls and a boy. Grown now. Got children of their
own.”
“You could write a letter.”
“What kind?”
“Invite them for a visit. You’ve got a big house. And one of those
children, God help them, might seem like you. It struck me, if you can’t
have any private sense of destiny, immortality, you name it—you could
get it secondhand from your brother’s house. Seems to me you’d want to
connect up with a thing like that.”
“Foolish.”
“No, common sense. You’re too old for marriage and children, too old for
everything except experiments. You know how things work. Some children
look like their fathers, or mothers, or grandfathers, and some take
after a distant brother. Don’t you think you’d get a kick out of
something like that?”
“Too easy.”
“Think on it, anyway. Don’t wait, or you’ll sink back into being nothing
but a mean old son-of-abitch again.”
“So that’s what I’ve been! Well, well. I didn’t start out intending to
be mean, but I got there somehow. Are you mean, Bleak?”
“No, because I know what I did to myself. I’m only mean in private. I
don’t blame others for my own mis takes. I’m bad in a different way than
you, of course, with a sense of humor developed out of necessity.” For a
moment, Bleak’s eyes seemed to twinkle, but maybe it was only the
passing sun.
“I’ll need a sense of humor from here on out. Bleak, visit me more
often.” Quartermain’s gnarled fingers grasped Bleak’s hand.
“Why would I visit you, you sorry old bastard, ever again?”
“Because we’re the Grand Army, aren’t we? You must help me think.”
“The blind leading the sick,” said Bleak. “Here we are.”
He paused at the walk leading up to the gray, fl akepainted house.
“Is that my place?” said Quartermain. “My God, it’s ugly, ugly as sin.
Needs paint.”
“You can think about that, too.”
“My God, what a Christ-awful ugly house! Wheel me in, Bleak.”
And Bleak wheeled his friend up the walk toward his house.
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO
Douglas stood with Tom and Charlie in the moist-smelling warm
late-summer-green ravine. Mosquitoes danced their delicate dances upon
the silence. A dancing idiot hum-tune.
“Everyone’s gone,” said Tom . Douglas sat on a rock and took off his
shoes . “Bang, you’re dead,” said Tom, quietly . “I wish I was, oh, I
wish I was dead,” said Doug . Tom said, “Is the war over? Shall I take
down the flag?” “What flag?”
“Just the flag, that’s all.”
“Yeah. Take it down. But I’m not sure if the war is really over yet . .
. but it sure has changed. I’ve just got to figure out how.”
Charlie said, “Yeah, well, you did give cake to the enemy. If that
wasn’t the strangest thing . . .”
“Ta-ta-tahhhh,” hummed Tom. He made furling motions in the warm empty
silent air. He stood solemnly by the quiet creek in the summer evening
with the sun fading. “Ta-ta-tahhhh. Ta-ta-tahhhh.” He hummed “Taps.” A
tear fell off his cheek.
“Oh, for gosh sakes!” cried Douglas. “Stop!”
Douglas and Tom and Charlie climbed out of the ravine, and walked
through the boxed and packaged town, through the avenues and streets and
alleys, among the thousand-celled houses, the bright prisons, down the
definite sidewalks and the positive lanes, and the country seemed far
away and it was as if a sea had moved away from the shore of their life
in one day. Suddenly there was the town and their lives to be lived in
that town in the next forty years, opening and shutting doors and
raising and lowering shades, and the green meadow was distant and alien.
Douglas looked over at Tom getting taller every minute, it seemed. He
felt the hunger in his stomach and he thought of the miraculous foods at
home and he thought of Lisabell blowing out the candles and sitting
there with fourteen years burnt behind her and not caring, very pretty
and solemn and beautiful. He thought of the Lonely One, very lonely
indeed, wanting love, and now gone.
Douglas stopped at Charlie’s house, feeling the season change about
them.
“Here’s where I leave you guys,” said Charlie. “See you later, at the
haunted house with those dumb girls.”
“Yeah, see you later, Charlie.”
“So long, Charlie,” said Tom.
“You know something,” said Charlie, turning back toward his friends, as
if he’d suddenly remembered something important. “I been thinkin’. I got
an uncle, twenty-five years old. Came by earlier today in a big Buick,
with his wife. A really nice, pretty lady. I was thinkin’ all morning:
Maybe I’ll let them make me twenty-fi ve. Twenty-five strikes me as a
nice medium age. If they’ll let me ride in a Buick with a pretty lady
like that, I’ll go along with them. But that’s it, mind! No kids. It
stops at squalling kids. Just a nice car and a pretty lady with me,
ridin’ along out toward the lake.
Boy! I’ll take about thirty years of that. I’m puttin’ in my order for
thirty years of being twenty-five. Fill ’er up and I’m on my way.”
“It’s something to think about,” said Douglas. “I’m goin’ in the house
to think about it right now,” said Charlie. “So, when do we start the
war again?” said Tom. Charlie and Douglas looked at each other. “Heck, I
dunno,” said Doug, a little uncomfortably. “Tomorrow, next week, next
month?” “I guess." “We can’t give up the war!” said Tom. “Heck, we’re
not giving it up,” said Charlie. “Ev ery once in a while we’ll do it
again, huh, Doug?” “Oh, sure, sure!” “Shift the strategy, identify new
objectives, you know,” said Charlie. “Oh, we’ll have wars okay, Tom,
don’t you worry.” “Promise?” cried Tom, tears in his eyes. “Cross our
hearts, mother’s honor.” “Okay,” said Tom, lower lip trembling. The wind
whistled, was cool: it was an early au tumn evening, no longer a late
summer one. “Well,” said Charlie, standing there, smiling shyly, looking
up from under his eyebrows at Doug. “It sure was a farewell summer,
huh?”
“Sure was.”
“Sure kept us busy.”
“Sure did.”
“Only thing is,” said Tom, “it didn’t come out in the papers: Who won?”
Charlie and Douglas stared at the younger boy.
“Who won? Don’t be silly!” Douglas lapsed into silence, staring up into
the sky. Then he fi xed them with a stare. “I don’t know. Us, them.”
Charlie scratched inside his left ear. “Everybody. The first war in
history where everybody won. I can’t figure it. So long.” He went on up
the sidewalk, crossed the front yard, opened the door of his house,
waved, and was gone.
“There goes Charlie,” said Douglas.
“Boy, am I sad!” said Tom.
“About what?”
“I don’t know. I keep playin’ ‘Taps’ inside my head. It’s a sad song,
that’s all.”
“Don’t start bawlin’ now!”
“No, I’m just gonna be quiet. You know why? I guess I got it fi gured.”
“Why?”
“Ice cream cones don’t last.”
“That’s a silly thing to say.”
“Ice cream cones are always gettin’ done with. Seems I’m no sooner
bitin’ the top than I’m eatin’ the tail. Seems I’m no sooner jumpin’ in
the lake at the start of vacation than I’m creepin’ out the far side, on
the way back to school. Boy, no wonder I feel bad.”
“It’s all how you look at it,” said Doug. “My gosh, think of all the
things you haven’t even started yet. There’s a million ice cream cones
up ahead and ten billion apple pies and hundreds of summer vacations.
Billions of things waitin’ to be bit or swallowed or jumped in.”
“Just once, though,” said Tom, “I’d like one thing. An ice cream cone so
big you could just keep eatin’ and there isn’t any end and you just go
on bein’ happy with it forever. Wow!”
“There’s no such ice cream cone.”
“Just one thing like that is all I ask,” said Tom. “One vacation that
never has a last day. Or one matinee with Buck Jones, boy, just ridin’
along forever, bangin’, and Indians fallin’ like pop bottles. Gimme just
one thing with no tail-end and I’d go crazy. Sometimes I just sit in the
movie theater and cry when it says ‘The End’ for Jack Hoxie or Ken
Maynard. And there’s nothin’ so sad as the last piece of popcorn at the
bottom of the box.”
“You better watch out,” said Doug. “You’ll be workin’ yourself into
another fit any minute. Just remember, darn it, there’re ten thousand
matinees waitin’ right on up ahead.”
“Well, here we are, home. Did we do anything today we might get licked
for?”
“Nope.”
“Then let’s go in.”
They did, slamming the door as they went.
CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE
The house stood on the edge of the ravine.
It looked haunted, just like everyone said it was.
Tom and Charlie and Bo followed Doug up the side of the ravine and stood
in front of the strange house at nine o’clock at night. In the distance,
the courthouse clock bonged off the hour.
“There it is,” said Doug. He turned his head right and left, as if he
was looking for something.
“What are we gonna do?” asked Tom.
“Well,” said Bo, “is it haunted, like they said?”
“From what I’ve heard, at eight o’clock, no,” said Doug. “And not at
nine. But starting around ten, strange sounds start to come from the
house. I think we should hang around and fi nd out. Besides, Lisa-bell
said that she and her friends were going to be here. Let’s wait and
see.”
They stood by some bushes by the front porch steps and they waited and
at last the moon came up.
There was a sound of footsteps along the path somewhere and from inside
the house, the sounds of someone going up some stairs.
Doug stood alert, craned his neck, but he couldn’t quite see what was
going on.
“Heck,” said Charlie at last. “What are we doing here? I’m gosh-awful
bored. I got homework. I think I better head home.”
“Hold on,” said Doug. “Let’s wait just a few more minutes.”
They waited as the moon got higher. And then, a little after ten, as the
last peals of the courthouse clock faded away on the night air, they
heard the noises. From inside the house, faint at first, almost
imperceptible, there came a sound of rustling and scraping, as if
someone was shifting trunks from one room to another.
A few minutes later, they heard a sharp cry, and then another cry, and
then a sort of whispering and rustling and, finally, a dull thump.
“Those,” said Doug, “were definitely ghost sounds. Like someone getting
killed and the bodies being dragged around the rooms. Doesn’t it sound
like that?”
“Heck,” said Tom, “I don’t know.”
“Don’t ask me,” said Bo.
“Well,” said Charlie, “it’s sure a god-awful racket. If there’s another
scream, I’m getting out of here.”
They stood alert and waited, almost not breathing. Silence. And then,
suddenly, more groans and cries and then something that sounded like a
weak cry, “Help.”
Then it faded away.
“That’s it,” said Charlie. “I’ve had enough.”
“Me too,” said Bo.
The two boys turned tail and ran.
There was a great whispering and the hair stood up on the back of Doug’s
neck.
“I don’t know about you,” said Tom, “but I’m get-tin’ out of here. If
you want to stay to listen to some darned ghosts, you can, but not me.
I’ll see you at home, Doug.”
Tom turned and ran.
Alone, Doug stood for a long while staring at the old house. Then he
heard someone coming up the path behind him. He turned, his fists
clenched, ready to defend himself against the midnight assailant.
“Lisabell,” he said. “What are you doing here?”
“I told you I’d be here. But what are you doing here? I thought you were
a scaredy-cat. Is it true what they say? Did you find out anything? I
mean, it’s all darn foolishness, isn’t it? There’s no such thing as
ghosts, is there? That place can’t be haunted.”
“We thought,” said Doug, “we’d come here and wait and see. But the
others got scared and left and now it’s only me. So I’m just standing
here, waiting, listening.”
They listened. A low cry wafted out of the house into the night air.
Lisabell said, “Is that a ghost?”
Doug strained to listen. “Yes, that’s one.”
A moment later they heard another great whisper and cry.
“Is that another?”
Doug looked at her face and said, “You look like you’re enjoying this.”
“I don’t know,” said Lisabell. “It’s kind of strange, but the more I
hear, I —” And here she smiled a strange smile. The whispers and the
cries and murmurs from the house grew louder and Doug felt his whole
body turn hot and then cold and then warm again.
Finally he reached down and found a large stone by the front of the
house, reared his hand back, and flung it through the glass panes of the
front door.
The glass exploded with a loud crash and the door creaked open, slowly.
Suddenly, all the ghosts wailed at the same moment.
“Doug!” cried Lisabell. “Why did you do that?”
“Because . . .” said Doug.
And then it happened.
There was a rush of feet, a torrent of whispers, and a swirling mob of
white shapes burst out of the house and down the stairs and along the
path and away into the ravine.
“Doug,” said Lisabell. “Why’d you do that?”
“Because,” said Doug, “I couldn’t stand it anymore. Someone had to scare
them out. Someone had to act like they knew what they were doing. I bet
they won’t come back.”
“That’s terrible,” said Lisabell. “Why would you want ghosts not to be
here?”
“Why would you think,” said Doug, “that they had a right to be here? We
don’t even know who they were.”
“Well,” said Lisabell, angrily. “Just for that I’m going to teach you a
lesson.”
“What?” said Douglas.
And Lisabell stepped up to him, grabbed him by the ears, and planted an
immense kiss on Douglas’s mouth. It lasted only an instant, but it was a
blow like a bolt of lightning that had come out of the air and struck
his face and anguished his body.
He shook from head to toe, his fi ngers extended, and somehow he
imagined sparks firing out of his fingertips. His eyelids jittered and a
fantastic fl ow of sweat broke out on his brow. He gasped and could not
breathe.
Lisabell stood back, surveying her creation: Douglas Spaulding, hit by
lightning.
Douglas fell back, afraid that she might touch him again. She laughed,
her face merry.
“So there!” she cried. “That’ll fi x you.”
She turned and ran away and left him in the invisible rain, a terrible
storm, shaken, his whole body now hot, now cold, his jaw dropped, his
lips trembling.
The explosion of the lightning bolt hit him agai n in memory, even
stronger than when it had fi rst struck.
Slowly, Doug felt himself sink to his knees, his head shaking, his mind
wondering at what had happened and where Lisabell had gone.
He looked up at the now truly empty house. He wondered if he should go
up the stairs and find out if maybe he hadn’t just come out of the house
himself.
“Tom,” he whispered. “Take me home.” And then he remembered: Tom wasn’t
there.
He turned, stumbled, almost fell down into the ravine, and tried to find
his way home.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR
Quartermain woke laughing.
He lay wondering what in god-awful hell had made him happy. What was the
dream, gone now, but so wondrous that it cracked his face and uncorked
something resembling a chuckle beneath his ribs!? Holy Jesus. What?
In the dark he dialed Bleak.
“Do you know what time it is?” Bleak cried. “There’s only one thing you
ever wait half the night to churn my guts with—your stupid war. I
thought you said the damned thing was over!”
“It is, it is. ”
“It is what?” shouted Braling.
“Over,” said Quartermain. “There are just a few more things I want to
make sure of. It’s what you would call the joyful aftermath. Bleak,
remember the collection of oddities and medical freaks we put together
one summer for a town fair, all those years ago? Do you think we could
find those jars? Are they up in an attic or down in a basement
somewhere?”
“I suppose so. But why?”
“Find them. Unlock them. We’re bringing them out in the open again.
Gather our army of gray. We have work to do. It’s time.”
Click. Hummm.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE
A huge question mark, painted on a ply wood shingle, hung over the tent
entryway. The tent had been erected on one side of the lakefront
grounds, and the entrance gave way into the darkness of a haphazardly
constructed plywood lean-to museum. Inside was a series of platforms on
which were no freaks, no beasts, no magicians, no people. Somehow,
overnight, this mystery tent had appeared, as if it had pitched itself.
Across town, Quartermain smiled.
That morning, in school, Doug had found an un signed handwritten note in
his desk. Its message was simple, written with black ink in large block
letters:
“the mystery of life explained. ??? at the lake-front. limited time
only.” Doug passed the note among his friends, and as soon as school let
out for the day, the boys had rushed down here, as fast as their feet
could carry them. Now, entering the question mark tent with his friends,
Doug was incredibly disappointed. Migawd, no bones, no dinosaurs, no mad
generals at war, he thought. Nothing but night-dark canvas and flat
platforms and . . . Douglas peered. Charlie squinted. Will, Bo, and Tom
came last into the smell of old wood and tar-paper. There wasn’t even a
curator with a tall hat and baton to guide them along. There was only—
On top of a series of small tables were a number of large one- and
two-gallon jars filled to the brim with a thick, clear liquid. Each jar
was topped by a glass lid, and each lid had a red number on it—twelve in
all— each number, painted in a shaky hand. And inside each of the jars .
. . maybe that was it, at last, the things implied by the huge question
mark outside.
“Heck,” muttered Bo. “There’s nothing here.
What a gyp. So long, you guys. ”
And Bo turned, pushed the tent flap aside, and left.
“Wait,” said Douglas, but Bo was already gone. “Tom, Charlie, Will, you
won’t leave, will you? You’ll miss out if you go.”
“But there’s nothing here, just some old jars.”
“Wait,” said Doug. “It’s more than just jars. What’s in the jars? C’mon.
Let’s look closer.”
They edged up to the platform and crept along, staring into the jars,
one after another. There were no labels to tell them what they were
looking at, just glass and liquid and a soft light that seemed to pulse
within the liquid and shone on their eager, sweaty faces.
“What is that stuff in there?” asked Tom.
“Gosh knows. Look close.”
Their eyes moved along, darted and stayed, stayed and darted, fastened
and examined until their noses dilated and their mouths gaped.
“What’s that, Doug? And that? And that one there?”
“How do I know? Move!” Doug went back to the beginning of the row and
crouched down in front of the first jar so his eyes were level with
whatever was inside it.
The big bright glass jar held what looked like a giant cold gray oyster.
Doug peered at it, mumbled something to himself, then stood up and moved
on. The boys followed.
Suspended within the liquid in the next jar was something that looked
like a bit of translucent seaweed or, no, more like a seahorse, a
miniature sea-horse, sure!
And the glass jar after that held something that resembled a skinned
rabbit or a raw cat with its fur shucked, getting bigger . ..
The boys’ eyes moved, darted, stayed, fl icked back to examine the
first, second, third, fourth jars again.
“What’s in this one, Doug?”
Five, six, seven.
“Look!”
They all looked and it might have been another animal, a squirrel or a
monkey—sure, a monkey—but with transparent skin and a strange sorrowful
expression.
Eight, nine, ten, eleven—the jars were numbered but had no names. There
was nothing to hint at what the boys were looking at, what it was that
froze their veins and iced their blood. Until at last, at the far end of
the row, near the exit sign, they reached the last jar and all leaned
toward it and blinked.
“That can’t be!”
“Naw.”
“It is," gasped Douglas. “A baby!”
“What’s it doing in there?”
“Being dead, dummy.”
“Yeah, but . . . how . . .?”
All their eyes swiveled to rush back—eleven, ten, nine, eight, seven,
six, five and four and three and two and one—to the first jar, the one
holding the pale little oyster curlicue.
“If that’s a baby . . .”
“Then,” said Will, all numbness, “what in blazes are all those creepy
things in the other jars?”
Douglas counted backward, then forward again, but stayed silent, his icy
flesh all goose bumps.
“I got nothing to say.”
“Upchuck, Doug, upchuck.”
“Those things in the jars . . .” Doug began, face pale, voice paler.
“They’re—they’re babies, too!”
It was as if half a dozen sledgehammers had slammed into half a dozen
stomachs.
“Don’t look like babies!”
“Things from another world, maybe. ” Another world, thought Douglas. In
those jars, drowned .
Another world.
“Jellyfish,” Charlie said. “Squids. You know.”
I know, thought Douglas. Undersea.
“It’s got blue eyes,” Will whispered. “It’s looking at us.”
“No, it’s not,” said Doug. “It’s drowned.”
“C’mon, Doug,” Tom whispered. “I got the willies.”
“Willies, heck,” Charlie said. “I got the heebiejeebies. Where’d all
this stuff come from?”
“I don’t know,” Douglas said, chafing his elbows.
“The wax museum last year. That was sort of like this.”
“These aren’t wax,” said Tom. “Oh, gosh, Doug, that’s a real baby there,
used to be alive. I never seen a dead baby before. I’m gonna be sick.”
“Run outside. Go on!”
Tom turned and ran. In a moment, Charlie backed off and followed, his
eyes darting from the baby to the jellyfish or whatever it was and then
to the seahorse or what might be someone’s earlobes, tympanum and all.
“How come there’s no one here to tell us what all this stuff is?” Will
wondered.
“Maybe,” said Doug slowly, “maybe they’re afraid to tell, or can’t tell,
or won’t."
“Lord,” said Will. “I’m froze.”
From outside the tent’s canvas walls came the sounds of Tom being sick.
“Hey!” Will cried suddenly. “It moved!”
Doug reached his hand out to the glass. “No, it didn’t.”
“It moved, darn it. It doesn’t like us staring at it! Moved, I’m telling
you! That’s enough for me. So long, Doug.”
And Doug was left alone in the dark tent with the cold glass jars
holding the blind things that stared out with eyes that seemed to say
how awful it was to be dead.
There’s nobody to ask, thought Douglas, no one here. No one to ask and
no one to tell. How do we find out? Will we ever know?
From the far end of the tent museum came the sound of high-pitched
laughter. Six girls ran into the tent, giggling, letting in a bright
wedge of sunlight.
Once the tent flap closed they stopped laughing, enveloped suddenly in
darkness.
Doug turned blindly and walked out into the light.
He took a deep breath of the hot summer-like air, and squeezed his eyes
shut. He could still see the platforms and the tables and the glass jars
filled with thick fluid, and in the fluid, suspended, strange bits of
tissue, alien forms from far unknown territories. What could be a swamp
water creature with half an eye and half a limb, he knew, was not. What
could be a fragment of ghost, of a spiritual upchuck come out of a
fogbound book in a night library, was not. What could be the stillborn
discharge of a favorite dog was not. In his mind’s eye the things in the
jars seemed to melt, from fluid to fluid, light to light. If you fl
icked your eyes from jar to jar, you could almost snap them to life, as
if you were running bits of film over your eyeballs so that the tiny
things became large and then larger, shaping themselves into fi ngers,
hands, palms, wrists, elbows, until finally, asleep, the last shape
opened wide its dull, blue, lashless eyes and fi xed you with its gaze
that cried, Look! See! I am trapped here forever! What am I? What is the
question, what, what? Could it be, you there, below, outside looking in,
could it be that I am . . . you ?
Beside him, rooted to the grass, stood Charlie and Will and Tom.
“What was that all about?” Will whispered.
“I almost—” Doug started but Tom interrupted, tears running down his
cheeks.
“How come I’m crying?”
“Why would anyone be crying?” said Will, but his eyes were wet, too.
“Darn,” he whispered.
They heard a creaking sound. From the corner of his eye, Douglas saw a
woman go by pushing a carriage in which something struggled and cried.
Beyond in the afternoon crowd, a pretty woman walked arm in arm with a
sailor. Down by the lake a mob of girls played tag, hair fl ying,
leaping, bounding, measuring the sand with swift feet. The girls ran
away down the shore and Douglas, hearing their laughter, turned his gaze
back to the tent, the entry, and the large strange question mark.
Douglas started to move back toward the tent, like a sleepwalker.
“Doug?” said Tom. “Where you going? You going back in to look at all
that junk again?”
“Maybe.”
“Why?” exploded Will. “Creepy-looking stuff that someone stuck in old
pickle jars. I’m going home.
C’mon.”
“You go on,” said Doug.
“Besides,” said Will, passing a hand across his forehead, “I don’t feel
so good. Maybe I’m scared. How about you?”
“What’s to be scared of?” said Tom. “Like you said, it’s just some
creepy old stuff .”
“See you later, guys.” Doug walked slowly to the entryway and stopped in
the shadows. “Tom, wait for me.” Doug vanished.
“Doug!” Tom cried, face pale, shouting into the tent at the tables and
jars and alien creatures. “Be careful, Doug. Watch out !”
He started to follow but stopped, shivering, clutching his elbows,
gritting his teeth, half in, half out of night, half in, half out of
sun.
III. APPOMATOX
CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX
Suddenly the town was full of girls, girls running here, walking there,
going in doors, coming out, girls in the dime store, girls dangling
their legs at the soda fountain, girls in mirrors or refl ected in
windows, stepping off curbs or stepping up, and all of them, all in
bright not yet fall, not quite autumn dresses, and all, well maybe not
all but almost all, with wind blowing their hair and all with downcast
eyes looking to see where their shoes might take them.
It seemed to happen overnight, this infestation of girls, and Douglas
walked through the town as if it were a mirror maze, walked down to the
ravine steps and halfway up the jungle path before he realized where he
was. From the top of the last rise he could almost see the lake and the
sand and the tent with the question mark over the entrance.
He kept walking and found himself, inexplicably, in Mr. Quartermain’s
front yard, waiting for he couldn’t say what.
Quartermain, half-hidden in shadow on the front porch, leaned forward in
his rocking chair, creaking the wicker, creaking his bones. For a long
moment the old man looked one way, the boy another, until their gazes
locked.
“Douglas Spaulding?” Quartermain said.
“Mr. Quartermain?” asked the boy.
It was as if they were meeting for the fi rst time.
“Douglas Spaulding.” This time it was not a question, but a
confirmation. “Douglas Hinkston Spaulding.”
“Sir.” And this was not a question from the boy, either. “Mr. Calvin C.
Quartermain.” And again, “Sir.”
“What’re you doing down there, so far out on the lawn?”
Douglas was surprised. “Dunno. ”
“Why don’t you come up here?” said Quarter-main.
“I’ve got to get home,” said Douglas.
“No hurry. Why don’t we sort out the sic transits, letting loose the
dogs of war, havocs cried, all that."
Douglas almost laughed, but found he could not take the fi rst step.
“Look,” said Quartermain. “If I take out my teeth I won’t bite.” He
pantomimed as if removing something from his mouth but stopped, for
Douglas was on the first step, and then the second, and fi nally at the
top, where the old man nodded at another rocker.
Whereupon a remarkable thing took place.
Even as Douglas sat it seemed that the porch planks sank the merest half
inch under his weight.
Simultaneously, Mr. Quartermain felt his wicker seat move up half an
inch!
Then, still further, as Quartermain settled back in his rocker, the
porch sank under him.
And at that precise moment, the chair under Douglas rose silently, a
quarter inch.
So that each, only sensing, only half knowing, felt that he occupied one
end of an invisible teeter-totter which, as they spoke quietly, moved
up, moved down, first Douglas sinking as Quartermain rose, then
Quartermain descending as Douglas imperceptibly lifted—now one up, now
down; now the other up, now down; slowly, slowly.
Now Quartermain high in the soft air of the dying summer, a moment
later, Douglas the same.
“Sir?”
“Yes, son?”
He’s never called me that before, thought Douglas, and looked at the old
man’s face softened with some half-perceived sympathy.
Quartermain leaned forward.
“Before you ask me whatever you’ve got on your mind, let me ask you
something.”
“Sir?”
The old man’s voice was quiet.
“How old are you?”
Doug felt the breath sift over his lips.
“Ummm, eighty-one?”
“What?!”
“I dunno. I mean. I dunno.”
At last Douglas added, “And you, sir?”
“Well, now,” said Quartermain.
“Sir?”
“Well, let me see. Twelve?”
“Sir?!”
“Or maybe thirteen would be better?”
“Yes, sir.”
Teeter up, teeter down.
“Douglas,” said Quartermain at last, “I’d like you to tell me. What’s
life all about?”
“My gosh,” cried Douglas, “I was going to ask you that very question!”
Quartermain pulled back.
“Let’s rock awhile.”
There was no motion up, no motion down. They held still.
“It’s been a long summer,” the old man said.
“Seemed like it would never end,” Doug agreed.
“I don’t think it has. Not yet,” said Quartermain.
He reached out to the table beside him and found some lemonade and
poured a glass and handed it over. Douglas held the glass and took a
small sip. Quarter-main cleared his throat and looked at his hands.
“Appomattox.”
Douglas blinked. “Sir?”
Quartermain looked around at the railings, the boxes of geraniums, and
the wicker rockers that he and the boy sat still in.
“Appomattox. You ever heard of that?”
“In school once.”
“The thing is, which one is me, which one is you?”
“Which one what, sir?”
“Lee and Grant, Doug. Grant and Lee. What color uniform are you
wearing?”
Douglas looked down at his sleeves and his pants and his shoes.
“I see you have no better answer than I do,” observed Quartermain.
“No, sir.”
“It was a long time ago. Two tired old generals. Appomattox.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Now.” Cal Quartermain leaned forward so his wicker bones creaked. “What
is it you want to know?”
“Everything,” said Douglas.
“Everything?” Quartermain laughed gently. “That’ll take at least ten
minutes.”
“How about something?” said Douglas fi nally.
“Something? One special thing? Why, Doug, that will take a lifetime.
I’ve been at it a while. Everything rolls off my tongue, easy as pie.
But something ! Some thing! I get lockjaw just trying to define it. So
let’s talk about everything instead, for now. When you fi nally unhinge
your tongue and find one special eternal forever thing of substance, let
me know. Promise?”
“Promise.”
“Now, where were we? Life? There’s an everything topic. You want to know
all about life?”
Douglas nodded, head ducked.
“Steel yourself.”
Douglas looked up and fixed Quartermain with a stare like the sky and
all of time waiting.
“Well, to begin . . .” He paused and held out his hand for Douglas’s
empty glass. “You’re going to need this, son.”
Quartermain poured. Douglas took and drank.
“Life,” said the old man, and murmured, muttered, and murmured again.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN
Calvin C. Quartermain woke because some one had said something or called
out in the night air. But that was impossible. Nobody or nothing had. He
looked out the window at the great face of the courthouse clock and
could almost hear it clearing its throat, preparing to announce three in
the morning. “Who’s there?” Quartermain said into the cool night air.
Me.
“How’s that again?” Quartermain lifted his head and peered left and
right.
Me. Remember?
And now he looked down along the quilt.
Without moving his hands to touch and fi nd, he knew his old friend was
there. A bare subsistence of friend, but still, friend.
He did not lift his head to peer down along the sheets to the small
mound there below his navel, between his legs. It was hardly more than a
heartbeat, a pulse, a lost member, a ghost of flesh. But it was there.
“So you’re back?” he said to the ceiling, and snorted a chopped-off
laugh. “It’s been a long while.”
In reply, a soft pulse of recognition.
“How long will you stay?”
The slender mound beat its own private heart twice, three times, but
showed no signs of going anywhere; it seemed it would stay awhile.
“Is this your very last visit?” asked Quartermain.
Who can say? was the silent reply of his old friend revisiting, nested
in a wirework of ancient hair.
I do not so much mind my scalp turning gray, Quartermain had once said,
but when you fi nd whiteness sprouting down there, to hell with it. Let
the rest of me age, but not that !
But age he did and age it did. He was all of a dead winter grayness now.
Still, there was this heartbeat, this tender and incredible pulse
saluting him, a promise of spring, a seedbed of memory, a touch of . . .
what was the word out there in the town in this strange weather when
everyone’s juices roused again?
Farewell summer.
Dear God, yes.
Don’t go yet. Stay. I need a friend.
His friend stayed. And they talked. At three in the morning.
“Why do I feel so happy?” said Quartermain. “What’s been going on? Was I
mad? Am I cured? Is this the cure?” Quartermain’s teeth chattered with
an outrageous laugh.
I just came to say goodbye, the voice whispered.
“Goodbye?” Quarterman’s laughter caught in his throat. “Does that mean—”
It does, came the whisper. It’s been a lot of years. It’s time to move
on.
“Time, yes,” said Quartermain, his eyes watering. “Where are you going?”
Can’t say. You’ll know when the time comes.
“How will I know?”
You’ll see me. I’ll be there.
“How will I know it’s you? ” You’ll know. You’ve always known
everything, but me above all .
“You’re not leaving town?”
No, no. I’ll be around. But when you see me, don’t embarrass anyone, all
right?
“Of course.”
The quilt and the sheets under the quilt were lowering, melting to rest.
The whisper grew fainter.
“Wherever you go . . . ” began Quartermain.
Yes?
“I wish you a long life, a good life, a happy one.”
Thank you.
A pause. Silence. Quartermain found he didn’t know what to say next.
Goodbye then?
The old man nodded, his eyes misted with tears.
His bed, the coverlet, his body was flat as a tabletop. What had been
there for seventy years was now totally and completely gone.
“Goodbye,” said Mr. Quartermain into the still night air.
I wonder, he thought, where, oh just where in hell he has gone?
The great courthouse clock struck three. And Mr. Quartermain slept.
***
Douglas opened his eyes in the dark. The town clock finished the last
stroke of three.
He looked at the ceiling. Nothing. He looked at the windows. Nothing.
Only the night breeze fl uttered the pale curtains.
“Who’s there?” he whispered . Nothing . “Someone’s here,” he whispered .
And at last he asked again, “Who,” he said, “i s there?” Here, something
murmured. “What?” Me, something spoke in the night. “Who’s me?” Here,
was the quiet answer. “Where?” Here, quietly. “Where?” And Douglas
looked all around and then down.
“There? ”
Yes, oh, yes.
Down along his body, below his chest, below his navel, between his two
hipbones, where his legs joined. There it was.
“Who are you?” he whispered . You’ll find out .
“Where did you come from?”
A billion years past. A billion years yet to come.
“That’s no answer.”
It’s the only one.
“Were you . . .”
What?
“Were you down in that tent today?”
What? “Inside. In those glass jars. Were you?" In a way, yes .
“What do you mean, ‘in a way’?”
Yes.
“I don’t understand.”
You will, when we get to know each other.
“What’s your name?”
Give me one. We always have names. Every boy names us. Every
man says that name ten thousand times in his life.
“I don’t . . . ”
Understand? Just lie there. You have two hearts now. Feel the pulse. One
in your chest. And one below. Yes?
“Yes.”
Do you actually feel the two hearts?
“Yes. Oh, yes!”
Go to sleep then.
“Will you be here when I wake up?”
Waiting for you. Awake long before you. Good night, friend . “ Are we?
Friends?" The best you ever had. For life .
***
There was a soft rabbit running. Something hit the bed, something
burrowed beneath the blankets. “Tom?” “Yeah,” said the voice from under
the covers. “Can
I sleep here tonight? Please!” “ Why, Tom?” “I dunno. I just had this
awful feeling tomorrow morning we’d find you gone or dead or both.” “I’m
not going to die, Tom.” “Someday you will.”
“Well . . .”
“Can I stay?”
“Okay.”
“Hold my hand, Doug. Hold on tight.”
“Why?”
“You ever think the Earth’s spinning at twenty-fi ve thousand miles per
hour or something? It could throw you right off if you shut your eyes
and forget to hold on.”
“Give me your hand. There. Is that better?”
“Yeah. I can sleep now. You had me scared there for a while.”
A moment of silence, breath going in and out.
“Tom?”
“Yeah?”
“You see? I didn’t ditch you, after all.”
“Thank gosh, Doug, oh, thank gosh.”
A wind came up outside and shook all the trees and every leaf, every
last one fell off and blew across the lawn.
“Summer’s over, Tom.”
Tom listened.
“Summer’s done. Here comes autumn.”
“Halloween.”
“Boy, think of that !”
“I’m thinking."
They thought, they slept.
The town clock struck four.
And Grandma sat up in the dark and named the season just now over and
done and past.
Afterword: The Importance of Being Startled
The way I write my novels can best be described as imagining that I’m
going into the kitchen to fry a couple of eggs and then find myself
cooking up a banquet. Starting with very simple things, they then
word-associate themselves with further things until I’m up and running
and eager to find out the next surprise, the next hour, the next day or
the next week.
Farewell Summer began roughly fi fty-five years ago when I was very
young and had no knowledge of novels and no hope of creating a novel
that was sensible. I had to wait for years for material to accumulate
and take me, unaware, so that as I sat at my typewriter quite suddenly
there would be bursts of surprise, resulting in short stories or longer
narratives that I then connected together.
The main action of the novel takes place in a ravine that cut across my
life. I lived on a short street in Waukegan, Illinois, and the ravine
was immediately east of my home and ran on for several miles in two
directions and then circled around to the north and to the south, and
finally to the west. So, in eff ect, I lived on an island where I could,
at any time, plunge into the ravine and have adventures.
There I imagined myself in Africa or on the planet Mars. That being so,
and my going through the ravine every day on my way to school, and
skating and sledding there in winter, this ravine remained central to my
life and so it was natural that it would become the center of this
novel, with all of my friends on both sides of the ravine and the old
people who were curious time-pieces in my life.
I’ve always been fascinated by elderly people. They came and went in my
life and I followed them and questioned them and learned from them, and
that is primarily true in this novel because it is a novel about
children and old people who are peculiar Time Machines.
Many of the greatest friendships in my lifetime have been with men or
women who were in their eighties or nineties and I welcomed the chance
to ask them questions and then to sit, very quietly, saying nothing and
learning from their responses.
In a way, Farewell Summer is a novel about learning by encountering old
people and daring to ask them certain questions and then sitting back
and listening to their answers. The questions posed by Doug, and the
answers given by Mr. Quartermain, provide the organization of the action
of the chapters and the fi nal resolution of the book.
The bottom line here is that I am not the one in control. I do not try
to steer my characters; I let them live their lives and speak their
truths as quickly as possible. I listen, and write them down.
Farewell Summer is actually an extension of my book Dandelion Wine,
which I completed fi fty-five years ago. When I delivered it to my
publishers they said, “My God, this is much too long. Why don’t we
publish the first 90,000 words as a novel and keep the second part for
some future year when you feel it is ready to be published.” At the
time, I called the full, primitive version The Blue Remembered Hills .
The original title for what would become Dandelion Wine was Summer
Morning, Summer Night . Even all those years ago, I had a title ready
for this unborn book: Farewell Summer .
So, it has taken all these years for the second part of Dandelion Wine
to evolve to a point where I felt it was correct to send it out into the
world. During the ensuing years, I waited for those parts of the novel
to attract further ideas and further metaphors to add richness to the
text.
Surprise is everything with me. When I go to bed at night I give myself
instructions to startle myself when I wake in the morning. That was one
of the great adventures in letting this novel evolve: my instructions at
night and my being startled in the morning by revelations.
The influence of my grandparents and my aunt, Neva Bradbury, is in
evidence all through the narrative. My grandfather was a very wise and
patient man, who knew the importance of showing, not simply tell ing. My
grandmother was a wonderful woman who had an innate understanding of
what made boys tick. And my aunt Neva was the guardian and gardener of
the metaphors that became me. She saw to it that I was fed all the best
fairy tales, poetry, cinema, and theater, so that I was continually in a
fever about life and eager to write it all down. Today, all these years
later, I still feel in the writing process that she is looking over my
shoulder and beaming with pride.
Beyond that there is very little to add except that I’m glad that the
long haul of writing this novel is fi nished and I hope that there is
pleasure in it for everyone. It has been a great pleasure for me, to
revisit my beloved Green Town—to gaze up at the haunted house, to hear
the deep gongs of the courthouse clock, to run through the ravine, to be
kissed by a girl for the fi rst time, and to listen to and learn from
the wisdom of those who have gone before.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==
