prose_contemporaryRayBradburyA Literary EncountercutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
A Literary Encounter
It had been going on for a long time, but perhaps she first gave it
notice this autumn evening when Charlie was walking the dog and met her
on the way back from the grocer’s. They had been married a year, but it
wasn’t often they happened on each other this way, like two strangers.
‘God, it’s good to see you, Marie!’ he cried, taking her arm fiercely.
His dark eyes were shining and he was sniffing great lungfuls of the
sharp air. ‘God, isn’t it a lost evening, though!’
‘It’s nice.’ She looked quietly at him as they walked toward their
house.
‘October,’ he gasped. ‘Lord, I love to be out in it, eating it,
breathing it, smelling its smell. Oh, it’s a wild, sad month, all right.
Look at the way the trees are burning with it. The world’s on fire in
October; and you think of all the dead you’ll never see again.’ He
gripped her hand tightly.
‘Just a minute. The dog wants to stop.’
They waited in the cold darkness while the dog tapped a tree with his
nose.
‘God, smell that incense!’ The husband stretched. ‘I feel tall tonight,
like I could stride the earth, yank down stars, start volcanoes
roaring!’
‘Is your headache gone from this morning?’ she asked softly.
‘Gone, Christ, it’llnevercome back! Who thinks of headaches on such a
night! Listen to the leaves rustle! Listen to that wind in the high and
empty trees! God, isn’t it a lonely, lost time, though, and where are we
going, we lost and wandering souls on the brick pavements of the surging
cities and little lonely towns where the trains pound through the night?
I’d love to be traveling tonight, oh, traveling anywhere, to be out in
it, drinking its wildness, its sad sweetness!’
‘Why don’t we ride the trolley out to Chessman Park tonight, it’s a nice
ride,’ she said, nodding.
He flung up a hand, urging on the slow dog. ‘No, I meanreallytraveling!
Over bridges and hills and by cold cemeteries and past hidden villages
where lights are all out and nobody knows you’re passing in the night on
ringing steel!’
‘Well, then, we might take the North Shore up to Chicago for the
weekend,’ she suggested.
He looked at her pitiably in the dark and crushed her small cool hand in
his mighty one. ‘No,’ he said with grand simplicity. ‘No.’ He turned.
‘Come on. Home to a huge dinner. Three steaks, I want, a glutton’s
repast! Rare red wines, rich sauces, and a steaming tureen of creamed
soup, with an after-dinner liqueur, and—’
‘We’ve pork chops and peas.’ She unlocked the front door.
On the way to the kitchen, she tossed her hat. It landed on an opened
copy of Thomas Wolfe’sOf Time and the River, which lay under the
hurricane lamp. Giving her husband a look, she ran to investigate the
potatoes.
Three nights passed in which he stirred violently in bed when the wind
blew. He stared with intent brightness at the window rattling in the
autumn storm. Then, he relaxed.
The following evening, when she entered from snatching a few sheets off
the line, she found him seated deep in his library chair, a cigarette
hanging from his lower lip.
‘Drink?’ he said.
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘What?’
‘What do you mean, “what?”’ she asked.
A faint tinge of irritation moved in his impassive cold face.
‘Whatkind?’ he said.
‘Scotch,’ she said.
‘Soda?’ he said.
‘Right.’ She felt her face take on the same expressionless aspect as
his.
He lunged over to the cabinet, took out a couple glasses big as vases,
and perfunctorily filled them.
‘Okay?’ He gave her hers.
She looked at it. ‘Fine.’
‘Dinner?’ He eyed her coldly, over his drink.
‘Steak.’
‘Hash browns?’ His lips were a thin line.
‘Right.’
‘Good girl.’ He laughed a little, bleakly, tossing the drink into his
hard mouth, eyes closed.
She lifted her drink. ‘Luck.’
‘You said it.’ He thought it over slyly, eyes moving about the room.
‘Another?’
‘Don’t mind,’ she said.
‘Atta girl,’ he said. ‘Atta baby.’
He shot soda into her glass. It sounded like a fire hose let loose in
the silence. He walked back to lose himself like a little boy in the
immense library chair. Just before sinking behind a copy of Dashiell
Hammett’sThe Maltese Falcon, he drawled, ‘Call me.’
She turned her glass slowly in her hand that was like a white tarantula.
‘Check,’ she said.
-   -   *
        She watched him for another week. She found herself frowning
        most of the time. Several times she felt like screaming.
        As she watched, one evening, he seated himself at dinner and
        said:
        ‘Madame, you look absolutely exquisite tonight.’
        ‘Thank you.’ She passed the corn.
        ‘A most extraordinary circumstance occurred at the office
        today,’ he said. ‘A gentleman called to ascertain my health.
        “Sir,” I said politely. “I am in excellent equilibrium, and am
        in no need of your services.” “Oh, but, sir,” he said, “I am
        representative of such-and-so’s insurance company, and I wish
        only to give into your hands this splendid and absolutely
        irreproachable policy.” Well, we conversed pleasantly enough,
        and, resultantly, this evening, I am the proud possessor of a
        new life insurance, double indemnity and all, which protects you
        under all circumstances, dear kind lady love of my life.’
        ‘How nice,’ she said.
        ‘Perhaps you will also be pleased to learn,’ he said, ‘that for
        the last few days, beginning on the night of Thursday last, I
        became acquainted and charmed with the intelligent and certain
        prose of one Samuel Johnson. I am now amidst hisLife of
        Alexander Pope.’
        ‘So much I assumed,’ she said, ‘from your demeanor.’
        ‘Eh?’ He held his knife and fork politely before him.
        ‘Charlie,’ she said wistfully. ‘Could you do me a big favor?’
        ‘Anything.’
        ‘Charlie, do you remember when we married a year ago?’
        ‘But yes; every sweet, singular instant of our courtship!’
        ‘Well, Charlie, do you remember what books you were reading
        during our courtship?’
        ‘Is it of importance, my darling?’
        ‘Very.’
        He put himself to it with a scowl. ‘I cannot remember,’ he
        admitted finally. ‘But I shall attempt to recall during the
        evening.’
        ‘I wish you would,’ she urged. ‘Because, well, because I’d like
        you to start reading those books again, those books, whatever
        they were, which you read when first we met. You swept me from
        my feet with your demeanor then. But since, you’ve–changed.’
        ‘Changed?I?’ He drew back as from a cold draft.
        ‘I wish you’d start reading those same books again,’ she
        repeated.
        ‘But why do you desire this?’
        ‘Oh, because.’
        ‘Truly a woman’s reason.’ He slapped his knees. ‘But I shall try
        to please. As soon as I recall, I shall read those books once
        more.’
        ‘And, Charlie, one more thing, promise to read them every day
        for the rest of your life?’
        ‘Your wish, dear lady, my command. Please pass the salt.’
        But he did not remember the names of the books. The long evening
        passed and she looked at her hands, biting her lips.
        Promptly at eight o’clock, she jumped up, crying out, ‘I
        remember!’
        In a matter of instants she was in their car, driving down the
        dark streets to town, into a bookstore where, laughing, she
        bought ten books.
        ‘Thank you!’ said the book dealer. ‘Good night!’
        The door slammed with a tinkle of bells.
        Charlie read late at night, sometimes fumbling to bed, blind
        with literature, at three in the morning.
        Now, at ten o’clock, before retiring, Marie slipped into the
        library, laid the ten books quietly next to Charlie, and tiptoed
        out.
        She watched through the library keyhole, her heart beating
        loudly in her. She was in a perfect fever.
        After a time, Charlie glanced up at the desk. He blinked at the
        new books. Hesitantly, he closed his copy of Samuel Johnson, and
        sat there.
        ‘Go on,’ whispered Marie through the keyhole. ‘Go on!’ Her
        breath came and went in her mouth.
        Charlie licked his lips thoughtfully and then, slowly, he put
        out his hand. Taking one of the new books, he opened it, settled
        down, and began reading.
        Singing softly, Marie walked off to bed.
        He bounded into the kitchen the next morning with a glad cry.
        ‘Hello, beautiful woman! Hello, lovely, wonderful, kind,
        understanding creature, living in this great wide sweet world!’
        She looked at him happily. ‘Saroyan?’ she said.
        ‘Saroyan!’ he cried, and they had breakfast.


