prose_contemporaryRayBradburyArrival and DeparturecutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Arrival and Departure
No day in all of time began with nobler heart or fresher spirit. No morn
had ever chanced upon its greener self as did this morn discover spring
in every aspect and every breath. Birds flew about, intoxicated, and
moles and all things holed up in earth and stone ventured forth,
forgetting that life itself might be forfeit. The sky was a Pacific, a
Caribbean, an Indian sea, hung in a tidal outpouring over a town that
now exhaled the dust of winter from a thousand windows. Doors slammed
wide. Like a tide moving over a town that now exhaled the dust of winter
from a thousand windows. Doors slammed wide. Like a tide moving into a
shore, wave after wave of laundered curtains broke over the piano-wire
lines behind the houses.
And at last the mild sweetness of this particular day summoned forth two
souls, like wintry figures from a Swiss clock, hypnotized, upon their
porch. Mr and Mrs Alexander, twenty-four months locked deep in their
rusty house, felt long-forgotten wings stir in their shoulder blades as
the sun rekindled their bones.
‘Smellthat!’
Mrs Alexander took a drink of air and spun to accuse the house. ‘Two
years! One hundred sixty-five bottles of throat molasses! Ten pounds of
sulfur! Twelve boxes of sleeping pills! Five yards of flannel for our
chests! How much mustard grease? Get away!’ She pushed at the house. She
turned to the spring day, opened her arms. The sun made teardrops jump
from her eyes.
They waited, not yet ready to descend away from two years of nursing
each other, falling ill time and again, accepting but never quite
enjoying the prospect of another evening together after six hundred of
seeing no other human face.
‘Why, we’re strangers here.’ The husband nodded to the shady streets.
And they remembered how they had stopped answering the door and kept the
shades down, afraid that some abrupt encounter, some flash of bright
sun, might shatter them to dusty ghosts.
But now, on this fountain-sparkling day, their health at last
miraculously returned, old Mr and Mrs Alexander edged down the steps and
into the town, like tourists from a land beneath the earth.
Reaching the main street, Mr Alexander said, ‘We’re not so old; we
justfeltold. Why I’m seventy-two, you’re only seventy. I’m out for some
special shopping, Elma. Meet you here in two hours!’
They flew apart, rid of each other at last.
Not half a block away, passing a dress shop, Mr Alexander saw a
mannequin in a window, and froze. There, ah, there! The sunlight warmed
her pink cheeks, her berry-stained lips, her blue-lacquer eyes, her
yellow-yarn hair. He stood at the window for an entire minute, until a
live woman appeared suddenly, arranging the displays. When she glanced
up, there was Mr Alexander, smiling like a youthful idiot. She smiled
back.
What a day! he thought. I could punch a hole in a plank door. I could
throw a cat over the courthouse! Get out of the way, old man! Wait! Was
that amirror? Never mind. Good God! I’m really alive!
Mr Alexander was inside the shop.
‘I want to buy something!’ he said.
‘What?’ asked the beautiful saleslady.
He glanced foolishly about. ‘Why, let me have a scarf. That’s it, a
scarf.’
He blinked at the numerous scarves she brought, smiling at him so his
heart roared and tilted like a gyroscope, throwing the world out of
balance. ‘Pick the scarf you’d wear, yourself. That’s the scarf for me.’
She chose a scarf the color of her eyes.
‘Is it for your wife?’
He handed her a five-dollar bill. ‘Put the scarf on.’ She obeyed. He
tried to imagine Elma’s head sticking out above it; failed. ‘Keep it,’
he said. ‘It’s yours.’ He drifted out the sunlit door, his veins
singing.
‘Sir,’ she called, but he was gone.
What Mrs Alexander wanted most was shoes, and after leaving her husband
she entered the very first shoe shop. But not, however, before she
dropped a penny in a perfume machine and pumped great vaporous founts of
verbena upon her sparrow chest. Then, with the spray clinging round her
like morning mist, she plunged into the shoe store, where a fine young
man with doe-brown eyes and black arched brows and hair with the sheen
of patent leather pinched her ankles, feathered her instep, caressed her
toes, and so entertained her feet that they blushed a soft, warm pink.
‘Madame has the smallest foot I’ve fitted this year. Extraordinarily
small.’
Mrs Alexander was a great heart seated there, beating so loudly that the
salesman had to shout over the sound:
‘If Madame will push down!’
‘Would the lady like another color?’
He shook her left hand as she departed with three pairs of shoes, giving
her fingers what seemed to be a meaningful appraisal. She laughed a
strange laugh, forgetting to say she had not worn her wedding band, her
fingers had puffed with illness so many years that the ring now lay in
dust. On the street, she confronted the verbena-squirting machine,
another copper penny in her hand.
Mr Alexander strode with great bouncing strides up and down streets,
doing a little jig of delight on meeting certain people, stopping at
last, faintly tired, but not admitting it to anyone, before the United
Cigar store. There, as if seven-hundred-odd noons had not vanished,
stood Mr Bleak, Mr Grey, Samuel Spaulding, and the Wooden Indian. They
seized and punched Mr Alexander in disbelief.
‘John, you’re back from the dead!’
‘Coming to the lodge tonight?’
‘Sure!’
‘Oddfellows meeting tomorrow night?’
‘I’ll be there!’ Invitations blew about him in a warm wind. ‘Old
friends, I’vemissedyou!’ He wanted to grab everyone, even the Indian.
They lit his free cigar and bought him foamy beers next door in the
jungle color of green-felt pool tables.
‘One week from tonight,’ cried Mr Alexander. ‘Open house. My wife and I
invite you all, good friends. Barbecue! Drinks and fun!’
Spaulding crushed his hand. ‘Will your wife mind about tonight?’
‘Not Elma.’
‘I’ll come for you at eight o’clock.’
‘Fine!’
And Mr Alexander was off like a ball of Spanish moss blown on the wind.
After she left the store, Mrs Alexander was discovered in the streets of
the town by a sea of women. She was the center of a bargain sale, ladies
clustering in twos and threes, everyone talking, laughing, offering,
accepting at once.
‘Tonight, Elma. The Thimble Club.’
‘Come pick me up!’
Breathless and flushed, she pushed through, made it to a far curb,
looked back as one looks at the ocean for a last time before going
inland, and hustled, lighting to herself, down the avenue, counting on
her fingers the appointments she had in the next week at the Elm Street
Society, the Women’s Patriotic League, the Sewing Basket, and the Elite
Theatre Club.
The hours blazed to their finish. The courthouse clock rang once.
Mr Alexander stood on the street corner, glancing at his watch
doubtfully and shaking it, muttering under his breath. A woman was
standing on the opposite corner, and after ten minutes of waiting, Mr
Alexander crossed over. ‘I beg your pardon, but I think my watch is
wrong,’ he called, approaching. ‘Could you give me the correct time?’
‘John!’ she cried.
‘Elma!’ he cried.
‘I was standing here all the time,’ she said.
‘AndIwas standing over there!’
‘You’ve got a new suit!’
‘That’s a new dress!’
‘New hat.’
‘So is yours.’
‘New shoes.’
‘How doyoursfit?’
‘Mine hurt.’
‘So do mine.’
‘I bought tickets for a play Saturday night for us, Elma! And made
reservations for the Green Town picnic next month! What’s that perfume
you’re wearing?’
‘What’s that cologneyou’vegot on?’
‘Nowonderwe didn’t recognize each other!’
They looked at each other for a long time.
‘Well, let’s get home. Isn’t it a beautiful day?’
They squeaked along in their new shoes. ‘Yes, beautiful!’ they both
agreed, smiling. But then they glanced at each other out of the corner
of their eyes and suddenly looked away, nervously.
Their house was blue dark; it was like entering a cave after the fresh
green spring afternoon.
‘How about a little lunch?’
‘Not hungry. You?’
‘Me neither.’
‘I sure do like my new shoes.’
‘Mine, too.’
‘Well, what’ll we do the rest of the day?’
‘Oh, go to a show, maybe.’
‘After we rest awhile.’
‘You’re nottired!’
‘No, no, no,’ she cried hastily.‘You?’
‘No, no!’ he said quickly.
They sat down and felt the comfortable darkness and coolness of the room
after the bright, glaring warm day.
‘I think I’ll just loosen my shoelaces a bit,’ he said. ‘Just untie the
knots a moment.’
‘I think I’ll do the same.’
They loosened the knots and the laces in their shoes.
‘Might as well get our hats off!’
Sitting there, they removed their hats.
He looked over at her and thought: Forty-five years. Married to her
forty-five years. Why, I can remember…and that time in Mills Valley…and
then there was that other day…forty years ago we drove to…yes…yes. His
head shook. A long time.
‘Why don’t you take off your tie?’ she suggested.
‘Think I should, if we’re going right out again?’ he said.
‘Just for a moment.’
She watched him take off his tie and she thought: It’s been a good
marriage. We’ve helped each other; he’s spoon-fed, washed, and dressed
me when I was sick, taken good care…Forty-five years now, and the
honeymoon in Mills Valley–seems like only the day before the day before
yesterday.
‘Why don’t you get rid of your earrings?’ he suggested. ‘New, aren’t
they? They look heavy.’
‘Theyarea bit.’ She laid them aside.
They sat in their comfortable soft chairs by the green baize tables
where stood arnica bottles, pellet and tablet boxes, serums, cough
remedies, pads, braces and foot rubs, greases, salves, lotions,
inhalants, aspirin, quinine, powders, decks of worn playing cards from a
million slow games of blackjack, and books they had murmured to each
other across the dark small room in the single faint bulb light, their
voices like the motion of dim moths through the shadows.
‘Perhaps I can slip my shoesoff,’ he said. ‘For one hundred and twenty
seconds, before we run out again.’
‘Isn’t right to keep your feet boxed up all the time.’
They both slipped off their shoes.
‘Elma?’
‘Yes?’ She looked up.
‘Nothing,’ he said.
They heard the mantel clock ticking. They caught each other peering at
the clock. Two in the afternoon. Only six hours until eight tonight.
‘John?’ she said.
‘Yes?’
‘Never mind,’ she said.
They sat.
‘Why don’t we put on our woolly slippers?’ he wondered.
‘I’ll get them.’
She fetched the slippers.
They put them on, exhaling at the cool feel of the material.
‘Ahhhhhh!’
‘Why are you still wearing your coat and vest?’
‘You know, new clothesarelike a suit of armor.’ He worked out of the
coat and, a minute later, the vest.
The chairs creaked.
‘Why, it’s four o’clock,’ she said, later.
‘Time flies. Too late to go out now, isn’t it?’
‘Much too late. We’ll just rest awhile. We can call a taxi to take us to
supper.’
‘Elma.’ He licked his lips.
‘Yes?’
‘Oh, I forgot.’ He glanced away at the wall.
‘Why don’t I just get out of my clothes into my bathrobe?’ he suggested,
five minutes later. ‘I can dress in a rush when we stroll off for a big
filet supper on the town.’
‘Now you’re being sensible,’ she agreed. ‘John?’
‘Something you want to tell me?’
She gazed at the new shoes lying on the floor. She remembered the
friendly tweak on her instep, the slow caress on her toes.
‘No,’ she said.
They listened for each other’s hearts beating in the room. Clothed in
their bathrobes, they sat sighing.
‘I’m just theleast bittired. Not too much, understand,’ she said. ‘Just
alittle bit.’
‘Naturally. It’s been quite a day, quite a day.’
‘You can’t justrushout, can you?’
‘Got to take it easy. We’re not young anymore.’
‘That’s right.’
‘I’m slightly exhausted, too,’ he admitted casually.
‘Maybe.’ She glanced at the clock. ‘Maybe we should have a
biteheretonight. We can always dine out tomorrow evening.’
‘A really smart suggestion,’ he said. ‘I’m not ravenous, anyway.’
‘Strange, neither am I.’
‘But, we’ll go to a picture later tonight?’
‘Ofcourse!’
They sat munching cheese and some stale crackers like mice in the dark.
Seven o’clock.
‘Do you know,’ he said, ‘I’m beginning to feel just a trifle queasy?’
‘Oh?’
‘Back aches.’
‘Why don’t I just rub it for you?’
‘Thanks. Elma, you’ve got fine hands. You understand how to massage; not
hard, not soft–but justright.’
‘My feet are burning,’ she said. ‘I don’t think I’ll be able to make
that film tonight.’
‘Some other night,’ he said.
‘I wonder if something was wrong with that cheese? Heartburn.’
‘Didyounotice, too?’
They looked at the bottles on the table.
Seven-thirty. Seven forty-five.
‘Almost eight o’clock.’
‘John!’ ‘Elma!’
They had both spoken at once.
They laughed, startled.
‘What is it?’
‘You go ahead.’
‘No, you first!’
They fell silent, listening and watching the clock, their hearts beating
fast and faster. Their faces were pale.
‘I think I’ll take a little peppermint oil for my stomach,’ said Mr
Alexander.
‘Hand me the spoon when you’re done,’ she said.
They sat smacking their lips in the dark, with only the one small
moth-bulb lit.
Tickety-tickety-tick-tick-tick.
They heard the footsteps on their sidewalk. Up the front-porch stairs.
The bell ringing.
They both stiffened.
The bell rang again.
They sat in the dark.
Six more times the bell rang.
‘Let’s not answer,’ they both said. Startled again, they looked at each
other, gasping.
They stared across the room into each other’s eyes.
‘It can’t be anyone important.’
‘No one important. They’d want to talk. And we’re tired, aren’t we?’
‘Pretty,’ she said.
The bell rang.
There was a tinkle as Mr Alexander took another spoonful of peppermint
syrup. His wife drank some water and swallowed a white pill.
The bell rang a final, hard time.
‘I’ll just peek,’ he said, ‘out the front window.’
He left his wife and went to look. And there, on the front porch, his
back turned, going down the steps, was Samuel Spaulding. Mr Alexander
couldn’t remember his face.
Mrs Alexander was in the other front room, looking out a window,
secretly. She saw a Thimble Club woman walking along the street now,
turning in at the sidewalk, coming up just as the man who had rung the
bell was coming down. They met. Their voices murmured out there in the
calm spring night.
The two strangers glanced up at the dark house together, discussing it.
Suddenly the two strangers laughed.
They gazed at the dim house once more. Then the man and the woman walked
down the sidewalk and away together, along the street, under the moonlit
trees, laughing and shaking their heads and talking until they were out
of sight.
Back in the living room, Mr Alexander found his wife had put out a small
washtub of warm water in which, mutually, they might soak their feet.
She had also brought in an extra bottle of arnica. He heard her washing
her hands. When she returned from the bath, her hands and face smelled
of soap instead of spring verbena.
They sat soaking their feet.
‘I think we better turn in those tickets we bought for that play
Saturday night,’ he said, ‘and the tickets for that benefit next week.
You never can tell.’
‘All right,’ she said.
The spring afternoon seemed like a million years ago.
‘I wonder who that was at the door,’ she said.
‘I don’t know,’ he said, reaching for the peppermint oil. He swallowed
some. ‘Game of blackjack, missus?’
She settled back in her chair with the faintest wriggle of her body.
‘Don’t mind if I do,’ she said.

