                                 
                                   First Day
                                      2002

     It  was  while  he was eating breakfast that Charles Douglas glanced at his
newspaper  and  saw the date. He took another bite of toast and looked again and
put the paper down.
     "Oh, my God," he said.
     Alice, his wife, startled, looked up. "What?"
     "The date. Look at it! September fourteenth."
     "So?" Alice said.
     "The first day of school!"
     "Say that again," she said.
     "The  first day of school, you know, summer vacation's over, everyone back,
the old faces, the old pals."
     Alice studied him carefully, for he was beginning to rise. "Explain that."
     "It is the first day, isn't it," he said.
     "What's  that got to do with us?" she said. "We don't have family, we don't
know any teachers, we don't even have friends anywhere near with kids."
     "Yeah,  but.  .  ." Charlie said, picking up the newspaper again, his voice
gone strange. "I promised."
     "Promised? Who?"
     "The old gang," he said. "Years ago. What time is it?"
     "Seven-thirty."
     "We'd better hurry then," he said, "or we'll miss it."
     "I'll get you more coffee. Take it easy. My God, you look terrible."
     "But  I  just  remembered."  He watched her pour his cup full. "I promised.
Ross  Simpson, Jack Smith, Gordon Haines. We took almost a blood oath. Said we'd
meet again, the first day of school, fifty years after graduation."
     His wife sat back and let go of the coffeepot.
     "This all has to do with the first day of school, 1938?"
     "Yeah,'38."
     "And you stood around with Ross and Jack and what's his-"
     "Gordon!  And we didn't just stand around. We knew we were going out in the
world  and  might not meet again for years, or never, but we took a solemn oath,
no  matter what, we'd all remember and come back, across the world if we had to,
to meet out in front of the school by the flagpole, 1988."
     "You all promised that?"
     "Solemn  promise, yeah. And here I am sitting here talking when I should be
getting the hell out the door."
     "Charlie,"  Alice  said,  "you  realize that your old school is forty miles
away."
     "Thirty."
     "Thirty. And you're going to drive over there and-"
     "Get there before noon, sure."
     "Do you know how this sounds, Charlie?"
     "Nuts," he said, slowly. "Go ahead, say it."
     "And what if you get there and nobody else shows?"
     "What do you mean?" he said, his voice rising.
     "I mean what if you're the only damn fool who's crazy enough to believe-"
     He cut in. "They promised!"
     "But that was a lifetime ago!"
     "They promised!"
     "What if in the meantime they changed their minds, or just forgot?"
     "They wouldn't forget."
     "Why not?"
     "Because  they  were  my  best  pals, best friends forever, no one ever had
friends like that."
     "Ohmigod," she said. "You're so sad, so naive."
     "Is that what I am? Look, if I remember, why not them?"
     "Because you're a special loony case!"
     "Thanks a lot."
     "Well,  it's true, isn't it? Look at your office upstairs, all those Lionel
trains, Mr. Machines, stuffed toys, movie posters."
     "And?"
     "Look at your files, full of letters from I960, 1950, 1940, you can't throw
away."
     "They're special."
     "To  you,  yes.  But  do you really think those friends, or strangers, have
saved your letters, the way you've saved theirs?"
     "I write great letters."
     "Darn right. But call up some of those correspondents, ask for some of your
old letters back. How many do you think will return?"
     He was silent.
     "Zilch," she said.
     "No use using language like that," he said.
     "Is 'zilch' a swearword?"
     "The way you say it, yes."
     "Charlie!"
     "Don't 'Charlie' me!"
     "How about the thirtieth anniversary of your drama club group where you ran
hoping  to  see  some  bubblehead  Sally  or  something or other, and she didn't
remember, didn't know who you were?"
     "Keep it up, keep it up," he said.
     "Oh,  God,"  she  said.  "I don't mean to rain on your picnic, I just don't
want you to get hurt."
     "I've got a thick skin."
     "Yes? You talk bull elephants and go hunt dragonflies." He was on his feet.
With each of her comments he got taller.
     "Here goes the great hunter," he said.
     "Yes," she exhaled, exhausted. "There you go, Charlie."
     "I'm at the door," he said.
     She stared at him.
     "I'm gone."
     And the door shut.
     My GOD, he thought, this is like New Year's Eve.
     He  hit  the gas hard, then released it, and hit it again, and let it slow,
depending on the beehive filling his head.
     Or  it's  like  Halloween,  late, the fun over, and everyone going home, he
thought. Which?
     So  he moved along at an even pace, constantly glancing at his watch. There
was enough time, sure, plenty of time, but he had to be there by noon.
     But  what  in  hell  is this? he wondered. Was Alice right? A chase for the
wild goose, a trip to nowhere for nothing? Why was it so damned important? After
all, who were those pals, now unknown, and what had they been up to? No letters,
no phone calls, no face-to-face collisions by pure accident, no obituaries. That
last,  scratch  that!  Hit  the accelerator, lighten up! Lord, he thought, I can
hardly wait. He laughed out loud. When was the last time you said that? When you
were a kid, could hardly wait, had a list of hard-to-wait-for things. Christmas,
my  God, was always a billion miles off. Easter? Half a million. Halloween? Dear
sweet Halloween, pumpkins, running, yelling, rapping windows, ringing doorbells,
and  the  mask,  cardboard smelling hot with breath over your face. All Hallows!
The  best.  But a lifetime away. And July Fourth with great expectations, trying
to be first out of bed, first half-dressed, first jumping out on the lawn, first
to  light  six-inchers,  first  to  blow  up  the town! Hey, listen! First! July
Fourth. Can hardly wait. Hardly wait!
     But,  back then, almost every day was can-hardly-wait day. Birthdays, trips
to the cool lake on hot noons, Lon Chaney films, the Hunchback, the Phantom. Can
hardly  wait.  Digging ravine caves. Magicians arriving in the long years. Can't
wait. Hop to it. Light the sparklers. Won't wait. Won't.
     He let the car slow, staring ahead across Time.
     Not  far  now, not long. Old Ross. Dear Jack. Special Gordon. The gang. The
invincibles. Not three but four, counting himself, Musketeers.
     He  ran  the  list, and what a list. Ross, the handsome dog, older than the
rest  though  they  were  all  the  same  age, bright but no show-off, bicycling
through classes with no sweat, getting high marks with no care. Reader of books,
lover  of  Fred  Allen Wednesdays radio, repeater of all the best jokes next day
noon.  Meticulous  dresser,  though poor. One good tie, one good belt, one coat,
one pair of pants, always pressed, always clean. Ross. Yeah, sure, Ross.
     And  Jack,  the future writer who was going to conquer the world and be the
greatest in history. So he yelled, so he said, with six pens in his jacket and a
yellow pad waiting to un-Steinbeck Steinbeck. Jack.
     And Gordon, who loped across campus on the bodies of moaning girls, for all
he had to do was glance and the females were chopped like trees.
     Ross, Jack, Gordon, what a team.
     Fast and slow he drove, now slow.
     But  what  will they think of me? Have I done enough, have I done too well?
Ninety  stories, six novels, one film, five plays - not bad. Hell, he thought, I
won't  say, who cares, just shut your mouth, let them talk, you listen, the talk
will be great.
     What  do  we  say first, I mean as soon as we show up, the old gang, by the
flagpole?  Hello?  Hi. My God, you're really here! How you been, what's new, you
okay,  good health? Marriage, children, grandchildren, pictures, 'fess up. What,
what?
     Okay,  he  thought,  you're  the  writer. Make something up, not just hi, a
celebration.  Write  a  poem. Good grief, would they stand still for a poem? How
about,  would  it be too much: I love you, love you all. No. Above and beyond. I
love you.
     He slowed the car even more, looking through the windshield at shadows.
     But  what  if  they  don't  show?  They  will. They must. And if they show,
everything will be all right, won't it? Boys being what they are, if they've had
a  bad life, bad marriages, you name it, they won't show. But if it's been good,
absolutely  incredibly  good,  they'll  show.  That'll  be  the proof, won't it?
They've  done  well so it's okay to remember the date and arrive. True or false?
True!
     He stepped on the gas, sure that they'd all be there. Then he slowed again,
sure  that  they wouldn't. Then stepped on the gas again. What the hell, by God,
what the hell.
     And  he  pulled up in front of the school. Beyond belief, there was a place
to  park,  and  not  many students by the flagpole, a handful at most. He wished
there were more, to camouflage the arrival of his friends; they wouldn't want to
arrive  and  be  seen  right  off,  would  they? He wouldn't. A slow progression
through the noon crowd and then the grand surprise, wouldn't that be the ticket?
     He  hesitated  getting  out of the car until a small crowd emerged from the
school,  young  men  and women, all talking at once and pausing by the flagpole,
which  made  him  happy, for now there were enough to hide latecomers, no matter
what  age.  He  got  out  of  the car and at first did not turn, afraid to look,
afraid  maybe  there'd  be  no  one  there, no one would come, no one would have
remembered, the whole thing was dumb. He resisted the temptation to jump back in
the car and go away.
     The  flagpole was deserted. There were a lot of students around it, nearby,
but nobody right at the flagpole.
     He  stood  staring  at  it  as  if by staring someone would move up, go by,
perhaps touch it.
     His heart slowed, he blinked, and started instinctively to leave.
     When, from the edge of the crowd, a man moved.
     An old man, hair white, step slow, face pale. An old man.
     And then two more old men.
     Oh Lord, he thought, is that them? Did they remember? What's next?
     They  stood in a wide circle, not speaking, hardly looking, making no move,
for the longest time.
     Ross,  he  thought,  is that you? And the next one: Jack, now, yes? And the
final one. Gordon?
     Their  expressions  were  all  the  same.  The same thoughts must have been
moving behind each face.
     Charlie  leaned  forward.  The  others  leaned  forward.  Charlie  took the
smallest  step. The three others took the smallest step. Charlie glanced over at
each face. They did the same, trading glances. And then -
     Charlie  stepped  back.  After  a  long  moment the other men stepped back.
Charlie waited. The three old men waited. The flag blew, softly flapping, on the
high pole.
     A bell rang somewhere inside the school. Lunchtime over. Time to go in. The
students dispersed across the campus.
     With  the  students  moving  away,  with  the crowd leaving so there was no
camouflage,  no  more  cover,  the  four  men stood in a great circle around the
flagpole,  some fifty or sixty feet separating them, the four points of a bright
autumn day compass.
     Perhaps  one of them wet his lips, perhaps one of them blinked, perhaps one
of  them  shuffled one shoe forward, took it back. The white hair on their heads
blew  in the wind. A wind took up the flag on the pole and blew it straight out.
Inside the school, another bell rang, with finality.
     He  felt  his mouth shape words but say nothing. He repeated the names, the
wondrous names, the loving names, in whispers only he could hear.
     He  did not make a decision. His lower body did it in a half turn, his legs
followed, as did his feet. He stepped back and stood sideways.
     Across  a  great  distance,  one by one in the blowing room wind, first one
stranger and then the next followed by the next half-turned, stepped a half step
away, and waited.
     He  felt  his body hesitate and want to move forward and not off toward his
car. Again, he made no decision. His shoes, disembodied, took him quietly away.
     As did the bodies, the feet, and the shoes of the strangers.
     Now he was on the move, now they were on the move, all walking in different
directions,  slowly,  half-glancing  back at the deserted flagpole and the flag,
abandoned, high, flapping quietly, and the lawn in front of the school empty and
inside the moment of loud talk and laughter and the shove of chairs being put in
place.
     They were all in motion now, half-glancing back at the empty flagpole.
     He halted for a moment, unable to move his feet. He gazed back a final time
with  a  tingling in his right hand, as if it wanted to rise. He half-lifted and
looked at it.
     And  then, across sixty or seventy yards of space, beyond the flagpole, one
of the strangers, only half-looking, raised his hand and waved it quietly, once,
on the silent air. Over to one side, another old man, seeing this, did the same,
as did the third.
     He  watched  as his hand and arm slowly lifted and the tips of his fingers,
up  in  the  air, gestured the least small gesture. He looked up at his hand and
over at the old men.
     My God, he thought, I was wrong. Not the first day of school. The last.
     Alice had something frying in the kitchen that smelled good.
     He stood in the doorway for a long moment.
     "Hey," she said, "come in, take a load off your feet."
     "Sure," he said, and went to the dining-room table and saw that it was laid
out  with  the  best  silver  and  the best dinnerware and candles lit that were
usually  lit  for  a  twilight  meal, and the best napkins in place, while Alice
waited in the kitchen door.
     "How did you know I'd be here so soon?" he said.
     "I  didn't,"  she  said.  "I  saw you pull up out front. Bacon and eggs are
quick, be ready in a sec. Sit down?"
     "That's an idea." He held to the back of one chair and studied the cutlery.
"Sit down."
     He  sat  and  she  came  and  kissed  him  on the brow and went back to the
kitchen.
     "Well?" she called.
     "Well, what?"
     "How did it go?" she called.
     "How did what go?"
     "You know," she said. "The big day. All those promises. Did anyone show?"
     "Sure," he said. "Everyone showed," he added.
     "Well, spill the beans."
     She  was  in  the  kitchen  doorway  now,  bringing the bacon and eggs. She
studied him.
     "You were saying?"
     "Was I?" He leaned forward over the table. "Oh, yeah."
     "Well, was there lots to talk about?"
     "We - " 
     "Yes?"
     He saw the waiting and empty plate.
     And tears falling on the plate.
     "God, yes!" he said, very loud. "We talked our heads off!"