prose_contemporaryRayBradburyThe ReincarnatecutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
The Reincarnate
After a while you will get over being afraid. There’s nothing you can
do; just be careful to walk at night.
The sun is terrible; summer nights are no help. You must wait for cold
weather. The first six months are your prime. In the seventh month the
water will seep through with dissolution. By the eighth month your
usefulness will fade. Come the tenth month you’ll lie weeping in sorrow
without tears, and you will know then that you will never move again.
But before that happens there is so much to be finished. Many likes and
dislikes must be turned in your mind before your mind melts.
It is all new to you. You are reborn! And your birthplace is silk lined
and smells of tuberoses and linens, and there is no sound before your
birth except the beating of the earth’s billion insect hearts. This
place is wood and metal and satin, offering no sustenance, but only an
implacable slot of close air, a pocket within the earth. There is only
one way you can live, now. There must be an anger to slap you awake, to
make you move. A desire, a want, a need. Then you quiver and rise to
strike your head against satin-lined wood. Life calls you. You grow with
it. You claw upward, slowly, and find ways to displace the heavy earth
an inch at a time, and one night you crumble the darkness, the exit is
complete, and you burst forth to see the stars.
Now you stand, letting the emotion burn you. You take a step, like a
child, stagger, clutch for support–and find a cold marble slab. Beneath
your fingers the carved story of your life is briefly told: BORN–DIED.
You are a stick of wood, trying to walk. You go outward from the land of
monuments, into twilight streets, alone on the pale sidewalks.
You feel something is left undone. Some flower yet unseen, some place
you must see, some lake waiting for you to swim, some wine unsipped. You
are going somewhere, to finish whatever is still undone.
The streets are strange. You walk through a town you have never seen, a
dream on the rim of a lake. You grow more certain of your walking, you
start to go quite swiftly. Memory returns.
Now you know every lawn of this street, every place where asphalt
bubbled from cement cracks in the summer oven weather. You know where
the horses were tethered, sweating in the green spring at these iron
waterfonts so long ago it is a fading mist in your brain. This cross
street, where a lamp hangs like a bright spider spinning light across
darkness. You escape its web into sycamore shadows. You run your fingers
along a picket fence. Here, as a child, you rushed by with a stick
raising a machine-gun racket, laughing.
These houses, holding their people and memories. The lemon odor of old
Mrs Hanlon who lived here, a lady with withered hands who gave you a
withered lecture on trampling her petunias. Now she is completely
withered like an ancient paper burned.
The street is quiet except for the sound of someone walking. You turn a
corner and unexpectedly collide with a stranger.
You both stand back. For a moment, examining each other, you understand.
The stranger’s eyes are deep-seated fires. He is tall, thin, and wears a
dark suit. There is a fiery whiteness in his cheekbones. He smiles.
‘You’re new,’ he says.
You know then what he is. He is walking and ‘different,’ like you.
‘Where are you going in such a hurry?’ he asks.
‘Step aside,’ you say. ‘I have no time. I have to gosomewhere.’
He reaches out and grasps your elbow firmly. ‘Do you knowwhatI am?’ He
bends close. ‘Do you not realize we are the same? We are as brothers.’
‘I–I have no time.’
‘No,’ he agrees. ‘Nor have I, to waste.’
You try to brush past, but he walks with you. ‘I know where you’re
going.’
‘Yes?’
‘Yes,’ he says. ‘To some childhood place. Some river. Some house. Some
memory. Some woman, perhaps. To some old friend’s bed. Oh, I know, I
know everything about our kind. I know.’ He nods at the passing light
and dark.
‘Do you?’
‘That is always why we lost ones walk. Strange, when you consider all
the books written about ghosts and restless souls–never once did the
authors of those worthy volumes touch upon the true secret of why we
walk. But it’s always for a memory, a friend, a woman, a house, a drink
of wine, everything and anything connected to life and…living!’ He makes
a fist to hold the words tight. ‘Living!Realliving!’
Wordless, you increase your stride, but his whisper follows:
‘You must join me later, friend. We will meet with the others, tonight,
tomorrow, and all the nights until at last, we win!’
‘Who are the others?’
‘The dead. We join against’–a pause–‘intolerance.’
‘Intolerance?’
‘We–the recently deceased, the newly interred–are a minority, a
persecuted minority.Theymake laws against us!’
You stop walking. ‘Minority?’
‘Yes.’ He grasps your arm. ‘Are we wanted? No! We are feared, driven
like sheep into a quarry, screamed at, stoned, like the Jews. It’s
wrong, I tell you, unfair!’ He lifts his hands in fury and strikes the
empty air. ‘Is it fair that we melt in our graves while the rest of the
world sings, laughs, dances? Fair, is it fair, that they love while we
lie cold, that they touch while our hands turn to stone? No! I say down
with them, down! Why should we die? Why not the others?’
‘Maybe…’
‘They slam the earth in our faces and carve a stone to weigh us down.
They bring flowers and leave them to rot, once a year–sometimes not even
that! Oh, how I hate the living. The damn fools! Dancing all night and
loving till dawn, while we are abandoned. Is that right?’
‘I hadn’t thought of it that way…’
‘Well,’ he cries, ‘we’ll fix them.’
‘How?’
‘There are thousands of us gathering tonight in the Elysian grove. I
will lead our army. We will march! They have neglected us for too long.
If we can’t live, then they won’t! Will you come, friend? I have spoken
with many. Join us. Tonight the graveyards will open and the lost ones
will pour forth to drown the unbelievers. You will come?’
‘Yes. Perhaps. But right now I must go. I am looking for
something…Later, later I will join you.’
‘Good,’ he says. You walk off, leaving him in shadow. ‘Good, good,
good!’
Up the hill now, quickly. Thank God the night is cold.
You gasp. There, glowing in the night, but with simple magnificence, the
house where Grandma sheltered and fed her boarders. Inside that grand,
tall house, Saturday feasts happen. Where you as a child sat on the
porch watching skyrockets climb in fire, the pinwheels sputtering, the
gunpowder drumming at your ears from the brass cannon your uncle Bion
fired with his hand-rolled cigarette.
Now, trembling with memory, you know why the dead walk. To see nights
like this. Here, where dew littered the grass and you crushed the damp
lawn, wrestling, and you knew the sweetness of now, now, tomorrow is
gone, yesterday is done, tonight you live!
And here, here, remember? This is Kim’s house. That yellow light around
the back, that’s her room.
You bang the gate wide and hurry up the walk.
You approach her window and feel your stale breath falling upon the cold
glass. As the fog vanishes the shape of her room emerges: things spread
on the little soft bed, the cherrywood floor brightly waxed, and
throw-rugs like heavily furred dogs sleeping there.
She enters the room. She looks tired, but she sits and begins to comb
her hair.
Breathlessly, you press your ear against the cold pane to listen, and as
from a deep sea you hear her sing so softly it is already an echo before
it is sung.
You tap on the windowpane.
But she doesn’t turn; she continues combing her hair gently.
You tap again, anxiously.
This time she puts down the comb and rises to come to the window. At
first she sees nothing; you are in shadow. Then she looks more closely.
She sees a dim figure beyond the light.
‘Kim!’ You cannot help yourself. ‘It’s me! Kim!’
You push your face forward into the light. Her face pales. She does not
cry out; but her eyes widen and her mouth opens as if a terrific
lightning bolt has hit the earth beneath her. She pulls back slightly.
‘Kim!’ you cry. ‘Kim.’
She says your name, but you can’t hear it. She wants to run but instead
she opens the window and, sobbing, stands back as you climb up and into
the light.
You close the window and stand, swaying there, only to find her far
across the room, her face half turned away.
You try to think of something to say, but cannot, and then you hear her
crying.
At last she is able to speak.
‘Six months,’ she says. ‘You’ve been gone that long. When you went away
I cried. I never cried so much in my life. But now youcan’tbe here.’
‘I am!’
‘But why? I don’t understand,’ she says. ‘Why did you come?’
‘I was lost. It was very dark and I started to dream; I don’t know how.
And there you were in the dream and I don’t know how, but I had to find
my way back.’
‘You can’t stay.’
‘Until sunrise I can. I still love you.’
‘Don’t say that. You mustn’t, anymore. I belong here and you belong
there, and right now I’m terribly afraid. It’s been so long. The things
we did, the things we joked and laughed about, those things I still
love, but—’
‘I still think those thoughts. I think them over and over, Kim. Please
try to understand.’
‘You don’t want pity, do you?’
‘Pity?’ You half turn away. ‘No, I don’t want that. Kim, listen to me. I
could come visit you every night, we could talk just like we used to. I
can explain, make you understand, if only you’ll let me.’
‘It’s no use,’ she says. ‘We can never go back.’
‘Kim, one hour every evening, or half an hour, anytime you say. Five
minutes. Just to see you. That’s all, that’s all I ask.’
You try to take her hands. She pulls away.
She closes her eyes tightly and says simply, ‘I’m afraid.’
‘Why?’
‘I’ve been taught to be afraid.’
‘Is that it?’
‘Yes, I guess that’s it.’
‘But I want to talk.’
‘Talking won’t help.’
Her trembling gradually passes and she becomes more calm and relaxed.
She sinks down on the edge of the bed and her voice is very old in a
young throat.
‘Perhaps…’ A pause. ‘Maybe. I suppose a few minutes each night and maybe
I’d get used to you and maybe I wouldn’t be afraid.’
‘Anything you say. You won’t be afraid?’
‘I’ll try not to be.’ She takes a deep breath. ‘I won’t be afraid. I’ll
meet you outside the house in a few minutes. Let me get myself together
and we can say good night.’
‘Kim, there’s only one thing to remember: I love you.’
You climb back out the window and she pulls down the sash.
Standing there in the dark, you weep with something deeper than sorrow.
Across the street a man walks alone and you recognize him as the one who
spoke to you earlier that night. He is lost and walking like you, alone
in a world that he hardly knows.
And suddenly Kim is beside you.
‘It’s all right,’ she says. ‘I’m better now. I don’t think I’m afraid.’
And together you stroll in the moonlight, just as you have so many times
before. She turns you in at an ice-cream parlor and you sit at the
counter and order ice cream.
You look down at the sundae and think how wonderful, it’s been so long.
You pick up your spoon and put some of the ice cream in your mouth and
then pause and feel the light in your face go out. You sit back.
‘Something wrong?’ the soda clerk behind the fountain says.
‘Nothing.’
‘Ice cream taste funny?’
‘No, it’s fine.’
‘You ain’t eating,’ he says.
‘No.’
You push the ice cream away and feel a terrible loneliness steal over
you.
‘I’m not hungry.’
You sit up very straight, staring at nothing. How can you tell her that
you can’t swallow, can’t eat? How can you explain that your whole body
seems to be solid, like a block of wood, and that nothing moves, nothing
can be tasted?
Pushing back from the counter, you rise and wait for Kim to pay for the
sundaes, and then you swing wide the door and walk out into the night.
‘Kim—’
‘It’s all right,’ she says.
You walk down toward the park. You feel her hand on your arm, a long way
off, but the feeling is so soft that it is hardly there. Beneath your
feet the sidewalk loses its solidity. You move without shock or bump, as
if you’re in a dream.
Kim says, ‘Isn’t that great? Smell the lilacs.’
You sniff the air but there is nothing. Panicked, you try again, but no
lilac.
Two people pass in the dark. They drift by, smiling to Kim. As they move
away one of them says, fading, ‘Smell that? Something’s rotten in
Denmark.’
‘What?’
‘I don’t see—’
‘No!’ Kim cries. And suddenly, at the sound of those voices, she starts
to run.
You catch her arm. Silently you struggle. She beats at you. You can
hardly feel her fists.
‘Kim!’ you cry. ‘Don’t. Don’t be afraid.’
‘Let go!’ she cries. ‘Let go.’
‘I can’t.’
Again the word: ‘Can’t.’ She weakens and hangs, lightly sobbing against
you. At your touch she trembles.
You hold her close, shivering. ‘Kim, don’t leave me. I have such plans.
We’ll travel, anywhere, just travel. Listen to me. Think of it. To eat
the best food, to see the best places, to drink the best wine.’
Kim interrupts. You see her mouth move. You tilt your head. ‘What?’
She speaks again. ‘Louder,’ you say. ‘I can’t hear you.’
She speaks, her mouth moves, but you hear absolutely nothing.
And then, as if from behind a wall, a voice says, ‘It’s no use. You
see?’
You let her go.
‘I wanted to see the light, flowers, trees, anything. I wanted to be
able to touch you but, oh God, first, there, with the ice cream I
tasted, it was all gone. And now I feel like I can’t move. I can hardly
hear your voice, Kim. A wind passed by in the night, but I hardly feel
it.’
‘Listen,’ she says. ‘This isn’t the way. It takes more than wanting
things to have them. If we can’t talk or hear or feel or even taste,
what is left for you or for me?’
‘I can still see you and I remember the way we were.’
‘That’s not enough, there’s got to be more than that.’
‘It’s unfair. God, I want to live!’
‘You will, I promise that, but not like this.’
You stop. You turn very cold. Holding to her wrist, you stare into her
moving face.
‘What do you mean?’
‘Our child. I’m carryingourchild. You see, you didn’t have to come back,
you’re always with me, you’ll always be alive. Now turn around and go
back. Believe me, everything will work out. Let me have a better memory
than this terrible night with you. Go back where you came from.’
At this you cannot even weep; your eyes are dry. You hold her wrists
tightly and then suddenly, without a word, she sinks slowly to the
ground.
You hear her whisper, ‘The hospital. Quick.’
You carry her down the street. A fog fills your left eye and you realize
that soon you will be blind.
‘Hurry,’ she whispers. ‘Hurry.’
You begin to run, stumbling.
A car passes and you flag it down. Moments later you and Kim are in the
car with a stranger, roaring silently through the night.
And in the wild traveling you hear her repeat that she believes in the
future and that you must leave soon.
At last you arrive and Kim has gone; the hospital attendant rushed her
away without a good-bye.
You stand there, helpless, then turn and try to walk away. The world
blurs.
Then you walk, finally, in half darkness, trying to see people, trying
to smell any lilacs that still might be out there.
You find yourself entering the ravine just outside the park. The walkers
are down there, the night walkers that gather. Remember what that man
said? All those lost ones, all those lonely ones are coming together
tonight to destroy those who do not understand them.
You stumble on the ravine path, fall, pick yourself up, and fall again.
The stranger, the walker, stands before you as you make your way toward
the silent creek. You look around and there is no one else anywhere in
the dark.
The strange leader cries out angrily, ‘They did not come! Not one of
those walkers, not one! Only you. Oh, the cowards, damn them, the damn
cowards!’
‘Good.’ Your breath, or the illusion of breath, slows. ‘I’m glad they
didn’t listen. There must be some reason. Perhaps–perhaps something
happened to them that we can’t understand.’
The leader shakes his head. ‘I had plans. But I am alone. Yet even if
all the lonely ones should rise, they are not strong. One blow and they
fall. We grow tired.Iam tired…’
You leave him behind. His whispers die. A dull pulse beats in your head.
You leave the ravine and return to the graveyard.
Your name is on the gravestone. The raw earth awaits you. You slide down
the narrow tunnel into satin and wood, no longer afraid or excited. You
lie suspended in warm darkness. You relax.
You are overwhelmed by a luxury of warm sustenance, like a great yeast;
you feel as if you are buoyed by a whispering tide.
You breathe quietly, not hungry, not worried. You are deeply loved. You
are secure. This place where you lie dreaming shifts, moves.
Drowsy. Your body is melting, it is small, compact, weightless. Drowsy.
Slow. Quiet. Quiet.
Who are you trying to remember? A name moves out to sea. You run to
fetch it, the waves bear it away. Someone beautiful. Someone. A time, a
place. Sleepy. Darkness, warmth. Soundless earth. Dim tide. Quiet.
A dark river bears you faster and yet faster.
You break into the open. You are suspended in hot yellow light.
The world is immense as a snow mountain. The sun blazes and a huge red
hand seizes your feet as another hand strikes your back to force a cry
from you.
A woman lies near. Sweat beads her face, and there is a wild singing and
a sharp wonder to this room and this world. You cry out, upside down,
and are swung right side up, cuddled and nursed.
In your small hunger, you forget talking, you forget all things. Her
voice, above, whispers:
‘Dear baby. I will name you for him. For…him…’
These words are nothing. Once you feared something terrifying and black,
but now it is forgotten in this warmth. A name forms in your mouth, you
try to say it, not knowing what it means, only able to cry it happily.
The word vanishes, fades, an erased ghost of laughter in your head.
‘Kim! Kim! Oh,Kim!’

