prose_contemporaryRayBradburyPieta SummercutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Pietà Summer
‘Gosh, I can hardly wait!’ I said.
‘Why don’t you shut up?’ my brother replied.
‘I can’t sleep,’ I said. ‘I can’t believe what’s happening tomorrow. Two
circuses in just one day! Ringling Brothers coming in on that big train
at five in the morning, and Downey Brothers coming by truck a couple
hours later. I can’t stand it.’
‘Tell you what,’ my brother said. ‘Go to sleep. We gotta get up at
four-thirty.’
I rolled over but I just couldn’t sleep because I could hear those
circuses coming over the edge of the world, rising with the sun.
Before we knew it, it was 4:30 A.M. and my brother and I were up in the
cold darkness, getting dressed, grabbing an apple for breakfast, and
then running out in the street and heading down the hill toward the
train yards.
As the sun began to rise the big Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey
train of ninety-nine cars loaded with elephants, zebras, horses, lions,
tigers, and acrobats arrived; the huge engines steaming in the dawn,
puffing out great clouds of black smoke, and the freight cars sliding
open to let the horses hoof out into the darkness, and the elephants
stepping down, very carefully, and the zebras, in huge striped flocks,
gathering in the dawn, and my brother and I standing there, shivering,
waiting for the parade to start, for therewasgoing to be a parade of all
the animals up through the dark morning town toward the distant acres
where the tents would whisper upward toward the stars.
Sure enough my brother and I walked with the parade up the hill and
through the town that didn’t know we were there. But there we were,
walking with ninety-nine elephants and one hundred zebras and two
hundred horses, and the big bandwagon, soundless, out to the meadow that
was nothing at all, but suddenly began to flower with the big tents
sliding up.
Our excitement increased by the minute because where just hours ago
there had been nothing at all, now there was everything in the world.
By seven-thirty Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey had pretty well
got its tents up and it was time for me and my brother to race back to
where the motorcars were unloading the tiny Downey Brothers circus; a
miniature version of the large miracle, it poured out of trucks instead
of trains, with only ten elephants instead of nearly one hundred, and
just a few zebras, and the lions, drowsing in their separate cages,
looked old and mangy and exhausted. That applied to the tigers, too, and
the camels that looked as if they’d been walking a hundred years, their
pelts beginning to drop off.
My brother and I worked through the morning carrying cases of Coca-Cola,
in real glass bottles, instead of plastic, so that lugging one of those
cases meant carrying fifty pounds. By nine o’clock in the morning I was
exhausted because I had had to move forty or more cases, taking care to
avoid being trampled by one of the monster elephants.
At noon we raced home for a sandwich and then back to the small circus
for two hours of explosions, acrobats, trapeze performers, mangy lions,
clowns, and Wild West horse riding.
With the first circus done, we raced home and tried to rest, had another
sandwich, then walked back to the big circus with our father at eight
o’clock.
Another two hours of brass thunder followed, avalanches of sound and
racing horses, expert marksmen, and a cage full of truly irritable and
brand-new dangerous lions. At some point my brother ran off, laughing,
with some friends, but I stayed fast by my father’s side.
By ten o’clock the avalanches and explosions came to a stunned halt. The
parade I had witnessed at dawn was now reversed, and the tents were
sighing down to lie like great pelts on the grass. We stood at the edge
of the circus as it exhaled, collapsed its tents, and began to move away
in the night, the darkness filled with a procession of elephants huffing
their way back to the train yard. My father and I stood there, quiet,
watching.
I put my right foot forward to start the long walk home when, suddenly,
a strange thing happened: I went to sleep on my feet. I didn’t collapse,
I felt no terror, but quite suddenly I simply could not move. My eyes
clamped shut and I began to fall, when suddenly I felt strong arms catch
me and I was lifted into the air. I could smell the warm nicotine breath
of my father as he cradled me in his arms, turned, and began the long
shuffling walk home.
Incredible, the whole thing, for we were more than a mile from our house
and it was truly late and the circus had almost vanished and all its
strange people were gone.
On that empty sidewalk my father marched, cradling me in his arms for
that great distance, impossible, for after all I was a thirteen-year-old
boy weighing ninety-two pounds.
I could feel his difficult gasps as he gripped me, yet I could not fully
wake. I struggled to blink my eyes and move my arms, but soon I was fast
asleep and for the next half hour I had no way of knowing that I was
being toted, a strange burden, through a town that was dousing its
lights.
From far off I vaguely heard voices and someone saying, ‘Come sit down,
rest for a moment.’
I struggled to listen and felt my father jolt and sit. I sensed that
somewhere on the homeward journey we had passed a friend’s house and
that the voice had called to my father to come rest on the porch.
We were there for five minutes, maybe more, my father holding me on his
lap and me, still half asleep, listening to the gentle laughter of my
father’s friend, commenting on our strange odyssey.
At last the gentle laughter subsided. My father sighed, rose, and my
half slumber continued. Half in and half out of dreams, I felt myself
carried the final mile home.
The image I still have, seventy years later, is of my fine father, not
for a moment making anything but a wry comment, carrying me through the
night streets; probably the most beautiful memory a son ever had of
someone who cared for him and loved him and didn’t mind the long walk
home through the night.
I’ve often referred to it, somewhat fancifully, as our pietà, the love
of a father for his son–the walk on that long sidewalk, surrounded by
those unlit houses as the last of the elephants vanished down the main
avenue toward the train yards, where a locomotive whistled and the train
steamed, getting ready to rush off into the night, carrying a tumult of
sound and light that would live in my memory forever.
The next day I slept through breakfast, slept through the morning, slept
through lunch, slept all afternoon, and finally wakened at five o’clock
and staggered in to sit at dinner with my brother and my folks.
My father sat quietly, cutting his steak, and I sat across from him,
examining my food.
‘Papa,’ I suddenly cried, tears falling from my eyes. ‘Oh, thank you,
Papa, thank you!’
My father cut another piece of steak and looked at me, his eyes shining
very brightly.
‘For what?’ he said.

