prose_contemporaryRayBradburyMiss Appletree And IcutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Miss Appletree and I
No one remembered how it began with Miss Appletree. It seemed Miss
Appletree had been around for years. Every time Nora made a bad biscuit
or didn’t put on her lipstick when she came to the breakfast table,
George would laughingly say, ‘Watch out! I’ll run off with Miss
Appletree!’
Or when George had his night out with the boys and came home slightly
eroded and worn away by the sands of time, Nora would say, ‘Well, how
was Miss Appletree?’
‘Fine, fine,’ George would say. ‘But I love only you, Nora. It’s good to
be home.’
As you can see, Miss Appletree was around the house for years, invisible
as the smell of grass in April, or the scent of chestnut leaves falling
in October.
George even described her: ‘She’s tall.’
‘I’m five feet seven in my stocking feet,’ said Nora.
‘She’s willowy,’ said George.
‘I’m spreading a bit with the years,’ said Nora.
‘And she’s fairy yellow in the hair.’
‘My hair is turning mousy,’ said Nora. ‘It used to shine like the sun.’
‘She’s a quiet sort,’ said George.
‘I gossip far too much,’ said Nora.
‘And she loves me blindly, passionately, with not a doubt in her mind or
soul, wildly, insanely,’ said George, ‘as no woman with brains could
ever love a shameful bumbling old drone like me.’
‘She sounds like an avalanche,’ said Nora.
‘But do you know,’ said George, ‘when the avalanche rolls away and life
must go on, I always turn to you, Nora. Miss Appletree is quite
impossible. I always come back to my one and only love, the woman who
doubts I am a God after all, the woman who knows I put my right foot
into my left shoe and is diplomatic enough to give me two right shoes at
a time like that, the woman who realizes that I’m a weather vane in
every wind yet never tries to tell me that the sun rises in the east and
sets in the west, so why am I lost? Nora, you know every pore in my
face, every hair in my ear, every cavity in my teeth; but I love you.’
‘Fare thee well, Miss Appletree!’ said Nora.
And so the years went by.
‘Hand me the hammer and some nails,’ said George one day.
‘Why?’ said his wife.
‘This calendar,’ he said. ‘I’m going to nail it down. The leaves fall
off it like a deck of cards somebody dropped. Good Lord, I’m fifty years
old today! Hand me that hammer quick!’
She came and kissed his cheek. ‘You don’t mind terribly, do you?’
‘I didn’t mind yesterday,’ he said. ‘But today I mind. What is there
about units of ten that so frightens a man? When a man’s twenty-nine
years old and nine months it doesn’t faze him. But on his thirtieth
birthday, O Fates and Furies, life is over, love is done and dead, the
career is up the flue or down the chute, either way. And a man goes
along the next ten, twenty years, through thirty, past forty, on toward
fifty, reasonably keeping his hands off Time, not trying to hold on to
the days too hard, letting the wind blow and the river run. But Good
Lord, all of a sudden you’re fifty years old, that nice round total,
that grand sum and–bang! Depression and horror. Wherehavethe years gone?
Whathasone done with one’s life?’
‘One has raised a daughter and a son, both married young and gone
already,’ said Nora. ‘And proud children they are!’
‘True,’ said George. ‘And yet on a day like this, in the middle of May,
it feels sad, like autumn. You know me, I’m a moody old dog. I’m the son
of Thomas Wolfe, O Time, O River, oh, the grieving of the winds, lost,
lost, forever lost.’
‘You need Miss Appletree,’ said Nora.
He blinked. ‘I need what?’
‘Miss Appletree,’ said Nora. ‘The lady we made up such a long time ago.
Tall, willowy, madly in love with you. Miss Appletree, the magnificent.
Aphrodite’s daughter. Every man turned fifty, every man who’s feeling
sorry for himself and feeling sad needs Miss Appletree. Romance.’
‘Oh, but I have you, Nora,’ he said.
‘Oh, but I’m neither as young nor as pretty as I once was,’ Nora said,
taking his arm. ‘Once in his lifetime, every man should have his fling.’
‘Do you really think so?’ he said.
‘I know it!’
‘But that causes divorce. Foolish old men rushing about after their
youth.’
‘Not if the wife has a head on her shoulders. Not if she understands
he’s not being mean, he’s just very sad and lost and tired and mixed
up.’
‘I know so many men who’ve run off with Miss Appletrees, alienated their
wives and children, and made a mess of their lives.’
He brooded for a moment and then said, ‘Well, I’ve been thinking a lot
of hard thoughts every minute of every hour of every day. One shouldn’t
think of young women that much. That’s not good and it might have some
sort of force of nature and I don’t think I should be thinking that way,
so hard and so intense.’
He was finishing his breakfast when the front doorbell rang. He and Nora
looked at each other and then there was a soft tapping at the door.
He looked as if he wanted to get up but couldn’t force himself, so Nora
rose and walked to the front door. She turned the knob slowly and looked
out. A conversation followed.
He closed his eyes and listened and thought he heard two women talking
out on the front stoop. One of the voices was soft and the other voice
seemed to be gaining strength.
A few minutes later, Nora returned to the table.
‘Who was that?’ he said.
‘A saleslady,’ Nora said.
‘A what?’
‘A saleslady.’
‘What was she selling?’
‘She told me but she talked so quietly that I could hardly hear.’
‘What was her name?’
‘I couldn’t quite catch it,’ said Nora.
‘What did she look like?’
‘She was tall.’
‘How tall?’
‘Very tall.’
‘And nice to look at?’
‘Nice.’
‘What color hair?’
‘It was like sunlight.’
‘So.’
‘So,’ Nora said. ‘Now, I tell you what. Drink that coffee, stand up, go
back upstairs, and get back into bed.’
‘Say that again,’ he said.
‘Drink that coffee, stand up…’ she said.
He stared at her, slowly picked up his coffee cup, drained it, and began
to rise.
‘But,’ he said, ‘I’m not sick. I don’t need to go back to bed this early
in the morning.’
‘You look a little poorly,’ said Nora. ‘I’m giving you an order. Go
upstairs, take off your clothes, and go to bed.’
He turned slowly and walked up the stairs and felt himself taking off
his clothes and lying down in the bed. As soon as his head hit the
pillow, he had to fight not to fall asleep.
A few moments later he heard a stirring in the somewhat dim
early-morning room.
He felt someone lie down in the bed and turn toward him. Eyes shut, he
heard his voice groggily ask, ‘What? Who’s there?’
A voice murmured to him from the next pillow. ‘Miss Appletree.’
‘How’s that again?’ he said.
‘Miss Appletree’ was the whisper.

