prose_contemporaryRayBradburyFly Away HomecutFB2.exe
Programm: cutFB2 v.0.2
Autor: Sven Karsten
Web: sites.google.com/site/svenkarsten/
Fly Away Home
‘Take good care. That’s it, that’s it.’
The cargo was most especially precious. It had been assembled and
disassembled with the tenderest care here at the rocket port and given
over to the workmen in immense packing cases, boxes as large as rooms,
wrapped, double-wrapped, cottoned and serpentined and velveted over to
prevent breakage. For all the tenderness and concern with the cartons
and bales and parceled property, everyone rushed.
‘On the double! Quick now!’
This was the Second Rocket. This was the Relief Rocket. The First Rocket
had leaped up toward Mars the previous day. It was out booming now in
the great black grasslands of space, lost from sight. And this Second
Rocket must follow, as a bloodhound through a haunted moor, seeking a
faint smell of iron and burned atom and phosphor. This Second Rocket, of
a fat, overpacked size and shape, and with an odd and ridiculous series
of people aboard, must not delay.
The Second Rocket was stuffed full. It trembled, shuddered, gathered
itself like the hound of heaven, and bounded with a full and graceful
leap, into the sky. It shook down avalanches of fire in its track. It
rained coals and flame like furnaces suddenly heaven-borne. When the
cinders died on the tarmac-concrete, the rocket was gone.
‘Hope it gets there safely,’ said a psychologist’s aide, watching the
sky.
The First Rocket arrived from a night sky and landed on the planet Mars.
There was a great gasping sound as its machines drank of the cool air.
After sniffing it through mechanical nostrils and lungs, the rocket
pronounced the air of the finest vintage, ten million years old,
intoxicating, but pure.
The rocket men stepped out.
They were alone.
Thirty men and a captain in a land where the wind blew forever across
dust seas and around dead cities that had been dead when Earth was
opening out like a jungle flower three times twenty million miles away.
The sky was immensely clear, like a vat of crystal alcohol in which the
stars blazed without a twinkle. The air knifed the throat and the lungs.
You jerked it in with a gasp. It was thin, a ghost, gone when sought
after. The men felt giddy and doubly alone. Sand moaned over their
rocket. In time, said the night wind, if you stand quietly, I could bury
you, as I did the stone cities and the mummified people hidden there,
bury you like a needle and a few bright bits of thread, before you have
a chance to make a pattern here.
‘All right!’ cried the captain, snapping it up.
The wind blew his voice away, end over end, a scrap of ghostly paper.
‘Let’s make a line there!’ he cried against the loneliness.
The men moved in a numbed series of motions. They collided and milled
and at last found their positions.
The captain faced them. The planet was under and all about them. They
were at the bottom of a dry sea. A tide of years and centuries poured
over and crushed them. They were the only living things here. Mars was
dead and so far away from everything that a trembling began,
imperceptibly, among them.
‘Well,’ cried the captain heartily. ‘Here we are!’
‘Here we are,’ said a ghostly voice.
The men jerked about. Behind them, the walls of a half-buried town, a
town dreamed full of dust and sand and old moss, a town that had drowned
in time up to its highest turrets, tossed back an echo. The black walls
quivered as running water does with sand.
‘You all have your work to do!’ cried the captain.
‘To do,’ said the city walls. ‘To do.’
The captain showed his irritation. The men did not turn again, but the
backs of their necks were cool and each hair felt separate and stirring.
‘Sixty million miles,’ whispered Anthony Smith, a corporal at the end of
the line.
‘No talking there!’ cried the captain.
‘Sixty million miles,’ said Anthony Smith again, to himself, turning. In
the cold dark sky, high above, Earth shone, a star, no more than a star,
remote, beautiful, but only a star. There was nothing in the shape or
the light to suggest a sea, a continent, a state, a city.
‘Let’s have it quiet!’ shouted the captain angrily, surprised at his
anger.
The men glanced down the line at Smith.
He was looking at the heavens. They looked where he looked and they saw
Earth, infinitely removed over a distance of six months of time, and
millions fired upon millions of miles in distance. Their thoughts
whirled. Long years ago, men went to the arctic regions of Earth in
boats, ships, balloons, and airplanes, took with them the bravest men,
handpicked, psychologically clean, alert, the noncrackables, the well
adjusted. But pick as they would, some men cracked, some went off into
the arctic whiteness, into the long nights or the insanity of monthlong
days. It was so alone. It was so alone. And herd-man, cut off from life,
from women, from homes and towns, felt his mind melt away. Everything
was bad and lonely.
‘Sixty million miles!’ said Anthony Smith, louder.
Then take thirty men. Shape, size, box, and parcel them. Antitoxin them,
mind and body, purify and psychoanalyze, clap these hardies in a pistol,
fire it at a target! At the end, in the final accounting, what do you
have? You have thirty men in a line, one man beginning to talk under his
breath, then louder, thirty men gazing up at the sky, seeing at a
distant star, knowing that Illinois, Iowa, Ohio, and California are
gone. Gone the cities, women, children, everything good, comfortable,
and dear. Here you are, by God, on some terrible world where the wind
never stops, where all is dead, where the captain is trying to be
hearty. Suddenly, as if you had never considered it before, you say to
yourself:
‘Good Lord, I’m on Mars!’
Anthony Smith said it.
‘I’m not home, I’m not on Earth, I’m on Mars! Where’s Earth? There it
is! See that damn small pinpoint of light? That’s it! Isn’t it silly?
What’re we doing here?’
The men stiffened. The captain jerked his head at Walton, the
psychiatrist. They went down the line quickly, trying to be casual.
‘All right, Smith, what seems to be the trouble?’
‘I don’t want to be here.’ Smith’s face was white. ‘Good God, why did I
come? This isn’t Earth.’
‘You took all the exams, you knew what you’d be up against.’
‘No, I didn’t. I blocked it off.’
The captain turned to the psychiatrist with a look of irritation and
hatred, as if the doctor had failed. The doctor shrugged. ‘Everyone
makes mistakes,’ he would have said, but stopped himself.
The young corporal was beginning to cry.
The psychiatrist turned instantly. ‘Get to your jobs! Build a fire! Set
up your tents! On the double!’
The men broke, mumbling. They walked off stiffly, looking back. ‘Afraid
of this,’ said the psychiatrist. ‘I was afraid. Space travel’s so new,
damn it. Sodamnnew. No telling how many sixty million miles’ll affect a
person.’ He took hold of the young corporal. ‘Here we are. Everything’s
all right. You’d better get to your job, Corporal. Get busy. Get on the
ball.’
The corporal had his hands to his face. ‘It’s a Christ-awful feeling. To
know we’re so far away from everything. And this whole damn planet is
dead. Nothing else here but us.’
They started him unloading packets of frozen food.
The psychiatrist and the captain stood on a sand dune nearby for a
moment, watching the men move.
‘He’s right, of course,’ said the psychiatrist. ‘I don’t like it,
either. It really hits you. It hits hard. It’s lonely here. It’s awfully
dead and far away. And that wind. And the empty cities. I feel lousy.’
‘I don’t feel so well myself,’ said the captain. ‘What do you think?
About Smith? Will he stay on this side of the cliff or will he fall
over?’
‘I’ll stick with him. He needs friends now. If he falls over, I’m afraid
he’ll take some others with him. We’re all tied together by ropes, even
if you can’t see them. I hope to hell the second rocket comes through.
See you later.’
The psychiatrist went away and the rocket stood on the sea bottom in the
night in the center of the planet Mars, as the two white moons rose
suddenly, like terrors and memories, and flung themselves in a race over
the sky. The captain stood looking up at the sky and Earth burning
there.
During the night, Smith went mad. He fell over into darkness, but took
no one with him. He pulled hard at the ropes, caused terrible secret
panics all night, with screams, shouts, warning of terror and death. But
the others stood firm positioned in the dark, working, perspiring. None
was blown with him to his secret place at the bottom of a long cliff. He
fell all night. He hit in the morning. Under sedatives, eyes shut,
coiled upon himself, he was bunked in the ship, where his cries
whispered away. There was silence, with only the wind and the men
working. The psychiatrist passed extra rations of food, chocolate,
cigarettes, brandy. He watched. The captain watched with him.
‘I don’t know. I’m beginning to think—’
‘What?’
‘Men were never meant to go so far alone. Space travel asks too much.
Isolation, completely unnatural, a form of realistic insanity, space
itself, if you ask me,’ said the captain. ‘Watch out, I’m going balmy
myself.’
‘Keep talking,’ said the doctor.
‘What do you think? Can we stick it out here?’
‘We’ll hold on. The men look bad, I admit. If they don’t improve in
twenty-four hours, and if our relief ship doesn’t show up, we’d best get
back into space. Just knowing they’re heading home will snap them out of
it.’
‘God, what a waste. What a shame. A billion dollars spent to send us.
What do we tell the senators at home, that we were cowards?’
‘At times, cowardice is the only thing left. A man can take only so
much, then it’s time for him to run, unless he can find someone to do
his running for him. We’ll see.’
The sun rose. The double moons were gone. But Mars was no more
comfortable by day than by night. One of the men fired off a gun at some
animal he saw behind him. Another stopped work with a blinding headache,
and retired to the ship. Though they slept most of the day, it was a
fitful sleeping, with many calls on the doctor for sedatives and brandy
rations. At nightfall, the doctor and the captain conferred.
‘We’d better pull out,’ said Walton. ‘This man Sorenson is another. I
give him twenty-four hours. Ditto Bernard. A damn shame. Good men, both
of them. Fine men. But there was no way to duplicate Mars in our Earth
offices. No test can duplicate the unknown. Isolation-shock,
loneliness-shock,severe. Well, it was a good try. Better to be happy
cowards than raving lunatics. Myself? I hate it here. As the man said, I
want to go home.’
‘Shall I give the order, then?’ asked the captain.
The psychiatrist nodded.
‘Jesus, God, I hate to give up without a fight.’
‘Nothing to fight but wind and dust. We could give it a decent fight
with the relief ship, but that doesn’t seem to be—’
‘Captain, sir!’ someone shouted.
‘Eh?’ The captain and psychiatrist turned.
‘Look there, sir! In the sky! The relief rocket!’
This was no more than the truth. The men ran out of the ship and the
tents. The sun was set and the wind was cold, but they stood there,
straining their eyes up, watched the fire grow large, larger, larger.
The Second Rocket beat a drum and let out a long plume of red color. It
landed. It cooled. The men of the First Rocket ran across the sea bottom
toward it, yelling.
‘Well?’ asked the captain, standing back. ‘What does this mean? Do we go
or stay?’
‘I think,’ said the psychiatrist, ‘that we’ll stay.’
‘For twenty-four hours?’
‘For a little longer than that,’ Walton replied.
-   -   *
        They hoisted immense crates out of the Second Rocket.
        ‘Careful! Careful there!’
        They held up blueprints and wielded hammers and pries and
        levers. The psychiatrist supervised. ‘This way! Crate 75? Here.
        Box 067?Here!That’s it. Open ’er up. Tab A into Slot B. Tab B
        into Slot C. Right, fine,good!’
        They put it all up before dawn. In eight hours they assembled
        the miracles out of boxes and crates. They took away the
        serpentines, wax papers, cardboards, brushed and dusted every
        part and portion of the whole. When the time came, the men of
        the First Rocket stood on the outer rim of the miracle, gazed in
        at it, incredulous and awed.
        ‘Ready, Captain?’
        ‘I’ll be damned! Yes!’
        ‘Throw the switch.’
        The captain threw the switch.
        The little town lit up.
        ‘Good Lord!’ said the captain.
        He walked into the single main street of the town.
        It was a street of no more than six buildings on a side, false
        fronts, strung with bright red, yellow, green lights. Music
        played from a half-dozen hidden jukeboxes, somewhere. Doors
        slammed. A man in a white smock emerged from a barbershop, blue
        shears and a black comb in hand. A peppermint-stick pole rotated
        slowly behind him. Next was a drugstore, a magazine rack out
        front, newspapers fluttering in the wind, a fan turning in the
        ceiling, the snakelike hiss of soda water sounding inside. As
        they passed the door they looked in. A girl smiled there, a
        crisp green starched cap on her head.
        A pool hall, with green tables, like jungle glades, soft,
        inviting. Billiard balls, multicolored, triangled, waiting.
        Across the street, a church, with candied-root-beer, strawberry,
        lemon-glass windows. A man there, too, in dark suit, white
        collar. Next to that, a library. Next to that, a hotel. SOFT
        BEDS. FIRST NIGHT FREE. AIR-CONDITIONING. A clerk behind a desk
        with his hand on a silver bell. But the place they were going
        to, that drew them like the smell of water draws cattle across a
        dusty prairie, was the building at the head of the street.
        THE MILLED BUCK SALOON.
        A man with greased, curled hair, his shirtsleeves gartered with
        red elastic above his hairy elbows, leaned against a post there.
        He vanished behind swinging doors. When they hit the swinging
        doors, he was polishing the bar and tipping rye into thirty
        glasses all lined up glittering on the beautiful long bar. A
        crystal chandelier blazed warmly overhead. There was a stairway
        leading up and a number of doors above, on a balcony, and the
        faintest smell of perfume.
        They all went to the bar. They were quiet. They took up the rye
        and drank it straight down, not wiping their mouths. Their eyes
        stung.
        The captain said, in a whisper, to the psychiatrist, standing by
        the door, ‘Good God! The expense!’
        ‘Film sets, knockdowns, collapsibles. A real minister next door
        in the church of course. Three real barbers. A piano player.’
        The man at the yellow-toothed piano began to play ‘St. Louis
        Woman with Your Diamond Rings.’
        ‘A druggist, two fountain girls, a pool-hall proprietor,
        shoeshine boy, rack boy, two librarians, odds and ends, workmen,
        electricians, et cetera. Totals up another two million dollars.
        The hotel isallreal. Every room with bath. Comfort. Good beds.
        Other buildings are three-quarters false front. All of it so
        beautifully constructed, with slots and tabs, a child could put
        up the whole toy-works in an hour.’
        ‘But will it work?’
        ‘Look at their faces, beginning to relax already.’
        ‘Why didn’t you tell me?!’
        ‘Because, if it’d got out, spending money this silly, ridiculous
        way, the papers would’ve jumped me–senators, Congress, God would
        have gotten in the act. It’s silly, damn silly, but itworks.
        It’sEarth. That’s all I care about. It’sEarth. It’s a piece of
        Earth the men can hold in their hand and say, “This is Illinois,
        this is a town Iknew.These arebuildingsI knew. This is a little
        piece of Earth that’s here for me to hold on to until we
        bringmoreof it up and make the loneliness run away forever.”’
        ‘Ingenious, devilish, clever.’
        The men ordered a second rye all around, smiling.
        ‘The men on our ship, Captain, are from fourteen small towns.
        Picked them that way. One of each of these buildings in this
        little street here is from one of those towns. The bartender,
        ministers, grocery-store owner, all thirty of the people on the
        Second Rocket, are from those towns.’
        ‘Thirty?Besidesthe relief crew?’
        The psychiatrist glanced happily at the steps leading up to the
        balcony and the series of shut doors. One of the doors opened a
        trifle and a beautiful blue eye gazed out for a moment.
        ‘We’ll rush in more lights and more towns every month, more
        people, more Earth. Priority on familiarity. Familiarity breeds
        sanity. We’ve won the first round. We’ll keep winning if we keep
        moving.’
        Now the men were beginning to laugh and talk and slap one
        another on the shoulders. Some of them walked out and across the
        street for a haircut, some went to play pool, some to buy
        groceries, some into the quiet church, you could hear organ
        music for a moment just before the piano player here in the
        crystal-chandeliered saloon began ‘Frankie and Johnny.’ Two men
        walked laughingly up the stairs to the doors along the balcony.
        ‘I’m no drinking man, Captain. How about a pineapple malt at the
        drugstore over the way?’
        ‘What? Oh. I was thinking…Smith.’ The captain turned. ‘Back in
        the ship. Do you think–I mean–could we get Smith, bring him
        here, with us, would it do any good, would helikeit, mightn’t it
        make himhappy?’
        ‘We could certainly try,’ said the doctor.
        The pianist was playing, very loud, ‘That Old Gang of Mine.’
        Everybody singing, some of them starting to dance, and the city
        like a jewel blazing in the wilderness, darkness all around.
        Mars lonely, the sky black and full of stars, the wind rushing,
        the moons rising, the seas and old cities dead. But the barber
        pole whirled brightly, and the church windows were the color of
        Coca-Cola and lemonade and boysenberry phosphate.
        The piano was tinkling ‘Skip to My Lou’ half an hour later when
        the captain, the psychiatrist, and a third man walked into the
        drugstore and sat.
        ‘Three pineapple malts,’ said the captain.
        And they sat, reading magazines, turning slowly on the stools,
        until the girl behind the fountain set three beautiful pineapple
        malts at their elbows.
        They all reached for the straws.


