                                  
                           The Dog in the Red Bandana
                                      2010

     Ðàññêàç     áûë    âïåðâûå    îïóáëèêîâàí    â
æóðíàëå Ãèëüäèè ñöåíàðèñòîâ Àìåðèêè "Written By"
(writtenby.com), â ëåòíåì íîìåðå 2010-ãî ãîäà.
     
     The  patient was in the hospital only three long sad days when on a Sunday,
with  all  the  doctors  mostly absent and the nurses off doing something no one
knew, that the remarkable thing happened.
     He  could  hear  the  approach  of  the remarkable event moments before its
arrival  because  of  the  explosions  of  laughter  and  the welcoming cries of
patients far down the hall.
     At long last the remarkable event arrived in the door.
     A  man  stood  there  and  on the end of a leash he held the most beautiful
golden retriever that anyone had ever seen.
     The  retriever  was  incredibly handsome and well groomed and had a look of
bright intelligence and wore around his neck a neatly tied bandana, the color of
blood.
     The dog had been making the rounds at the hospital and rumor had it that on
those days when the dog arrived there was a great joy in all the corridors where
he visited.
     This  seemed only natural and the patient often wondered why there were not
more  such dogs in the world to visit people and raise their spirits and perhaps
make them well.
     The  dog  in  the  blood-red  bandana  hesitated  for a moment at the door,
glanced  in at the patient, and then padded in to stand by his bed for a moment,
waiting to be petted.
     Then,  certain  that  the  patient was feeling better, the dog turned, went
back, and padded down the hall, greeted by glad cries and welcoming shouts.
     It was, indeed, a remarkable event and the patient felt better immediately.
     In  the  following  days  the patient found himself waiting with a peculiar
impatience. He knew not for what, but suddenly realized he wanted the dog in the
red bandana to return; it seemed more important than the arrivals and departures
of the doctors and the irritable attention of the nurses.
     In the next week, the dog visited only once.
     In  the  week  following,  as  the  patient’s  illness persisted, the dog
returned  twice and the entire hospital seemed brighter and finer as a result of
his visit.
     In the third week, for some reason that was never explained, the dog in the
red  bandana  came  every day and walked through the halls with his bright scarf
tied  around  his  neck and with a look of complete sympathy and intelligence in
his handsome face.
     At  the  end  of  the  first month, when the patient began to sense that he
might be released any day, an even more remarkable thing happened:
     Instead of the usual attendant who followed the dog, a man came through who
was almost as remarkable as the dear beast.
     This  man was dressed in a simple khaki suit, but with a red tie around his
neck. He was obviously blind, so indeed the dog had to be leading him.
     This  time, as before, the dog paused in the door and almost pointed to the
patient  who  sat  up  and  leaned  forward, almost as if he expected the dog to
speak.
     Instead, the blind man began a conversation.
     "Sir?” he said, guessing at the identity of the patient. "If someone were
to  ask you of all the beasts, in the sea, on the land, in the air, which of all
these  creatures  is  the most Christian?” The patient, thinking this was some
sort  of  trick,  tried  to  imagine  and  then  replied,  "Are  you speaking of
mankind?”
     The  blind man shook his head gently. "No. Excluding man, which creature is
the most Christian?”
     The  patient studied the dog in the blood-red bandana, sitting in the door,
again noticing his fine intelligence, and then said, "The answer is dogs.”
     The  blind  man  nodded, quietly. "Exactly right. All other creatures live,
but do not know that they live.
     "Cats  are  special  and  fine  and dearly loved, but they exist and do not
truly  know  that  they  exist, as it is with all the other creatures of the air
that  fly,  that  soar, that circle the earth, and all the field beasts who live
but do not know their existence.
     "All  about these creatures of the field and the inhabitants of the sea and
air, death occurs, but they do not know death and they do not grieve.
     "But  dogs not only know what life is, but sense and consider death.” The
patient nodded, for he knew this to be true. He remembered the death of a friend
where  his  dog had grieved long after the friend was gone, and the dog wandered
about the house, crying mournfully, and dwindled away to darkness.
     The  patient  said,  "The  more  I  think  on this, the more remarkable are
dogs.”
     The  blind man raised his eyes to the ceiling and said, "And if dogs should
appear at the gates of Heaven, would they be admitted?”
     "Immediately!”  cried the patient and laughed at his quick response. "For
they are without sin. Mankind would line up behind them to beg for entrance. The
dogs would instantly run to stand by Saint Peter and help admit the sinful beast
called man.
     "So,  to  answer  your  question, of all the creatures in the world who are
most Christian, forgiving, and most loving, dogs can be named with Abu Ben Adam,
lead all the rest.”
     The blind man agreed.
     "Strike your cat and you’ve lost a friend. Hit your dog, which I hope you
will  never  do,  but  nevertheless if you strike him just once in a lifetime he
will stare at you with his tender eyes and say, ‘What’s wrong? What was that
all about? Don’t you know that I love you and forgive you?’ And then he will
turn  first one cheek and then the other and will go on loving you forever. That
is what a dog is.”
     During  all  this,  the  dog in the blood-red bandana sat by the blind man,
looking  at  the  patient  with  the most tender and beautiful stare he had ever
seen.  Listening,  the  dog  did  neither acknowledge the compliments nor ignore
them, but sat quietly in the midst of his beauty.
     Finally,  when  the  dog  felt that the blind man had said his say, the dog
wandered  off  into  the  corridors  of  the  hospital,  and welcoming cries and
laughter could be heard.
     In  the  following  days rumors spread through the hospital that an amazing
number  of  people  were  heading home; people who had lived there for weeks, or
sometimes months, suddenly packed up and left, to the curiosity and amazement of
the  doctors  and  to the whispering wonder of the nurses. Patient after patient
departed  and  the  number of really sick people in the hospital diminished, and
the number of deaths reported, or rumored, sank down to almost zero.
     During  the  fourth  week, lying in bed one night, the patient felt a sharp
pain in his right wrist and took some aspirin, but the pain did not go away.
     During  the  night  he  half-wakened because he felt someone sit on the bed
beside him, but he could not be sure of that.
     Half  drowsy,  he  sensed  a  kind  of  breathing near him and then heard a
strange sound that reminded him of a summer night when he was a child.
     How  beautiful  it  had  been  at  three in the morning, with the moonlight
streaming in through the panes of the window, to hear a beautiful far sound from
the kitchen where the icebox stood.
     In  the  drip-pan  under  the  icebox cold water from the blocks of ice was
trapped below and at three in the morning there was a soft sound of lapping; the
family dog, thirsty, had half-crawled under the icebox and was drinking the cool
clear waters from the fallen ice.
     To  lie  quietly  in bed, listening to that beautiful far sound, was one of
the most touching experiences in his life.
     In  the  middle of remembering or half-dreaming the sound of the lapping of
ice water, the patient thought he felt something move on his wrist.
     It  was  much  like  the  brief licking of a tongue moving to catch the ice
water on that summer night long ago.
     Then he fell asleep.
     When he woke in the morning, the pain in his wrist was gone.
     In  the  following days the dog with the blood-red bandana wandered at will
through the hospital, this time alone; the blind man was long since gone.
     The  dog  seemed  to  know  where  it  was  going  and  came often into the
patient’s room and gazed upon him very quietly for long periods of time.
     They  conversed in their minds; the dog seemed to understand everything the
patient wished to say, even though he never spoke.
     The  dog then wandered off through the hospital and in the days to come the
sounds  of  laughter,  the  shouts, the cries welcoming him, diminished until it
seemed  that  the  hospital  was  growing  empty. Not only did the doctors cease
visiting  on  Sundays,  or  golf  Wednesdays,  but  they seemed not to arrive on
Tuesdays or Thursdays and, finally, hardly at all on Fridays.
     The  echoes in the corridors grew loud and the sounds of breathing from the
far rooms ceased.
     On a final day the patient, feeling alert and sensing that at any moment he
might  arise  and  don  his  clothes without the advice of doctors and then head
home, sat up in bed and called to the high corridors, "Hello! Anyone there?”
     A  long  silence  from  the  quiet  hospital rooms. Again he cried, "Anyone
there?  Hello!”  There  were  only  echoes  from the halls and all the avenues
throughout the entire building stood still.
     Very quietly, the patient began to dress in preparation to leave.
     Finally,  at  three  in  the afternoon, the handsome dog with the blood-red
bandana came padding by in the silent corridor and stood by the door.
     The patient said, "Come in.”
     The dog entered and stood by the bed.
     "Sit,” said the patient.
     The dog sat and gazed at him with great luminous eyes, a tender expression,
a half- smile on his mouth.
     Finally the patient said, "What is your name?”
     The dog studied him with his great luminous eyes.
     His mouth moved just the merest touch and a whisper came forth:
     "Jesus,”said the dog."That is my name. Jesus. What is yours?”
