[[Image]]



TABLE OF CONTENTS


Title Page

Table of Contents

Copyright

The Abominable Snowman

Coming Soon: DRAGONS AT CRUMBLING CASTLE

About the Author

 

 

Clarion Books
215 Park Avenue South
New York, New York 10003

 

Text copyright © 2014 by Terry and Lyn Pratchett
Illustrations copyright © 2014 by Mark Beech

 

_The Abominable Snowman_ was originally published in the “Children’s
Circle” section of the _Bucks Free Press_ in 1969.

 

First U.S. edition, 2014

 

First published in Great Britain in 2014 by Doubleday, an imprint of
Random House Children’s Publishers UK, a Penguin Random House Company.

 

All rights reserved. For information about permission to reproduce
selections from this book, write to Permissions, Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt Publishing Company, 215 Park Avenue South, New York, New York
10003.

 

www.hmhco.com

 

eISBN 978-0-544-63066-6
v1.1214



THE ABOMINABLE
SNOWMAN


[[Image]]

 

There was once a young man called Captain the Honorable Sir Herbert
Stephen Ernest Boring-Tristram-Boring, who was known to his friends as
Bill and was very rich indeed. He was also very bored with living in
London.

One day a man knocked at his door, pushed past Bill’s butler, and asked,
“Are you Captain the Honorable Sir, and so on?”

“That’s me!” said Bill.

“Well, I’m Alfred Tence, the famous explorer,” said the visitor,
brushing a heap of fifty-dollar bills off a chair and sitting down.

“Not the man who walked up the Amazon?”

“I am that man,” said Tence modestly.

“Not the man who rowed from Brighton to Bombay in the bathtub?”

“I am that man,” said Tence, swelling with pride.

“The man who sailed across the Pacific on a raft made from mahogany and
shoelaces, and discovered the lost islands of Odium?”

“No, I wasn’t _that_ man, actually,” said Tence, deflating suddenly.
“That was another man. Anyway, look at this.” He whipped out his wallet
and showed Bill a blurred photograph of a white blob in snowstorm. “Know
what that is?” he asked. “That’s an abominable snowman! If I had twenty
thousand dollars, I could go and capture it,” he added, looking sharply
at Bill.

Bill signaled to the butler. “Give this gentleman twenty thousand
dollars from the jar in the hall,” he said.

 

[[Image]]

 

“Excellent!” cried Tence. “You must come, of course. We start tomorrow
at dawn.”

“Where to? Mount Everest?”

“Nonsense! That’s like Disney World these days—the snowmen are only
found on Ben Drumlin. That’s a real mountain for you. It’s in Chilistan.
I must rush—I’ve got things to do.”

Bill watched him go. “What a strange man, Twist,” he said to his butler.
“But a genius when it comes to exploring, of course. I wonder where he
got that photo.”

“I couldn’t say, sir. Shall I pack?”

“Yes, Twist. I think something warm is called for—hot-water bottles,
long underwear, and so forth. Chuck a lot of money into a suitcase too.”

They had locked up the house and were waiting on the step when Tence
turned up the next morning wearing a blue parka and a hat with a pom-pom
on it. He was followed by a small Chilistanian man—his guide and
interpreter—pulling a suitcase along behind him. There were also a lot
of reporters, asking questions all at once and taking photographs as
they ran up.

Tence waved them aside and shouted at Bill: “Just get a taxi, my boy!”

 

[[Image]]

 

Bill stepped into the road and waved his umbrella.

“Where to, sir?” said the taxi driver as the vehicle pulled up.

“Chilistan, please.”

The taxi driver looked puzzled. “Is that anywhere near Shepherd’s Bush?”
he asked.

“It’s about six thousand miles away. Here’s five thousand dollars to
start with,” said Bill.

The taxi driver paled when he saw all that money. “Right-ho, then,” he
said.

“You can’t go by taxi all the way to Chilistan!” cried Tence. “There’s
an ocean in the way!”

Bill leaned forward and tapped the taxi driver on the shoulder. “I say,
old chap,” he said, “have you got a passport?”

“Yes, sir. I got it when we went to the Costa Lotta for our vacation
last year,” said the taxi driver.

Bill told him to fetch it, so they drove around to the taxi driver’s
house, which was No. 8 Tramway Place, London. He went inside and
reappeared not long afterward followed by a small fat woman in a brown
coat and a velvet hat stuck full of hatpins. She carried two suitcases.

“It’s my wife, sir!” said the taxi driver sadly. “She says she’s not
going to have me gallivanting about abroad without her to keep an eye on
me.”

“Sensible woman!” said Bill. “What is your name, madam?”

“Agnes Glupp,” she said, and curtsied, because she knew a gentleman when
she saw one.

“Twist, just shove the lady’s luggage on the roof. Get in, madam. Are
you a good cook? Splendid! I can’t boil an egg myself.”

“This is all wrong!” cried Tence, almost in tears. “This isn’t the
proper way to go exploring! You can’t just take someone’s wife along!
Madam, there are abominable snowmen, and man-eating plants, and
dangerous mountains and things like that where we’re going!”

Mrs. Glupp just smiled absent-mindedly.

 

∾

 

Mr. Glupp drove down to Dover, and before long they were bowling through
France.

“Head south,” said Bill. “Down to the Costa Lotta—it’s sunny there.”

They drove for ages through cabbage fields. When they reached the Costa
Lotta, it was all blue sea, blue sky, and rich people in swimsuits.

 

[[Image]]

 

“Oh, I remember this,” said Mrs. Glupp.

Bill bought a small villa for them to stay at, and then they all went
down to the beach, where Mr. and Mrs. Glupp waded with their shoes tied
together around their necks—Mr. Glupp even took his coat off. Tence, of
course, was still wearing his fleece-lined explorer’s clothes, which
made people stare.

 

[[Image]]

 

Twist, the butler, bought himself a copy of _The Times,_ his favorite
newspaper, and settled down to read it, while Tence’s Chilistanian guide
said he wanted to stay with the taxi, where he had made himself a home
among the suitcases.

“I say, sir,” said Twist suddenly. “It says here that a party of
Arbrovian gentlemen are climbing Ben Drumlin to look for the abominable
snowman. I thought _we_ were.”

Tence almost exploded. “They’ll get there before us! All my work is in
ruins!”

“Let me see that paper!” said Bill. “Hmm . . . it says here that those
Arbrovians have just set out for Chilistan. I reckon we could get there
before them. Stop crying, Tence. Twist, find me a telephone.”

A moment later he was back and ordered everyone to pile into the taxi.

“Drive to Nasti airport, runway three,” he said to Mr. Glupp.

Fifteen minutes later they were driving up a ramp and through the giant
doors of a cargo plane. The propellers were already spinning.

“How did you arrange this?” gasped Tence.

“I bought it,” said Bill. “That’s the best part of being a
multimillionaire—you don’t have to hang around.”

“Oh! I’ve never been up in the air before,” said Mrs. Glupp. She sat
down and put her hat-pinned hat on the table. Except that it wasn’t a
table. It was the control panel, and she accidentally moved a switch.

“We appear to be moving, sir,” said Twist, the butler. “And sir, there
is a uniformed gentleman running along behind us shouting, ‘Hey,’ sir. I
venture to suggest that he is the pilot, sir.”

The plane trundled along the runway, gathering speed. The wall at the
edge of the airfield was getting very near.

“Has anyone got any suggestions?” asked Tence.

Everyone stood around looking embarrassed. Then Tence’s guide, the small
Chilistanian, leaned forward and cautiously pushed a lever.

The plane left the ground.

He sat down and hit some switches.

“How did he learn to fly an airplane?” asked Bill.

“Search me,” said Tence. “When I first met him, he was driving camels.
He is clearly a man of many talents.”

The plane looped the loop twice, dived under some telephone wires,
climbed straight upward, and settled down flying more or less properly
in the direction of Chilistan. The radio started to crackle frantic
messages from the control tower, but their new pilot ignored them.

Soon they were over the sea, while Mrs. Glupp and Twist prepared lunch
in the galley.

 

[[Image]]

 

 

It took several days to get to Chilistan, because they had to keep
landing to refuel—usually at little desert airstrips, where fuel was
brought to the plane on camels. They also got lost for a while around
Turkey.

“I’ve just remembered something,” said Tence, as the Himalayan mountains
loomed up. “Chilistan hasn’t got an airport.”

“That’s funny,” said Bill. “We seem to be landing.”

 

∾

 

Chilistan is a very small country, mostly tropical jungle, stony desert,
and mountains. The capital city, Chilblaine, lies on the bank of the red
River McPherson, named after the man who claimed to have discovered the
country, and it was toward this that the plane was descending.

Fishermen on the bank were amazed to see it drop out of the clouds, skim
up the river, bounce onto the bank, and come to rest in a thicket of
baza trees.

The doors opened and a small black taxi shot out at great speed. Then
the plane exploded.

“Not a bad landing at all,” said Tence to his guide. “I reckon we’re
ahead of the Arbrovians now.”

Mr. Glupp braked as a small man in a blue suit dashed up to the taxi.
Tence leaped out and shook hands with him, and there started a long
conversation in Chilistanian, which sounded to Bill like a wet finger
being dragged across a window.

“It’s my old friend Godli, the prime minister,” Tence explained to the
others. “He says he’ll give us all the help we need.”

“That’s pretty decent, considering we’ve just set fire to a splendid
thicket of baza trees,” said Bill.

“Yes, but he doesn’t like Arbrovians, because he had an Arbrovian camera
that broke, as far as I can understand it,” said Tence.

“Where is Ben Drumlin?” asked Mrs. Glupp.

Tence pointed.

The mountain rose out of the jungle and went on rising, higher and
higher, until it disappeared into the clouds.

 

[[Image]]

 

“Good heavens,” she said, “and is that snow on top?”

“Some do say it’s sherbet,” said Tence sarcastically. “I don’t think
we’ll have to go more than a third of the way up, though,” he added.
“The abominable snowmen are supposed to live in caves not too far above
the jungle.”

The rest of the day was spent buying warm clothes and hiring porters,
and the tropical night had fallen suddenly, like a brick, when they went
to bed at Chilblaine’s best hotel, La Grande Magnifique Ritz Splendide
Carlton. Twist, the butler, had to sleep in the bathtub.

 

∾

 

Early the next morning they piled into the taxi again, with Twist
driving a truck full of porters and provisions. A small crowd gathered
to see them off, and a brass band played the Chilistan national anthem,
“God Save Us All.”

Then they started off through the forests around Ben Drumlin, the taxi
nosing along tiny tracks between huge trees full of brightly colored
birds. Monkeys swung through the trees and shrieked, and millions of
insects hummed and clicked.

Up and up the foothills of Ben Drumlin went the little convoy, until the
lush forests gave way to pine trees and finally to rocks and stunted
bushes.

The road disappeared. There was nothing for it but to walk. Mr. Glupp
locked the door of his taxi and hid the key in his hat.

“How much farther before we find the abominable snowmen?” asked Bill,
lacing up his climbing boots.

Tence struggled to get his backpack on. “Another two or three thousand
feet,” he said. “That’s where I saw them. By Jove, doesn’t the air smell
good up here!”

“Smells like air to me,” said Mr. Glupp.

“Onward!” cried Tence.

They trudged on up the slopes of Ben Drumlin, singing songs. At last
they came to a little mountain stream that ran tinkling over the stones.
Bill bent down to fill his water bottle and heard a whirring noise.
There was a tiny water wheel in the stream, spinning at great speed.

“And there’s something attached to it,” said Tence. It was a small piece
of parchment. On it were two lines written in Chilistanian, and Tence
translated them:

 

[[Image]]

 

“It’s a joke,” said Bill. “A very old one too.”

“Extremely so, sir,” said Twist, the butler.

“Hmm,” said Tence, tapping the paper. “You know what this is, don’t you?
It’s a Joke Wheel. There must be a Joke Monastery up here—and Joke
Monks.”

He explained: “You see, they think the world was created as a joke, so
everyone should give thanks by having a good laugh. That’s why they tie
jokes to water wheels. Every time the wheel goes around, a joke goes up
to heaven.”

 

[[Image]]

 

“What singular persons,” said Bill. “You mean they spend all their time
telling jokes?”

“Yes. They even get up in the middle of the night to invent some more.”

Someone tapped him on the shoulder. It was a small round man in a blue
robe, with a bald head and a big grin. Slowly he took a custard pie from
one of his voluminous sleeves.

Tence ducked just in time. It hit Twist.

 

[[Image]]

 

It was a curious scene, halfway up the twenty-seventh tallest mountain
in the world. The monk stood there, laughing, while everyone else looked
embarrassed, and Twist stood with custard dripping into his collar. Then
there was a green flash, a popping noise, and the monk was gone.

Twist blew his nose.

“Well!” said Bill. “What a strange man.”

“That was one of them,” said Tence. “I forgot to add that they can do
magic as well.”

 

∾

 

For the rest of that day they wandered on up Ben Drumlin. They saw no
more of the Joke Monks as they hurried on past large stones and bushes,
although, as the stars were coming out, they saw, high on a spur of
rock, a large building.

As they passed it, they could hear a singsong voice telling a joke in
Chilistanian, and a burst of laughter as the monks saw the funny side.

“An odd bunch,” said Bill after they’d pitched camp and were sitting
around the fire. “It can’t be much fun sitting up here all the time
inventing jokes.”

“They enjoy it,” said Tence. “Do you know, they reckon that there are
7,777,777,777,777 jokes in the world, and when they’ve all been told,
the world will come to an end, like switching off a light. There’ll be
no more need for it, see.”

There was silence while everyone sat around thinking, or just watching
the last of the sunset. The moon rose, painting Ben Drumlin’s snowy cap
bright silver. More stars came out.

“Like a light, you say?” asked Bill after a while.

“Yes. Or a burst balloon.”

There was another thoughtful pause, and they all listened to the monks’
laughter floating down from the monastery.

“I wonder how many there are left?”

“Millions,” said Tence reassuringly.

“Eeeeeeeeeee!” screamed Mrs. Glupp, hurtling out of her tent. “There’s a
hairy monster in my sleeping bag.”

“A snowman!” screamed Tence. “Don’t panic!”

[[Image]]

Everyone did, trying to hide behind everyone else as the sleeping bag
came bounding out of the tent, hopped high into the air, and burst.

The thing inside landed on Twist’s head. It sat there, blinking.

“That doesn’t look abominable to me,” said Mrs. Glupp. “It looks rather
sweet.”

It was about the size of a soccer ball, and the same shape, with a white
coat and a small bushy tail. Two button eyes peered out of the fur. Then
it started to cry.

Mrs. Glupp lifted it down off Twist’s head and said something like “Izzo
fwitened by der nasty man? Dere, dere.” Everyone wondered what she was
going on about, but the small snowman seemed to understand.

 

[[Image]]

 

“It must be a baby one,” said Tence.

It coughed and went to sleep. Mrs. Glupp made a bed for it out of
Tence’s backpack, much to his annoyance; then, wondering how the baby
snowman had come to be in their camp, the explorers crawled into their
tents for the night.

Bill dreamed that a Joke Monk was sitting in a bath of custard and
telling the 7,777,777,777,777th joke, which would bring about the end of
the world.

The monk went on telling it regardless of the attempts of Tence to stop
him by throwing sleeping bags at him.

_BANG!_

Bill woke up. Everything had gone dark. Something was treading on his
stomach. _The world has ended,_ he thought.

But no. The tent had just collapsed. Bill squirmed about underneath it
and raised the flap. A scene of utter confusion met his eyes. Tence was
running around waving a gun. Most of the tents had collapsed, and
everyone was shouting.

It turned out that something large and furry had rushed into the camp
and had run off with Twist, the butler. It was also now snowing.

“It must have been a full-grown snowman,” said Tence. “Let’s get after
it! Look at those footprints!” Bill looked. There in the snow were
prints nearly three feet long, each with three toes.

“Er,” he said. “Oh well, I suppose we’d better go.”

The others relit the fire and sat around it in a circle with their backs
to it, on guard, as Tence and Bill, bundled up in thick clothes and
carrying a gun apiece, set out up Ben Drumlin.

The footprints scrambled around rocks, leaped over crevasses, sidled
along narrow ledges, and disappeared, around about lunchtime, into a
cave.

Tence bent down and picked up Twist’s bowler hat. “He’s in there
somewhere,” he said sadly.

“After you, then,” said Bill, who was no fool.

 

[[Image]]

 

They sidled into the cave. Tence took a flashlight out of his pack, but
all they saw by its light were icicles and damp walls.

They tiptoed on, and there was no sound but their breathing.

Suddenly Tence tapped Bill on the shoulder. At least, that’s what Bill
thought, until he realized that Tence was in front of him. What he
thought then can be represented by a little sum. He thought:

 

Tence = in front of me

Therefore he’s not behind me.

Therefore it’s someone else.

+ This is an abominable snowman’s cave.

 

Therefore the person who just tapped me on the shoulder is a—

“Gah!” he screamed, and spun around. It was an abominable snowman, a
large ball of fur over six feet high with the biggest feet Bill had ever
seen. And there were other snowmen behind it.

The leading snowman stepped forward and said something in a language
made up of squeaks and grunts.

“Pardon?” said Bill.

Furry hands gripped them firmly and pushed them along into a cave lit by
candles.

Twist was sitting against one wall, drinking soup out of a bowl.

“Good morning, sir,” he said. “This is a bit presumptuous, isn’t it?
They’ve taken me prisoner.”

Tence and Bill stared around the cave. It was full of abominable
snowmen.

 

[[Image]]

 

The leading snowman stepped forward with a stick in its paw and started
to draw in the dust at Bill’s feet. It carefully drew a series of little
pictures. The first showed a small snowman running out of the cave. The
second was a rough drawing of the explorers’ camp.

 

[[Image]]

 

Then there was a drawing of Twist and the small snowman. The snowman
pointed at the picture and started waving his arms around.

“I may be wrong,” said Tence, “but I think he’s trying to say that
they’re holding Twist hostage until the baby snowman is returned. . . .”

“Yes, but we didn’t kidnap him,” said Bill. “He wandered into our camp.”

The snowman started to draw again. He made it clear that unless Bill
went alone to fetch the little snowman, Tence and Twist would be pushed
down a cliff when the sun went down.

“Oh,” said Tence. “Well, that’s clear enough. Hurry back!”

The snowmen led Bill out of the cave and watched him hurry down the
mountain. He skidded across glaciers, leaped over gaping crevasses, slid
down great drifts of frozen snow, tumbled into icy caves, and, finally,
puffing and panting, and with blue and pink stars bursting inside his
head, he staggered into the camp.

Mrs. Glupp was trying to feed the snowman a sort of porridge made out of
crushed biscuits.

Gasping for breath, Bill grabbed the little furry creature and rushed
back up the slopes of Ben Drumlin. It made frightened squeaking noises
but clung to Bill’s backpack as he climbed sheer cliffs holding on with
nothing but two fingernails and a toe. Finally he reached the cave, just
as the sun began to set.

“Hold everything!” he panted. “Here he is!”

There was a great commotion and the baby was hurried away by some
snowwomen. It was the chieftain’s son, explained Tence.

The chieftain trotted forward and shook Tence’s hand. He pointed at the
camera.

“Pictures!” said Tence. “Of course.”

During the next half hour he took photographs of abominable snowmen
standing in formal groups, abominable snowmen with their arms around
Bill’s shoulders, abominable snowmen wearing Twist’s bowler hat,
abominable snowmen standing on their heads, abominable snowmen jumping
up and down, and abominable snowmen looking serious.*

They didn’t actually look very abominable . . . but Tence seemed happy
enough.

“Just wait till I publish these,” he said. “They’ll make me president of
the Royal Zoological Society for this!”

Then they all shook hands and set off back to their camp. Twist was
thinking relieved thoughts, and Tence was thinking excited thoughts, and
Bill was thinking, _I wonder how long it will be before the Joke Monks
tell the last joke._

They can’t have done it yet, anyway.

 

 

*In one photo, an abominable snowman is making bunny ears behind Tence’s
head with his big paws. This always seems to happen when photos are
taken of groups of people.

 

[[Image]]


More delights from the master!

[[Image]]

 

These fourteen funny and inventive tales feature “characters heroic or
hiss-worthy, pranks and battles aplenty, sly twists on familiar tropes,
and Pratchett’s trademark mix of silly humor and acute moral
commentary.” (_Kirkus Reviews_)

 

“Pratchett’s signature warmth, wit, and intelligence light up these
stories. Highly recommended for reading aloud.” (_Booklist_)

 

Visit www.hmhco.com or your favorite retailer to order the book.



ABOUT THE AUTHOR


SIR TERRY PRATCHETT is the bestselling and multi-award-winning author of
more than fifty novels for children and adults. He wrote his first
published short story when he was thirteen. At seventeen, he went to
work for his local paper, where, in addition to reportage, he also wrote
stories for the paper’s “Children’s Corner.” It is from these pages that
_Dragons at Crumbling Castle_ was created.

Terry Pratchett’s many children’s books include _The Carpet People, The
Wee Free Men,_ and the Printz Honor winners _Nation_ and _Dodger_. His
phenomenally popular books for adults center on his satiric novels about
the fantastical flat planet Discworld.

In 2009, Sir Terry was knighted for “services to literature.” Published
in more than three dozen languages, his books have sold more than 85
million copies (give or take a couple million). He lives in England.

 

www.terrypratchettbooks.com
