m a p s • v o l u m e X n u m b e r 3 • c r e a t i v i t y 2 0 0 0 17

Huxley on Drugs and Creativity

ALDOUS HUXLEY interviewed for _The Paris Review_ (1960), reprinted in

_MOKSHA: ALDOUS HUXLEY’S CLASSIC WRITINGS ON PSYCHEDELICS AND THE
VISIONARY EXPERIENCE_

edited by Michael Horowitz and Cynthia Palmer (Park Street Press, 1999)
Interviewers: Do you see any relation between the stand very clearly the
way that certain specially gifted creative process and the use of such
drugs as lysergic acid people have seen the world. You are actually
introduced

[diethylamide]?

into the kind of world that Van Gogh lived in, or the kind of world that
Blake lived in. You begin to have a direct Huxley: I don’t think there
is any generalization one experience of this kind of world while you’re
under the can make on this. Experience has shown that there’s an drug,
and afterwards you can remember and to some slight enormous variation in
the way people respond to lysergic extent recapture this kind of world,
which certain privi-acid. Some people probably could get direct
aesthetic leged people have moved in and out of, as Blake obviously
inspiration for painting or poetry out of it. Others I don’t did all the
time.

think could. For most people it’s an extremely significant experience,
and I suppose in an indirect way it could help Interviewers: But the
artist’s talents won’t be any the creative process. But I don’t think
one can sit down different from what they were before he took the drug?

and say, “I want to write a magnificent poem, and so I’m going to take
lysergic acid [diethylamide].” I don’t think Huxley: I don’t see why
they should be different.

it’s by any means certain that you would get the result you Some
experiments have been made to see what painters wanted—you might get
almost any result.

can do under the influence of the drug, but most of the examples I have
seen are very uninteresting. You could Interviewers: Would the drug give
more help to the never hope to reproduce to the full extent the quite
lyric poet than the novelist?

incredible intensity of color that you get under the influence of the
drug. Most of the things I have seen are Huxley: Well, the poet would
certainly get an extraor-just rather tiresome bits of expressionism,
which corre-dinary view of life which he wouldn’t have had in any spond
hardly at all, I would think, to the actual experi-other way, and this
might help him a great deal. But you ence. Maybe an immensely gifted
artist—someone like see (and this is the most significant thing about
the Odilon Redon (who probably saw the world like this all experience),
during the experience you’re really not the time anyhow)—maybe such a
man could profit by the interested in doing anything practical—even
writing lyric lysergic acid [diethylamide] experience, could use his
poetry. If you were having a love affair with a woman, visions as
models, could reproduce on canvas the external would you be interested
in writing about it? Of course world as it is transfigured by the drug.

not. And during the experience you’re not particularly in words, because
the experience transcends words and is Interviewers: Here this
afternoon, as in your book, quite inexpressible in terms of words. So
the whole notion _The Doors of Perception_, you’ve been talking chiefly
about of conceptualizing what is happening seems very silly.

the visual experience under the drug, and about painting.

_After_ the event, it seems to me quite possible that it might Is there
any similar gain in psychological insight?

be of great assistance: people would see the universe around them in a
very different way and would be

Huxley: Yes, I think there is. While one is under the inspired,
possibly, to write about it.

drug one has penetrating insights into the people around one, and also
into one’s own life. Many people get tremen-Interviewers: But is there
much carry-over from the dous recalls of buried material. A process
which may take experience?

six years of psychoanalysis happens in an hour—and considerably cheaper!
And the experience can be very Huxley: Well, there’s always a complete
memory of liberating and widening in other ways. It shows that the the
experience. You remember something extraordinary world one habitually
lives in is merely a creation of this having happened. And to some
extent you can relive the conventional, closely conditioned being which
one is, and experience, particularly the transformation of the outside
that there are quite other kinds of worlds outside. It’s a world. You
get hints of this, you see the world in this very salutary thing to
realize that the rather dull universe transfigured way now and then—not
to the same pitch of in which most of us spend most of our time is not
the only intensity, but something of the kind. It does help you to
universe there is. I think it’s healthy that people should look at the
world in a new way. And you come to under-have this experience. •


