 sf Theodore Sturgeon Godbody en calibre 2.42.0, FictionBook Editor
Release 2.6 2.11.2015 e6229d3f-61b7-4e1a-a746-6e56c681544f 1.0 Godbody
Donald I. Fine 1986 0-917657-61-6
Godbody
Theodore Sturgeon
    <p>Introduction</p>
    <p>BY ROBERT A. HEINLEIN</p>

GODBODY—"The Last of the Wine."
And the best.
Sometimes (not often) the last work of an artist, published after his
death, is the capstone of his art, summing up what he had been telling
the world all his life. In writing Godbody Theodore Sturgeon achieved
this crowning statement. Again and again for half a century he has given
us one message. In Godbody he tells us still again, and even more
emphatically, the same timeless message that runs through all his
writings and through all his living acts—a message that was ancient
before he was born but which he made his own, then spoke it and sang it
and shouted it and sometimes scolded us with it:
"Love one another."
Simple. Ancient. Difficult.
Seldom attained.
Early this century, before World War I, I was taught in Sunday school
that Jesus loves us, you and me and everyone, saint and sinner alike.
Then the Kaiser raped poor innocent Belgium, and never again did the
world seem sweet and warm and safe. Today I cannot promise you that
Jesus loves you, but I can assure you that Ted Sturgeon loves you ...
did love you and does today—"does," present tense, because what I still
hold of my childhood faith includes a conviction that Ted did not cease
to be when his worn-out body stopped breathing. It may be that villains
die utterly. But not saints.
In fifty years of storytelling Sturgeon spoke to us of love, again and
again and yet again, without ever repeating himself. One of the marks of
his art was his unique talent for looking at an old situation from a new
angle, one that no one else had ever noticed. He did not imitate (and
could not be imitated) . . . and each of his stories was a love story.
Examples:
"Bianca's Hands." (That one? A story so horrible that editors not only
bounced it but blacklisted the author? Yes, that one.)
"The World Well Lost." (A love story, obviously—one about homosexuals.
But please note that the copyright on it is 1953, many years before "gay
pride" was even whispered, much less shouted. And Ted was not speaking
in defense of himself but out of empathy for others. Ted was not even
mildly homosexual. You can check this for yourself if you wish. I have
no need to; I knew him intimately for more than forty years.)
"Some of Your Blood." (Go back and read it again. Yes, George Smith
makes Count Dracula look like a tenderfoot Scout. But Sturgeon invites
you to look at it from George Smith's angle.)
And so on, story after story for half a century. Some of Sturgeon's
yarns had adventure trappings, or science-fiction gadgets, or
fantasy/weird/horror props, or whodunnit gimmicks or other McGuffins,
but in each, tucked away or displayed openly, you will find some
searching comment on love, a new statement, not something borrowed from
another writer.
In addition to this prime interest Ted was alive to every facet of the
world around him: He had a lifelong passion for machinery; his interest
in music was intense and professional; he delighted in travel; he
relished teaching others what he had learned—but above all and at all
times, waking and sleeping, he loved his fellow humans and expressed it
in all aspects of his life.
I first met Theodore Sturgeon in 1944. He had just returned from the
Caribbean, where he had been a heavy-machinery operator building
airstrips for the U.S. Army Air Force. That job played out in '44; no
more airfields were being built in the Antilles; the emphasis was
shifting to the Pacific Theater. Ted was 4-F, a waste of skin; his draft
board laughed at him. He was not even eligible for limited service.
Rheumatic fever in his high-school days had left him with a heart so
disabled that simply staying alive through each day was a separate
miracle.
That damaged heart not only kept Ted out of military service; ten years
earlier it had robbed him of his dearest ambition: to be a circus
acrobat. In high school, by grueling daily practice, he had transformed
himself from that fabled ninety-pound weakling into a heavily muscled
and highly skilled tumbler, one who could reasonably hope to join
someday the "Greatest Show on Earth/' Then one morning he woke up ill.
He recovered . . . but with a badly damaged heart. A circus career was
out of the question, and many other pursuits were foreclosed. Eventually
his disability forced him into the one career open to anyone whose body
is warm and mind still functioning: free-lance writing.
I once collected notes for an essay—the relation between physical
disability and the literary pursuit; or Shakespeare was 4-F and so was
Lord Byron and Julius Caesar and Somerset Maugham—and what's your
excuse, brother? Was it a queasy itch to see your name in print and a
distaste for hard work? Or was it diabetes (polio, consumption, heart
trouble) and a pressing need to pay the rent?
If we limit the discussion to science fiction, I can recall offhand
several writers who got into the business not from choice but from
physical disability coupled with financial necessity: Theodore Sturgeon,
Robert A. Heinlein, Cleve Cartmill, H. G. Wells, Fletcher Pratt, Daniel
F. Galouye, J. T. Mcintosh. Each on this list wound up as a free-lance
writer through physical limitations that crowded him into it . . . and I
am sure that the list could be much longer, if we but knew.
So what was Sturgeon doing running bulldozers and backhoes and power
shovels? Driving a Daisy Eight is not as easy as driving a car; rassling
a dozer is no job for a man with a bad heart.
The answer is simple: Ted never paid any more attention to his physical
limitations than he was forced to, and in wartime the physical
examination for a civilian employee of the army or navy consisted of
walking past the surgeon, who would then mark the prospect "fit for
heavy manual labor." I am not joking. In World War II, I hired many
civilians for the Navy Field Service; the Army Field Service was not
more demanding than we were—or we would have snatched their prospects
away from them. This was a time when any warm body would do. A typist
was a girl who could tell a typewriter from a washing machine. (Later we
took out the washing machine.)
So Ted built airstrips in broiling sun and 120-degree heat and failed to
drop dead. He outlasted the job and then came to New York.
I think Ted worked for a while for the University of California, in the
Empire State Building, with John W. Campbell, Jr., the editor of
Astounding Science Fiction, as his supervisor. No, I have not jumped my
trolley; at that time the University of California occupied one entire
floor in the Empire State Building. Campbell was supervisor in a
classified section that wrote radar operation and maintenance
manuals—and even the word "radar" was classified; one did not say that
word. (And didn't even think the word "uranium," not even in one's
sleep.)
I am not certain what work Ted did, because in 1944 one did not poke
into another man's classified work. I knew a trifle about this radar
project because I had a radar project of my own, with a touch of
overlap. But Campbell is dead now, and so is George O. Smith and so is
Ted; I can't check. (Ted's wife Jayne can't be certain; I am speaking of
the year she was born.)
As may be, Ted was writing at night for Campbell and sharing lodging
with Jay Stanton, who was both Campbell's assistant supervisor on the
radar writing project and Campbell's assistant editor at Street and
Smith . . . and all three men were part of another project I ran for
OpNav-23, a brainstorming job on antikamikaze measures. (I was wearing
three hats, not unusual then. One tended to live on aspirin and soothing
syrup.)
I had been ordered to round up science-fiction writers for this crash
project—the wildest brains I could find, so Ted was a welcome recruit.
Some of the others were George O. Smith, John W. Campbell, Jr., Murray
Leinster, L. Ron Hubbard, Sprague de Camp, and Fletcher Pratt. On
Saturday nights and Sundays this group usually gathered at my apartment
in downtown Philadelphia.
At my request Campbell brought Sturgeon there. My first impression of
Sturgeon was that no male had any business being that pretty. He was a
golden boy, one that caused comparisons with Michelangelo's David. Or
Baldur. He was twenty-six but looked about twenty. He was tall,
straight, broad-shouldered, and carried himself with the grace of a
tightwire artist. He had a crown of golden curls, classic features and a
sweet, permanent smile.
All this would have been inexcusable had it not been that he was
honestly humble and warmly charming. When others spoke, Sturgeon
listened with full attention. His interest in others caused one to
forget his physical beauty.
My flat was about three hundred yards from the Broad Street Station;
people came to these meetings from Washington, Scarsdale, Princeton, the
Main Line, Manhattan, Arlington, etc.; my place was the most convenient
rendezvous for most of the group. No one could drive a car (war
restrictions), but the trains every thirty minutes on the Pennsylvania
Railroad could get any member of the group there in two hours or less.
It was a good neutral ground, too, for meetings that might include
several officers (lieutenant to admiral), a corporal from OSS, a State
Department officer, one sergeant, civil servants ranging from P-l to
P-6, contractors' employees with clearances up to "top secret" but
limited by "need to know," and civilians with no official status and no
clearance. I never worried about security because there was always one
member of naval intelligence invariably present.
On Saturday nights there would be two or three in my bed, a couple on
the couch and the rest on the living-room floor. If there was still
overflow, I sent them a block down the street to a friend with more
floor space if not beds. Hotel rooms? Let's not be silly; this was 1944.
The first weekend Sturgeon was there he slept on the hall rug, a choice
spot, while both L. Ron Hubbard and George O. Smith were in the overflow
who had to walk down the street. In retrospect that seems like a wrong
decision; Hubbard should not have been asked to walk, as both of his
feet had been broken (drumhead-type injury) when his last ship was
bombed. Ron had had a busy war—sunk four times and wounded again and
again—and at that time was on limited duty at Princeton, attending
military governors' school.
On Sunday afternoon the working meeting was over, and we were sitting
around in my living room. Ron and Ted had been swapping stories and
horrible puns and harmonizing on songs—both were fine vocalists, one
baritone, one tenor. I think it was the first time they had met, and
they obviously enjoyed each other's company.
Ron had run through a burlesque skit, playing all the parts; then Ted
got up and made a speech "explaining" Marxism and featuring puns such as
"Engels with dirty faces" (groan), and ending with "then comes the
Revolution!" At that last word he jumped straight up into the air and
into a full revolution—a back flip. His heels missed the ceiling by a
scant inch, and he landed as perfectly as Mary Lou Retton on the exact
spot on which he had been standing.
This with no warning—which is how I learned that Ted was a tumbler. This
in a crowded room. This with no wind-up. I don't think he could have
done it in a phone booth but he did not have much more room.
Ron Hubbard leaned toward me, said quietly into my ear, "Uh huh, I can
see him now, a skinny kid in a clown suit too big for him, piling out of
that little car with the other clowns and bouncing straight into his
routine."
Ron was almost right.
I think it was a later weekend that we learned of Ted's incredible
ability to produce just from his vocal cords, no props, any sound he had
ever heard—traffic noises, train noises, shipboard noises, animals,
birds, machinery, any accent whatever.
Here is the first one I asked for: A frosty morning, a buzz-saw powered
by a two-cycle engine cranked by a line. Start the engine despite the
freezing weather, then use the saw to cut firewood. The saw hits a nail
in the wood.
I'm sorry I can't offer you a tape. Ted scored a cold four-oh.
Thirty-three years later, in front of a large audience at San Diego
ComiCon, I asked Sturgeon to repeat that buzz-saw routine, defining it
again for him, as he had forgotten ever doing it. He thought for a few
seconds, then did it. Another four-oh.
The second one I demanded was this: A hen lays an egg, then announces
it. The farm wife shoos her off the nest long enough to grab the egg and
replace it with a china egg.
Another perfect score—I do not know when or where Sturgeon coped with
cranky two-cycle engines or with temperamental hens . . . but this farm
boy now speaking can testify that Ted had been there in each case and
could reproduce the sounds as exactly as any equipment from Sony or
Mitsubishi.
I hope that someone somewhere has taped and preserved some of Sturgeon's
jokes in dialect. I would like to hear again the one about the pub in
London where one could get a bit of bread, a bit of cheese, a pint of
bitter, a gammon of Yorkshire ham, a bit of pudding and a go with the
barmaid, all for two and six. Try to imagine all that Was anyone running
a recorder?
Ted's ear was phenomenal and not limited to parlor tricks. Mark Twain
said that the difference between the right word and almost the right
word was the difference between lightning and a lightning bug.
Sturgeon did not deal in lightning bugs.
Exempli gratia:
Godbody is written in multiple first person, a difficult narrative
technique, believe me. Try this experiment. After you read Godbody, open
it up anywhere, read three lines. Note the page number and write down
who, in your opinion, is speaking. Do this several times.
Better yet, have someone help you, so that you do not know where the
sample comes from—beginning, middle or end.
I predict that you will call correctly which of eight characters spoke
each of these small samples.
Yet Sturgeon makes almost no use of spelled-out eccentricities of speech
or other flags to mark his characters. Flagging is mechanical, a device
any hack writer can copy. What Sturgeon does is subtle—each character
has his own voice. How do you know at once who is calling on the
telephone, if the caller is one familiar to you? By the caller's voice,
of course.
How does Sturgeon do this? First let's dissect Paderew-ski's hands to
learn how he played the piano; then we'll dissect Sturgeon's brain to
learn how he could give an imaginary person his own unique voice. Art on
this level resists analysis; the critic who tries it gets egg on his
face.
Godbody—Forget about art and enjoy it.
Some readers will feel that it is XXX-rated pornography. They will have
plenty to go on.
Others will see it as a tender, gentle love story. They'll be right.
Many will find it offensively coarse in language (people of my
generation, especially). It does contain every one of the "seven words
that must never be used on television," plus four or five more that
can't be used but never got on the verboten list.
Others will see that Ted has always used the exact word —always
"lightning," never "lightning bug." Those four-letter shockers are
essential.
Some will complain that Godbody is loaded with sex and violence.
Others may answer that "Hamlet" ("Romeo and Juliet," the Old Testament,
Le Morte d'Arthur) is nothing but sex and violence.
Some will denounce Godbody as baldly sacrilegious. They'll be right.
Others will see it as tenderly and beautifully reverent. And they will
be right.
Others will say, "Yes, it's a great story. But why did he have to stick
so much nudity into it?"
I'll answer that one myself, since it is too late to ask Sturgeon. God
must love skin since he makes so much of it. Covering it with cloth or
leather or fur in the name of "decency" is a vice thought up by dirty
old men; don't blame it on God.
Never mind what anyone says about this book. Read it, enjoy it, reread
it, give it to someone you love. It is our last love letter from a man
who loves all of us. Make the most of it today. Then keep it for a day
when you are downhearted and need what it gives you.
And don't be afraid to love.
—R.A.H, September, 1985
    <p>Dan Currier</p>

It may be that after all this time, and after all that has happened, I
do not remember that first time as it really was. Perhaps I remember it
as it should have been; we do that sometimes, all of us. Whatever I've
added, if I've added anything, was the right touch; the memory is
perfect:
Midmorning, late spring in the Catskills, and the mist burning away, but
still there an underwater-green with the rich new greenness of the
spring-struck trees radiating through it. A broken old stone fence,
green-grey, and at the corner of the two roads, he sat naked. He alone
in all that green universe was red, was reds: fine hair down to his
earlobes copper-orange, slab-sided cheeks picking a ripe-peach-red out
of the bars of sun, gold-red on the down of his chest and lower belly.
He was sitting absolutely boneless, comfortably round-shouldered, and
with his chin gone to bed on his collarbones.
And—maybe this is the part Five added, but it remembers like a real
memory, and I'd like to think it happened that way—around his head flew
a circle of white moths, turned pale, pale apple-green in that light and
amazing against that hair. I stopped the car. I don't think it was
because he was naked.
Because I couldn't help myself, I called to him, "Hey!"
He raised his head, swiftly but not startled, and opened his eyes; then,
as part of a flowing sequence without stopping anywhere, he placed his
hands on the stones and lifted himself and vaulted down, landing lightly
and already walking. Walking, his body moved forward as if on tracks,
not bobbing up and down the way most of the rest of us do. If his
shoulders had been the least bit wider they would have been too wide; if
his body were by a finger's breadth flatter it would have been too flat.
He made no attempt to cover his nakedness and he wasn't displaying it,
either; it just didn't matter to him. The moths whisked away in the wood
as he stepped out in the road.
Then: his eyes. Think back now; in all the talk, in everything you have
read or heard about Godbody, has anyone ever used a color-word for
Godbody's eyes? Someone with hair that color is called a redhead, but
redheads don't have red hair; it's orange or russet or brown-gold, and
you just can't say that this man had red eyes and be right. Cinnamon,
maybe, but that's too brown. Sherry is too yellow, ruby is too red. His
eyes were a rich color, that's all you can say, and warm. He bent to put
his elbows on the edge of the open window of the car and looked in at me
and smiled. "Hi."
What do you say? I didn't know. I tried this: "What you doing, man?"
He took it as a straight question and gave me what was for him a
straight answer. "Bein' a bird."
"What?"
Now you have to believe me: what came next was said with no effort to
make impressions, or to startle. It was only the truth—his truth. "Was a
bird for about an hour," he said. "Tell you something about birds.
People go around all the time sayin', 'Am I a man? Am I a woman, a real
woman?' Lookin' at what they've done, wonderin' if that's what a man
would do. Now, birds: they just birds. The one thing they never do is
say, 'Am I a bird?' "
I laughed. I'm afraid it was a silly little bleat of a laugh, but what
do you say? Now I tried this: "What's your name?"
"Godbody."
"My name's Currier."
He just hung there on the window for the longest time without speaking.
I kept looking at him because in some peculiar way I was afraid not to.
I began to feel that I had to move, so I moved my feet; to turn my head
would have broken something, and that would have been pretty bad. You
don't know what I mean. Neither did I at the time; neither do I now.
At last he touched me. He put his right hand very firmly just where my
neck meets my shoulder. He had to slide his hand part way under my
sports shirt to do it. My reaction was violent but motionless: does that
say anything? The contact evoked a wild desire to do something, and a
jaw-bunched, tooth-gritting effort not to. They canceled out, and it
cost. Then he took his hand away.
"Why did you do that?"
In that straight-answer way of his, he said, " 'Currier' don't say
anything. I wanted to find out who you are."
Again (annoying myself) I produced that stupid bleat. "Who am I, then?"
He straightened up and smiled. "I'll be seeing you again," he said, and
turned and sprang across the ditch and up onto the old wall. He waved
once and dropped down out of sight into the dim green of the wood.
I sat there for some time like a stopped clock; nothing seemed to be
happening inside at all. Perhaps the whole thing was soaking in, slowly.
Then I found myself looking at the corner of the wall where I had first
seen him, with a momentary feeling of disbelief. I actually craned my
head out of the car window to see if he had left any footprints. Then
there were his words, especially the last ones; the little emphasis he
put on one word changed a rubber-stamp phrase like "I'll be seeing you
again" into a message.
Then there was that hand on my shoulder. I sat there trying to resist
the temptation to reach up there and touch the place, for I could feel
that electric contact just as if the hand were still there. I was trying
to resist, I found, because to do so might wipe it away. I should have
known better. It is there to this day. And this resistance brought to
mind that other, the thing I wanted so desperately to do when he touched
me. All I knew then was that it cost, it cost terribly not to do the
thing I wanted to do, but I didn't know what it was. I know now.
In short—I was very upset. I started the car and turned it around. I had
things to do, people to see, but all I wanted then was home, and Liza.
Driving back down the twisting dirt road to the highway, and then
through town, I looked more or less as usual to people I passed, I
suppose; I have a vague recollection of waving to one and smiling at
another; but somehow I knew that there was in me an irreversible change,
and all I could do, over and over again, was to ask myself the special
question I used to guide me in my calling, and by which I judged all my
decisions: "I am ordained a man of God; what has this to do with how I
am behaving?" There was no answer, no matter how often or how intensely
I asked; home and Liza, Liza and home were all that could matter.
The rest I remember less clearly, but more real; I mean, it doesn't have
the crystal perfection in my mind that gives my first glimpse of Godbody
that dreamlike quality. I pulled into the drive and all the way to the
garage doors, so I could go in the back, and went in through the
kitchen. There was a flash of annoyance when I heard a man's voice —only
because of the pressure of wanting to be with Liza alone. It was
Wellen—"Hobo" Wellen they called him, because his name was Hobart, and
certainly not because of anything else about him. Hobo was one of those
people who look tailored even in store-bought jeans, whose teeth are
straighter than they ought to be and whose hair always seems to be blown
exactly into place by any passing wind. People like that always make me
feel too big and clumsy and put-together wrong, and somehow seem to have
easy answers to things which puzzle me all the time.
"Hi, Rev," he said with that bright smile of his. 'Just dropped by to
tell you a funny, and found you gone and a damsel in distress."
"Oh darling, I'm glad you're back." Liza was pink and happy-looking. The
drapes were down from the north windows and lying over the trestle
table. "I just washed the windows and Hobo was trying to help me put the
drapes back up."
"Well, thanks, Hobo," I said.
"It was nothing," Hobo said. "It really was nothing—I couldn't do it.
I'll leave it to you—you can go down on your knees and still reach up
there."
One thing I had learned about Hobo Wellen—never that I can recall, not
once, did he speak to me without at least one reference to my size. He
always made me feel that I had done something ridiculous to grow to
six-four and that I should have known better. I said, "I appreciate it
anyway, Hobo."
"I'll give you the funny," Hobo said, "and then I got to cut out." This
was one of Hobo's pastimes; I can't say I enjoyed it but it apparently
did him some good, and it was harmless, although sometimes his Tunnies'
weren't funny, and sometimes I wished he wouldn't tell them in front of
Liza. When you're a minister you go along with things, though. They say
of some pastors and priests, "He'll take a drink, tell a yarn along with
the rest of us," and this is supposed to make them better at their jobs.
I don't do either one, but I find myself listening all the same, even at
times like this, when I wanted desperately to be doing something else.
This time the funny was about an airplane and the captain's voice
announcing that three of the engines had failed and the plane would
crash. Instant panic, and then someone cried out "Somebody do something
religious!" whereupon a gentleman in the front of the plane rose to his
feet, whipped off his hat and came down the aisle collecting money. Lisa
smiled and I grinned like an ape and clapped him on the shoulder and he
left. That was the other thing about his Tunnies'—they always took a
sidewise swipe at the church.
As soon as he was gone I felt Liza's touch on my arm and realized I had
been staring at the door through which Hobo Wellen had left. The touch
told me it had been a long frozen moment; and what had been going
through my mind during it, I just do not know. A growing, mounting
pressure of some kind, yes, but a pressure of what? Desire, love,
wonder, and was that anger? Why anger? And fear with many faces, not the
least of them the certainty that nothing would ever be the same again,
that I stood on the borders of a new country with a long journey to
make. This part of the fear was not so much the sure knowledge that
there was danger ahead, though I knew there was, for I knew that there
was discovery and excitement and enrichment too; it was the fear of
change, which is a very special thing and perhaps not fear at all, for
life is change, isn't it? And why fear life?
"Dan!"
At last I looked at her; I took her elbows and looked down into her
face, her dear face. Liza is one of those women who is the envy and
despair of all the other women her age; she always had, always would
look younger than she was and younger than all of them. It wasn't only
the small, slender, firm body and the smooth skin and clear eyes; it was
the way she carried herself, the way, when she moved or spoke, she
released energy rather than stoking it up and eking it out like the rest
of us. She kept her masses of blue-fired black hair rolled and folded up
into a gleaming dark helmet and her eyes were not green, as they seemed
to be, but an illuminated blue full of so many flecks of gold that they
seemed to be green.
"Dan—what is it?"
What moves a man to do the things he does? Sometimes he knows before he
does them, sometimes he knows at the time; but what of the times when he
acts not knowing why, not understanding even afterward? She was
frightened, and instead of trying to comfort her, or trying to
understand or explain, I watched my own two hands living a life of their
own, rising to snatch the big pins out of the sides and back of her hair
so that it tumbled down about her shoulders and back.
"Dan!"
Why didn't I comfort her, why didn't I look for one single word to still
the birth of terror in that face? Did I like it? Dan Currier, who, when
he bumbled into hurting someone even a little, was almost obsessed with
efforts at instant consolation? Or was it the certainty that whatever
was going to happen would make up a thousand times over for any distress
on the way?
She was trying to say something: "Dan, I don't know what you're
thinking. If you think I was, if you think he— let me go. Let me go!" or
some such. I kissed her, I corked up her words and her breath with my
mouth. Her eyes, so huge and close, were big enough for me and a dozen
like me to tumble into and drown; I tumbled, I drowned. When I released
her she was crying; I'd seen her cry many times before but never like
this, except maybe that once on the roller-coaster and the other time
when I was in the accident and the radio said I had been killed and they
were mistaken and I walked in the door without a scratch. I said,
"Come." She went with me willingly, bewildered, until she found herself
at the foot of the stairs, and then she held back— not much at all, but
even that little made something explode inside me. I picked her up like
a doll and sprang up the stairs two at a time and crossed the upstairs
hall as if my feet, somehow, weren't touching the floor; but we were at
the top of an arc, having been thrown by some huge force. The bed was a
blaze of gold from the tops of the two wide windows and a floodlight of
sun; there was nothing on it but the bottom sheet, and I dropped her, or
threw her down. She bounced, she screamed; I took her wrist and hauled
her up sitting and broke the two top buttons off the soft denim jacket,
then got hold of the hem and snapped it off over her head. She wore
nothing under it, which was a vast surprise to me; I hadn't known, one
way or the other —how could I? I punched her shoulder with the heel of
my hand and down she went on her back; I snapped her waistband as if it
had been a single thread and snatched her skirt off. Her sandals had
disappeared somewhere along the way, and she lay naked in that glory of
light. I had seen her naked before, of course, but I had never let
myself look at her, really look, and as I got out of my clothes—it
seemed to take forever, but it couldn't have been long, for I tore my
shirt and ripped the zipper in my trousers halfway down; one of my
socks, I found later, was still in its shoe!—I held her pinned down to
the bed in the circle of my vision with her eyes tied to mine in the
center of it. I was breathing deeply but not rapidly at all—strange,
that—while her breath came and went like a pulse, making and losing
shadows between her ribs and the superb taut hollows at the sides of her
belly. And as I held her so, where she lay with her arms crossed over
her breasts and her hips half-turned, one knee drawn up to conceal
herself, something from me —a demand which was not anger, but still was
like a fury —reached out invisible hands and pulled those arms down and
away from her breasts, dropped the small strong hands curled to the
sheet, rolled back the hips, straightened that leg. The sunlight (you
take pictures in your mind at certain moments) slanted down through the
hair on the mound between her legs and tinted the skin under it, making
the clear cream-color radiate up—a wonder. It was all a wonder, even in
the violence and speed of the act itself, frozen forever in the mind,
ready to be retrieved forever after, spellbinding, breathtaking.
Then I was on her, and it was all new: never before in the light, never
before in haste, never before with the eyes and without cover, never
before this smooth opening-up for me, this unimpeded charge and plunge,
for always with Liza and me there was this long patient nudge and press
and slow yielding; if I moved too fast it was dry and hurt her. Her
gateway was completely wet and wanton . . . wanting, which was a glory
too, because nothing, nothing, nothing on earth could have prevented my
deep and total lunge into her at that moment. Then another new thing:
she cried out.
She cried out . . . what was usual with us? We loved each other, Liza
and I, and she never denied me. Who had told me that I must deny us both
as much as I could, and that when it became a pressure we must do what
must be done quickly and in the dark, and, though we embraced and were
happy with it, never discuss it before or afterward? And during it . . .
not a sound. Once—I recall it particularly because it was the first
time—after we had been married a month, Liza gasped and held her breath,
and it was as if both her small hands were magically inside her,
grasping my organ and squeezing it rhythmically. When it subsided she
let out the breath with a long hiss, while her heart thumped my chest
like something frantic, imprisoned. As for me, I demanded of myself a
control that would make me silent as I climaxed; if I caught myself
breathing faster I would instead breathe deeper until it was over. That,
usually, was three or four minutes—sometimes a lot longer if I was tired
or worried—and it was at those times when again I might experience that
extraordinary breath-held tightening grip inside her, like her little
hands; even then she controlled that gasp. But now—she cried out.
She cried out, and here was Dan Currier, professional (obsessional)
consoler: a cry was to be heeded, the affliction of pain was to be
stopped and existing pain consoled. This is everything I was and
everything I meant to be. But now, at my first great delving lunge,
miraculously made swift and easy, she cried out, and I withdrew almost
all the way and lunged again so deep and so hard that it bruised my
pubic bone against hers, and again she cried out, louder. Of course
there was pain, that shattering drive of flesh into flesh and bone
against bone, and my great weight on her and my big arms locked around
her so that the cry was forced out as shockingly as it was driven out by
whatever was moving her. How, then, she could take in enough air to do
what she did 1 can not explain, but she cried out again and again, each
cry like a plucked string, sharply appearing and fading, four, five . .
. seven of them, diminishing. And with each cry, that incredible
gripping inside, but harder, stronger than I had ever known it, so much
so that I could realize, now, that I had not felt those earlier ones,
but merely sensed them.
She was silent at last, and drenched with sweat from head to foot. I
took my weight off her, raising myself on my elbows and placing my hands
on the sides of her face and locking my gaze with hers. In hers I saw
only a great wonder—no fear, no pain—and in this and in the strange
slack slightly swollen new shape of her lips, such love as I have never
known.
I began to move slowly, deeply inside her, and then, like a slow-motion
reenactment of that first great drive, withdrew almost all the way and
pressed inward again, right to the root. Each time I penetrated to that
depth her eyes almost closed, but not quite—not enough to sever the
cable of withness that had been woven between her eyes and mine. We had
never done this in the light before; we had never seen each other
experiencing it; I think that in a deeply important way we had never
seen each other.
She put her arms around me as far as she could, pressing and stroking my
back, and then her legs separated widely and I felt, for the very first
time, her heels locking down against the backs of my thighs: oh, she was
strong! I hadn't known how strong she was.
With a deep and quiet joy I recognized the beginnings of my own climax,
and here again it was new, new. For usually it was a rush upward toward
the final explosion, with perhaps a split-second pause of almost
unbearable sensitivity before the ejaculation—and that was a short
series of electric thumps and a complete fall from whatever heights to
the ever-present here-and-now. Thinking of the way it used to be, a
phrase occurs to me: "I never left home." But now . . .
Now I rode no rockets to a quick burst of color and a cinder-fall. They
say that when a three-hundred-foot tidal wave struck somewhere in the
Pacific, fishermen eleven miles out were unaware of its passage, so
gently and massively were they raised and let down. This is the way I
was carried up to a height I had never before known; it was that
all-but-unbearable point of sensitivity that I had flicked past so many
times before; but this time I rested there forever, while time stopped.
It was from this altitude that my joy-bursts were launched—not the
abrupt sequence of little gouts of relief, but long sibilant syllables
arcing up and out into a universe I had never known existed. Four, five
of them, another, and then an interminable rest on that summit, and then
one more, and then the last.
I had always been silent before; now, I shouted, and while that long
wordless cry issued from me, another voice sounded deep inside me, as
clearly as if another Presence shared the room, shared me, with Liza,
and it said "I am the way and the life. "
Then the great wave let me down, let me down peacefully and easily into
the presence of my wife and my world and a sunshowered here and now.
She whispered my name and said something I knew, but always good to hear
. . . and why she said it at that moment I simply could not understand,
and did not try: "No other man will ever touch me."
I lay where I was, looking at her. Some small something in me was
yammering at me to try to pick up the pieces . . . explain . . .
apologize . . . make some reparation for this terrible conduct. Whatever
it was, I broke it off and threw it away. There was a Tightness about
what had happened that needed no explanation. I smiled, and still deep
in her, moved a little, and only then made a most interesting discovery.
I had just experienced a veritable earthquake of an orgasm, but I was
still rigid and ready. Full of delighted disbelief, I began to move
slowly, gently.
Liza's lips spoke my name again, though somehow she had no breath for
it, and now at last she let her eyes close. Her head tilted back, and
there was born such a smile as I have never seen before. She clasped me
close and moved with me, a kind of slow and knowing dance. Then "Dan!"
she cried, and climaxed, and at the first strong pulse of that inner
grip of hers, I came with her. It began somewhere below the calves of my
legs and flooded upward and spilled into her while my head spun and the
room went dark. "/ am the way and the life. " The voice brought me back
to her; it was my voice, not one from inside my being, underlining a
shout.
"Oh," she said, "twice. Oh, twice."
I had never been happier in my life, and I said so.
"Dan," she asked, "what was it?"
"Godbody," I said, and kissed her. "But don't ask me what I mean. Not
for a while."
    <p>Liza Currier</p>

I felt wonderful that morning, and in those days it frightened me to
feel that way, and I'd much rather not. I put on the soft denim jacket
and skirt and my sandals— that's all. I'd do that sometimes; he never
knew, nobody did, I think, but the soft thick cotton felt so good
against me. It was one of the little things I used to do, had to do,
that made me feel a little guilty and a little, well, courageous and a
lot more alive.
It was a beautiful day, not quite summer yet, with every leaf on every
tree new and unmarked and with that freshly dusted look; late spring
always has been the most troublesome time of year for me. It makes me
feel a little .. . angry, I think is the word. To be a woman and the
minister's wife and live in a town is—oh, it's nice, I mean it's a good
thing to be and to do, but you're never your own person. Your house
belongs to the parish and your time belongs to the work, and things you
say and how you look and where you go are surrounded with little rules
and do's and mustn'ts and can'ts that just don't apply to other people.
So it's a little disturbing to feel late-spring wonderful on a bright
warm morning.
And Hobo Wellen came over, he said to speak to Dan. He knew perfectly
well Dan wasn't home; everybody in town knows that when the car isn't in
the drive, Dan's out, and anyway, the kind of thing Hobo talks to Dan
about is never anything urgent. Really, I get so mad at Dan sometimes;
oh, not mad. He's so good. I get mad at that, I think, not him. It gives
him blind spots. It's hard for him to see that people like Hobo Wellen
are not only superficial, but sometimes destructive. I mean, Dan's under
attack from people like that, and he doesn't seem to know it, and when
you tell him he starts listing the person's good points and makes you
feel uncharitable. You see, Dan really believes that there's good in
every person, every single one; all you have to do is bring it out. He's
made me believe it too, but I also believe that some people are like
mines that have gold in them all right—real gold, too—but it's down so
deep, and surrounded by so much worthless hard rock, and is, when you
get to it, such a little bit, that it's just not worth what it costs to
get to it. I don't argue this with Dan, because it's the one thing we
could never agree on.
Hobo Wellen comes on as Dan's friend, that's what bothers me. He's
bright, you know, he found out very early in the game what sort of man
Dan is. I think he found it out sooner, even, than I did when I first
met Dan. Dan was a construction worker then, with no idea in the world
that he'd ever become a minister, and we were friends, that's all, and
he came to me the day he got his . . . what he calls his "tap on the
shoulder." A lot of things fell together in his mind all at once and he
just knew what he was going to do, and you don't stop Dan once his mind
is made up. He went right back to school and fought it through; it
wasn't easy, and then after he was ordained we were married.
It was during this time that I came to know this special thing about
Dan: he is an absolutely convinced and sincere man, but his convictions
are up for grabs. I mean he is so open, so, well, reachable, that if you
can show him another way, convince him he's wrong, he'll accept your way
completely and discard whatever he's been living by—discard it
completely no matter what it costs him or anyone else. Which isn't to
say that he's weak or vacillating—far from it.
All I mean is he's wide open and willing to test what he believes
against all comers, because that's what keeps him sure he's doing the
right thing. If you come along with something better, he'll accept
it—but it had better be better.
Hobo Wellen picked this up fast, and maybe it was some kind of challenge
to him, I don't know. He was willing to waste hours of Dan's time
forcing Dan to defend some of the more awful things the Church has
done—hanging witches, the Inquisition, things like that that don't
matter any more—and things in the Bible that contradict one another. And
dear sweet Dan would take each one as it came and deal with it
seriously, never realizing that people like Hobo aren't serious about
what they're saying, only what they're doing, which is to take down what
other people have built. Maybe it was all because Dan was so big—Hobo is
not a tall man. He has nice hair and good teeth and he always looks well
dressed no matter what he's wearing, but next to Dan he looks like a
bobcat next to a bear.
Anyway he came in that morning—when you're a minister's wife, everybody
can come in—and I was washing the windows in the living room. He flopped
down in the big chair and watched me; he had a way of watching rather
than looking at you. He made me feel naked ... it was more than that; he
and late spring and clean warm air and sunlight all got together to make
me feel, down deep inside, that I wished I was naked. He talked that
way, too . . . it's hard to explain, but he could be saying one thing to
you with words and all the while sending something else with his eyes;
and that something else is not the kind of thing a married woman wants
to be listening to. Not this married woman, anyway. I'd got it all
straight with myself and with Dan and with being a minister's wife, and
it hadn't been all that easy to do, and I didn't want it attacked.
So Hobo Wellen lay back in the big chair and watched me, talking easily,
which wasn't bad, and sometimes falling silent, which was a whole lot
worse. I was using a squeegee on a stick, and he made no effort to help
. . . well, I wouldn't have wanted him to. But then while I was reaching
up to do the top pane, I flicked a glance back over my shoulder and saw
how he was watching the backs of my legs. Before I knew it I had knocked
against the curtain rod with the squeegee and down came the whole array
of fully lined double drapes. I must have caught at them as they fell,
because one of the little L-hooks got bent, but I didn't see that at
first.
Hobo jumped up and crossed to me. "Can I help?" He pointed up to the
L-hook—not the bent one—and said, "All we have to do is hook it back up
there." A stupid, obvious thing to say, but Hobo Wellen is neither
stupid nor obvious. It was the old diversion-of-attention thing that
every parlor magician knows. He pointed and I looked, and with his other
hand he touched the small of my back.
It made me furious, because in one split second I knew what he was doing
and what he had been doing. He'd been lying in that chair watching me
work and wondering if I was wearing a bra—with me it isn't easy to tell
because I don't sag and I'm not all that big. And he used this cheap
trick to put his hand on my back and see if he could feel the strap. All
right, now he knew, and I was wildly angry on a lot of counts: that he
should find it out, that he should have done it so smoothly and without
warning, that he knew . . . and I had to wonder what he thought of it
and of me, and what he might say to me or to someone else, and what
might come of that, and it made me angry to have to worry about those
things too—not the things themselves, you see, but having to worry about
them. And it all had to do with the choices you make, and not being able
to live more than one life at a time except in your head, and being a
minister's wife and the do's and don'ts and mustn'ts and ... I snapped
at him, "No, I don't need your help," and I hopped up on the table and
picked up the rod with the heavy drapes. I got them on the one hook, and
that was when I found out the other was bent.
I hung the rod and it dropped, and I caught it and hung it again and it
dropped, and my arms were getting too tired and Hobo was standing very
close by the table, looking up at me and knowing I wasn't wearing
anything under my jacket. Then all of a sudden he shouted and grabbed me
around the hips—it really wasn't until afterward that I realized that he
grabbed me before I started to fall, that he made me fall. There was no
way for me to go but right into him; I hung there half-balanced with his
arms around my hips and his face thrust into my lower belly. He exhaled
deeply, and I could feel his hot breath warming my most private self; my
head spun ... it was all flashes of Dan and how controlled he was,
mixing loving up with decisions about good and evil . . . the spring
sunlight, the do's and don'ts and the Tuesday Club tea for the Building
Fund.
I don't know how long it lasted, poised, held there full of lightnings,
ready to fall . . . and then he lifted me down and I pushed away from
him, hard, feeling his hands still on me though they were gone, feeling
his breath on my body though it was gone too; and there was the scrunch
and chatter of Dan's wheels in the drive.
Hobo Wellen stood back and gave me a perfectly knowing smile. "That was
a close one, wasn't it?" he said.
"Not really," I said sharply, but it was, it was; and then there was
Dan, dear great cloud of clumsiness, bumping the side of the door with
one big shoulder as he came in, the way he almost always did. I blurted
something to him about the drapes and Hobo helping me; oh, damn it, I
felt I had to explain things, I felt guilty, but I hadn't done anything.
Had I?
Then there was some of Hobo's silliness, a story about an airplane
crash, and as usual it was an attack, and as usual Dan didn't seem to
see that. It was while Hobo was telling it that I realized there was
something different about Dan. He seemed to be listening, but he wasn't;
he was caught up in something ... I kept looking at him: Good? Bad? Oh
God, was he angry?
Then Hobo finished and left, and Dan stood there looking after him with
the strangest intent expression on his face. "Dan!" But he didn't hear
me. He really didn't hear me at all. Why was he looking at that empty
space where Hobo Wellen had just been? Why didn't he look at me?
I went to him and touched his arm. He stood still for a moment as if he
had something to finish first, and then he turned and looked at me. Oh,
did he look at me!
What was he seeing? Drilling down into me like that, his eyes surely
could see it all: Hobo Wellen, the touch and feel of him, the pressures
of spring, the wild-wanting nameless things I had always felt but which
had always to be suppressed, and the guilt they generated, guilt for
things I had not done and would not, would not do . . . would I? . . .
all the things he couldn't have known about but certainly could see now.
And the expression on his face—was it anger? Could Dan Currier, of all
people, be a jealous husband like those idiots in the movies, and
jealous because of anything I had done or ... or was? I began to be
frightened. "Dan—what is it?"
He did not, would not answer; instead he brought up his hands and pulled
the pins from my hair so that it tumbled down. I was frightened; he
wouldn't say anything, and he had never done anything like this
before—never. It was Wellen, then. Dan thought . . . Dan thought ... I
started to say something: "Dan, I don't know what you're thinking. If
you think it was, if you think he ... " He was holding me so hard, so
steadily; his hands were like manacles. It wasn't fright any more, it
was terror.
"Let me go, let me go!" but he stopped my words, my mouth, my breath, my
heart with a kiss. How can you live for years with a man without knowing
he can kiss like that? And not for a second did he let me go with his
eyes, so big and close they filled the world, they filled me. He
released me, all but one hand, and said, "Come." I was crying, I
couldn't see; he began to lead me. Then I realized I was at the foot of
the stairs, and I held back.
What happened then is hard to recall, hard even to believe. It was as if
Dan picked me up from the corner of the living room where the stairs are
and in one motion threw me on the bed in the second-floor bedroom—one
great long breathtaking swoop. And it was a blaze of light there, with
the high sun pouring in through the unshaded upper panes of all the side
windows; the unmade bed, with only the fitted bottom sheet on it, was
like a great snowy stage. Dan snatched my clothes away and for a moment
I cowered, trying to cover myself; but though he stood away from me,
busying himself with his own clothes, he held me pinned with those
newly-lit eyes, and they seemed to command me to open, to show myself. I
lowered my arms, my sheltering leg, and let Dan and the sunlight have
me. Naked he came to me like a thunderbolt, uncheckable, unerring, and
there was no time to fear hurt and hardly time for the great wonder that
there was no hurt, none at all: I was as moist and ready as ever I had
been in my life, and more. He surged into me with what must have been a
crash, though there was nothing for me to hear or, indeed, to see . . .
not then, not then. Nothing like this had ever happened before, not to
anyone—I was sure of that—and sight and sound were sunken away in a
great flood of touchness as he withdrew and plunged once again; and I
met that, that single, second thrust, with a climax such as I had never
dreamed of. Dan held still, deep within me, to take all I could give
until it had passed, and then began slowly to move. Our eyes were still
locked, and down inside his I could sense and share where he was going,
up and higher, higher and up again, held in some transcendant place
for—forever, perhaps?
Have you ever looked deeply and closely into well-known, well-loved eyes
and seen them, unblinking, go blind? Not the blindness of dark, this,
but the onset of unseeing glory; I knew he was with me as never before,
but through me into an other-place, where he poised, waiting. And at
last what he waited for came to him—not the effortful hammering of
release that I had known before in him, but a series of long, measured
spurts of ecstatic force, over and over and over, impossible but real.
Even when they were over, he stayed in that high place interminably; I
could sense reality and my presence as a person, not as a faceless
force-among-forces, filter back only slowly. And at last he was back
with me.
There was a strange thing, too: it was only with his return that I heard
the echoes, and I actually had to trace them back into recent memory to
realize that he had shouted. There were no words to this great sound he
made, but words, or a concept, or an insight must have come to him at
the same time; I know. I know Dan.
We were still for a time, soaked with more than the sweat and other
wetnesses of loving; we were bathed in wonder. Then he raised himself
slightly and took my face between his hands, and realized, I think, at
the same astonished moment as I did that he wasn't finished, even after
such an incredible release. He moved slowly, almost completely
withdrawing, then as slowly coming in and down; we smiled at one
another—pride, delight, compliment, joy, love—and together we turned
ourselves toward this new experience. I let my eyes close because of the
joy of opening them to see him watching me; I bent my legs around his to
draw him nearer; I think, if I could, I would have drawn him completely
inside myself, as if I could open my skin and close it again around him
and be a single thing with him. It was in this feeling of mutuality that
I began to realize that what was now happening was happening to us both,
not to me and then to him, but to us both as one, and miraculously, I
climaxed again—which I had never, never done before— and he did too,
saying in a huge voice:
"/ am the way and the life. "
As the great wave receded I looked up at him and spoke my miracle:
"Twice. Oh, twice. I have never been happier in all my life. Dan . . .
What's happened?"
"Godbody," he said. I suppose I must have looked puzzled, because he
laughed suddenly and kissed me. "Don't ask me what I mean. Not for a
while."
So we lay there for a while longer in that little lake of molten sun,
naked and unashamed for the first time together, knowing we had a world
of it, new worlds of it ahead. We inspected and touched each other in
the light, belated explorers and adventurers. We showered together,
laughing.
Oh . . .
    <p>Hobart Wellen</p>

I call it the Trick, and it works. Even if you don't score, you can see
it working, and wherever you don't score, if you keep using it, you
will. The Trick is something anyone can do, but most people don't know
that. The Trick is, no matter what you're saying to a chick, you keep
your eyes dead center on hers and you say silently, You and I are going
to make it. You don't stop, you don't let up, and sooner or later they
have to fall. You can see them wiggle and waver and try to fight back,
but they can't, because most of the time they don't even know you're
trying. They think it's coming from inside them, and when they think
that, you've got 'em.
That Liza Currier now; oh, those tight little tits, how about that
little muscular ass? That is quality stuff. She doesn't know what she's
got, and that goes double for her big dumb husband. Him! He doesn't know
it when he's being insulted, he doesn't know when he's being attacked,
he's even willing to leave that little bowl of sugar with the cover off
and a sign out. That big old blue Oldsmobile is either in the driveway
or out of it, and when it's out, so is he, and it's like somebody
banging on a gong and yelling, "Come and get it." Oh man would I like to
pull him down, him and his "Can I help you brother" and the vestry board
and the Tuesday Tea.
Anyway, there I sat with the driveway empty, watching Liza Currier wash
windows with a squeegee on a stick, talking about the weather and doing
the Trick. The way the soft blue material of that jacket she was wearing
went taut and loose across her back was driving me right up the wall.
She had a beautiful way of moving. Everything was always balanced, kind
of certain. She smiled a lot. A mouth like that, teeth like that, ought
to be doing better things than smiling over the weather. Then there was
that tight little ass, and the tapered legs ending in little
gold-trimmed barefoot sandals. I was appreciating those
specially—sometimes I think the Trick works on skin as well as on the
eyes, and if you look up and down a leg just so, you might as well have
your hand on it—when she looked over her shoulder and caught me at it,
which was all right with me. Next thing you know she'd jabbed the
squeegee upward against the rod and down came the drapes. I was over
there in a flash to find out what just had to be so: I pointed upward to
direct her attention away and put my hand between her shoulder
blades—sure enough, no strap. That did wonderful things to my crotch and
filled me full of wonderful things I would do to hers. Oh, but that
would fix that big stupid galoot Dan Currier; I wondered what he would
do about "finding the good" in me then, and saving both our souls.
Liza was so sharp with me when I did the Boy Scout bit, offering to
help, that I knew she knew I knew; also, I was wondering about the
pants. She scrambled up on the table and tried to hang the drapes back
up. Fat chance: one of the hooks was bent. That little squirming
striving ass at eye-level was more than I could stand, and I thought,
Hobo, now's the time for her to fall so you can save her; so I yelled
"hup!" like a circus acrobat and spun her and got my two hands on the
cheeks of the tight little tokus and pulled her crotch right up against
my face. I've found out there are some things you can do, if they're
crude enough, nobody you do them to will believe you're really doing it.
There was a kid in Dan Currier's choir who would build up to a sneeze
and then holler "horseshit!" as loud as he could in the middle of the Te
Deum, and nobody ever noticed. Another thing I found out is that if you
can get the heat of your breath into a woman's crotch, you have her
lassoed. So I let out a long breath into the soft denim against my face
while my hands were discovering she wasn't wearing pants, either. The
next thing to happen was for me to slide my hands up under the skirt,
but just as I tipped her forward onto my shoulder there came the scrunch
of gravel under wheels . . . oh, boy, the scoutmaster himself, coming
home on cue. I lifted her down as if I was a gentleman and set her on
her pretty little legs, and she pushed away from me. "That was pretty
close," I told her, and she said, cool as you like, "Not really." But it
was.
Then in he comes. He had a vaguer-than-usual look about him and
ordinarily I would cut out at a time like that, but this wasn't
ordinary; I was enjoying Liza's upset too much to leave just yet. So I
told him the airplane joke, though I don't think either one of them
heard me, and bid my adieux and left. The last I saw of her that day was
the way she was looking at him, as if she had something to confess and
didn't know what, and didn't know how. It was funny.
Part of it wasn't funny. I don't like to get handed off by anybody or
anything when I'm that close to a score. I tried the old philosophy
bandage: once you get a frau pulsing up like that, you can come back in
twelve years and go on from where you left off, or just about. But that
didn't help much now. I began to feel something I hadn't had since I was
a teenager—a lover's nut. Like having a C-clamp slowly closed on your
balls and then walking away with the clamp still hanging there. Every
step I took I felt it more, and Dan Currier began rapidly to become my
most unfavorite character.
I thought over the prospects. Mostly I hate going back over old
ground—it's the road ahead that turns me on. But this early in the day
most everyone's at work or school, unless .... By then I was just
passing the Mountain Star office, and a voice jumped out at me and blew
all my plans away, leaving me with only the lover's nut. "You, Hobo.
Hobo Wellen!"
I went in. It was just a storefront near the end of the main drag; half
of it was a gift shop. The Star is one of those weekly local papers full
of lost dogs and old houses for sale, cheap at twice the price, and big
local news: Tommy Zweck had an eleventh birthday party, Jim Breeze's
parents from the city spent the weekend. And, of course, the gossip,
Mrs. Mayhew's gossip, The Little Bird told Me . . . Mrs. Mayhew was the
little bird, and she wrote bird-talk: "Fluttering down Jason Lane last
night I saw you-know-who with a new one, dressed in blue and, really,
far too young, don't you think, Mr. You-know-who? And what do you think,
Mrs. You-know-who?!" Always that "?!" Or: "Somebody's big white Buick
convertible was parked ever so late outside a certain someone's house
the other night. Didn't know I was perched in the old oak tree, did
you?! But I won't tell. (There's a pine tree on the same lawn, though.)"
She knew everything that happened everywhere in town, Mrs. May-hew did,
and she used to brag about how she didn't tell all of it. And she
didn't. Some things she just threatened to tell, which is how she got so
much information. There was hardly a person in town who didn't have that
goddam little bird flying over his head ready to crap on him if he
didn't behave himself. Why do you think I right-turned real smart and
marched in there?
And sure enough, there she was, and Mr. Merriweather from the bank,
sitting out his lunch hour. Merriweather and Mayhew, the M&M's, the kids
used to call them, guardians of morals and decency. Talk was that the
bank never lent a penny without checking with Mrs. Mayhew, who checked
with her Little Bird, and people could be made or broken by her and her
rumor-box and never know why. . . . Did you ever hear that people who
live together a long time get to look like each other? Well the M&M's
had grown to look like each other over the years, which was funny
because Mr. Merriweather had a little bowlegged wife called Isabel who,
if she looked like anything, looked more and more like the toy poodle
she lived with; and Mrs. Mayhew was a widow of long standing and lived
alone, her and her Little Bird, which of course was caged up in her
head. All anybody remembered about the extinct Mr. Mayhew was that he
had more money than God.
Anyway, you can add something to that folklore about people looking
alike after living together. People who live alike get to looking alike
too, even if they live apart. Mr. Merriweather and Mrs. Mayhew were both
pushing fifty, and both had the same pouches under their eyes, the same
slightly yellow eyeballs, and the same lines around the mouth that you
see on aunts and spinsters who never fuck, but instead suck on nothing
all the time while their juices dry up. They both had slightly greying
hair, and each had a single fore-and-aft wattle from chin to Adam's
apple. Both of them had eyes that protruded slightly but were down in
caves: deepset pop-eyes, that says it. They had exactly the same voice,
but one octave apart. They approved the hell out of each other and
disapproved of everything and anything else. Oh, God, the damage she did
with that column.
I remember one time some kids were sitting on the porch steps across the
street and the girl, about fifteen, bent over and kissed the boy, but I
mean on the cheek. Mrs. Mayhew had been sitting in the back of her
office for half an hour with the light out watching them because they
were sitting close together, and the next issue of her column had a
crack by the Little Bird about "open and public displays of affection on
the village street. How about it, Sue?" and little Sue Vines, known now
for "what she was" by the whole village and everyone in school, ceased
and desisted, and the next time she snuggled somebody it was under the
bridge down at the creek and she got knocked up.
As for me, she'd never published anything about me, but she knew
something, and even though the girl got better and no longer lives
around here, Mrs. Mayhew knew and I knew she knew, so when she said
"Come," I came. It was a real drag sometimes; either she had an item and
wanted me to confirm it, which I couldn't always do, or she needed an
item and if I didn't have one, I'd have to make one up. Maybe some of
those made-up ones did damage too, but you know something? Whatever you
say about people is probably true, and if it hurts them, mostly they
deserve it.
"Well, Hobo," she says on her trumpet, "how nice of you to drop in." She
enjoyed this kind of thing. "Any grapes on the grapevine?" I just
shrugged and shook my head. She looked down at the portable typewriter
on the desk in front of her and so did I; it had one short paragraph on
it and then a wide space. I got the message. She needed material. God
damn.
I said, "Well ..." and looked over at Mr. Merriweather. He was leaning
forward a little and extruding his eyes. His lips were open a bit away
from his two big rabbit teeth. Mrs. Mayhew had two big rabbit teeth in
front too. She wouldn't let me con her off; she said, "You can speak
freely in front of Mr. Merriweather, Hobo dear. My, if you can't trust
your banker, who can you trust?"
There's an answer to that, but I wasn't about to give it. I looked at
the door and heard the typewriter carriage move to start a new
paragraph. I got that message, too. She meant to get something out of me
and she was perfectly willing to pin my poor aching balls to the wall
until I gave it to her.
"Well," I said, and then I had this inspiration. "I can't say for sure,
I don't know anything, it's just a feeling I got, but I think there's
some kind of trouble at the Curriers'."
"Oh," she said, "Oh, how awful," and she smiled; she kind of hunched
over her typewriter with her talons out like a vulture wondering whether
a carcass is dead enough yet. "What kind of trouble?"
"Oh, gosh, I wouldn't want to say." I came on like a real gentleman with
ethics and all. That taken care of, I went on, "I think it's something
to do with some guy who hangs around the missus while the pastor's out
pastoring."
The smile became a grin. I looked at the banker; he had a grin too. I
stopped thinking about vultures and began thinking about hyenas. "Go on,
go on."
I got very sincere. "I really don't know any more, who it is or
anything. You can't make an item out of that, Mrs. Mayhew; I don't
really know anything."
"You could find out," she said, her head still down over the typewriter
but her eyes up and aimed at me. Ever see one of those anti-aircraft
guns with two muzzles side by side, poking up out of camouflage? That's
what it was like, looking down into two ringsights showing through
eyebrows. So I said, scared, but was I laughing inside, "Well, I could
drop in a little more than I do, I guess."
"I suppose you could," she said, which meant "Do it!" and I could have
laughed out loud; the one worry I had about hanging around Currier's was
that she'd get wind of it, and now I was so safe from that that she'd
skewer me if I didn't. "Which doesn't help me a bit with this week's
column. What else, Hobo?"
I racked my brains. I ought to be able to say something about somebody
in this town. I had to get out of there; I was carrying a cargo of baled
barbed-wire, and I had to dump it, quick. Part of my head was still
running down possibles, the Shetland girl, Dona, old Betty, Bugsy
Schneider, that goofy Wanda with the sewed-up lip. There was something
wrong with them all—too young, too old, too dirty, too noisy, or I'd
just been there before and who needs it? Joanna, Margy, Britt . . .
Britt! Hey, why not two birds with one stone? Really, why not?
I said, "Well, it really isn't anybody's business, is it? I mean, how
could it hurt anyone even if it's so? It's not as if she lived on the
main stem or anything."
"How could what hurt anyone? Who?"
"I'd rather not say," I said real firm.
"Admirable, Hobo. You're absolutely right not to tell. What is it that
this Miss or Mrs. X does?"
"Well, I heard she sunbathes in the altogether."
"You mean without even—"
I nodded. Mrs. Mayhew looked at Mr. Merriweather, and he looked back at
her, and you know what? All four lips were just as wet. "This early in
the year?"
I'd heard it last year, actually, but I tried saying nothing and it
worked. "Right out where the children might see," Mrs. Mayhew said to
her typewriter hands.
I answered that: "Yep. Any kid wants to scramble up a quarter mile of
creek bed and then climb half a mountain so's they can look down," which
gave her the exact location.
"Oh," she said, "her. " She rubbed the talons together. "Well, she'll
get her warning, in no uncertain terms, the baggage." That's the word
she used, baggage.
I said I had to go. Mrs. Mayhew frowned at the blank part of the paper
in the typewriter, and my hopes fell and, from the way it felt, landed
on the load dragging on my scrotum.
Then Merriweather spoke up. "You could warn them both—her and Mrs. uh, I
mean, the minister's wife."
She considered it, and then looked at me. "All right, then, Hobo. But
keep your eyes open." That message said, Boy, you better have a
respectable load next time, or else.
"Sure will, Mrs. Mayhew, you bet. 'Bye." I waved at them both and got
out of there.
I walked home and got my wheels and drove up to the quarry. After that
it was creek bed on foot, and I began to wonder if this had been such a
great idea after all. A lover's nut is something you can sleep off, or
you can hammer your meat and get rid of it, but if you have something
lined up and you're getting close, it gets worse and worse and that is
no time to be climbing over rocks.
Britt was some kind of a Skywegian, a female hermit, kind of, that used
to paint pictures and stick old burlap and twigs and things on them;
somebody said she was pretty good and once or twice a year would sell
one for a bundle. If she ever had a bundle she didn't use it on making
herself comfortable. She had a little house built smack against the rock
wall of an abandoned hillside quarry. There was a kind of shelf of land
in front of it with a spring that made a pool like what a farmer will
dig for a duckpond. The roof of the house was built way out, like a
porch with no floor, and held up with a lot of uprights that she had
trained vines all over, so it was hard to know if you were in or
outside. Up on the hillside, if you wanted to risk your neck and the
chance of making a lot of racket in a shale-slide, you could get where
you could look in her windows and a kind of skylight thing in the roof.
That was how the rumor got around the year before about her being naked:
some kids were up here.
I don't mind winding up with a final sprint when I'm after some nooky,
but I've learned the hard way that you better be sure of the ground—all
of it—before you make your play. If I could look in and size her up
first, I would. I could, so I did. By now I had a lot of mileage and
trouble over this, and it had to come out right. But at these prices it
had better be good. So, all right—I had ways of making it good.
I got to a place, all scratched and bruised and out of breath, where I
could hang on to a tree root and stand with only one foot on a rock, and
lean over just one inch this side of the topple-point, and I could see
into the one big window at the side and also down into the skylight. And
I have never been so surprised in all my entire life.
Part of it was because the story those kids giggled out last year was
true. I never expect good juicy stories to be true —hell, they don't
have to be, if they're juicy, who cares? But sure enough, that kooky
Britt did go around bare-ass. Or at least, that's how she was when I
looked down.
The other part of the surprise was Britt herself. I guess I'd seen her
in town a hundred times, maybe carrying a picture in a gunnysack, or
trudging back up into the hills with the sack full of groceries. We have
more than one oddball in our town, artists and writers and musicians,
and it's all right as long as they keep their place, attract the
tourists and don't get rich. (When an oddball starts making real money
it makes other people try to be the same kind of oddball and that upsets
things.) Anyway Britt used to go barefoot most of the time and dress in
a kind of tent and wear a thing like a junior-league tablecloth over her
whole head. She had great big blue eyes with heavy lashes and eyebrows,
and she couldn't hide those; otherwise what could you say? Regular
teeth, straight nose, a lot of chin. But oh, look at this:
Hair dull gold, down almost to her ass. Big firm tits without a sign of
sag. The longest legs I think I've ever seen on a woman, and almost no
body hair at all. I couldn't believe my eyes. Then, the skin. I guess
she did sunbathe naked after all, because her whole body was a
reddish-gold color without strap marks or pale places. That, friend, was
a whole lot of woman. She was moving around the place, cooking
something, I think, and every now and then tossing back that big plume
of hair. I don't know how long I hung there on the rockface watching her
. . . watching her ... I do believe I forgot for a while what I had come
all this way for. Can you imagine? What reminded me was a sharp pain in
the back of my leg and a shift in that one foot; I was this close to
just using it up and having it quit and sending me down into her yard in
a heap of shale.
I had to edge back to a wider shelf and cling tight to the rock wall for
a bit, to get my breath back and my leg too. There was a civil war going
on in my balls, heavy artillery and bayonets as well. Now, that just had
to be taken care of.
I backed down to level ground and banged some of the dust and dirt out
of my clothes and hair. Okay, now for the sprint, because the coast was
not going to get any clearer.
I got into that thicket of vines and uprights under the overhang of the
roof and worked my way around the side of the building. There was a
small window to pass, and through it I could see her standing, reaching
up to light a candle swung from a chain—not that it was dark, but the
house was in the shadow side of the mountain, and the skylight opened to
the main part of the house. It wasn't but a second's glimpse, but the
tight muscles of her belly and those lifted-up breasts and the fine,
scarce down between her legs revealing the pink slit and the rounded
lips made two explosions inside me, one in my head and one in that
battleground downstairs. I all but yelped from the pain, and scrambled
around the corner to where the door was. I meant to have me a slice of
this, and I meant to have it now.
What I was going to do, see, was kick the door in and just dive. Then
she'd freeze, or she'd run; either way I'd get to her. No woman can stop
me when I get like this. They hand it over because they're scared, or
they try to fight back, and that's even better because then they get the
old rabbit punch and I cold-cock 'em and just leave it in 'em and wait
for them to wake up. Only . . .
Only this time there was no door to kick open—it was open already. And I
didn't get to dive in—she came out. I guess she was stepping outside for
something on the porch just as I came around the corner; anyway, there
she was. Finally, she didn't freeze and she didn't run. She just said,
"Hobo Wellen! What do you want?" (only she talks kind of funny, and it
was more like " 'Obo Vellen! Vot do yew vant?") and took a step toward
me.
I made no speeches; I downed my zipper and took out my tool. I was
breathing hard; that's the way I get. She looked down at my cock and up
again at me, and damn it, she didn't seem sore, she didn't seem scared,
she just was kind of. . . puzzled. Well I could fix that. I grabbed her
left wrist with my right hand and pulled her hard toward me, and with
the edge of my left hand I cut her hard on the side of the neck, and
down she went. As pretty a sight as I ever saw, the way she sprawled
down on her side and then twitched over on her back, putting both hands
where I'd hit her. I could've carried her inside where it was more
comfortable, but I like it better this way, here on the packed-earth
floor. Maybe later I'd take her in, but now, from the second I chopped
her, my dong pulsed up hard; it took only four heartbeats for that to
happen, and you can bet they were fast ones. It came up like it was
hooked to a hydraulic pump, or like four frames of a movie film, from
limp to rock hard.
The woman was moving a little, vaguely. I kicked her legs apart and fell
on her and found myself looking at a foot.
It was a great big foot; looking back, I'd say a size eleven or better,
and there was another one like it close by, and some ankles, and
long-boned, big-muscled calves and knees the size of my two fists. I
rolled off Britt and goggled upward, and there was a man standing there,
a naked man, a redheaded, big-jointed man with a slab-sided face and
funny-colored eyes and oh God why is it always a big guy in my way?
I jumped up and tried to say something, but I was half out of my gourd,
and all that came out was a funny squeal. I jumped back out of the way,
and it was like somebody hit my poor swollen nuts with a bat; I had to
hold them. The wonderful big hard-on just disappeared the way it does
with a scare, and I jumped back again, absolutely out of range of those
long arms and big hands. I wanted to call the son-of-a-bitch a
son-of-a-bitch, but all I could manage was another one of those squeals.
I scrambled backward holding my balls, tripped over something and almost
fell down, backed away some more, and then turned and ran away down to
the creek bed.
I guess I ran farther than I had to; he wasn't chasing me, but I didn't
know that. When I more or less came to my senses I was more than a mile
away from where I'd parked —I'd turned the wrong way—and deep in the
woods. I dragged myself up out of the creek bed and got out of sight on
some moss behind some bushes and kind of put myself together. I had a
cut on my leg I didn't remember getting and scratches on my arms and a
place on my hip that was going to be one great big sunset of a bruise
and I couldn't remember that, either. Most of all, where I hurt was in
the crotch. My poor balls were throbbing like a couple of misplaced
abcessed teeth. I looked at them and was only amazed; maybe they were a
little redder than usual, but that was all; but the way they felt they
should have been swollen big as basketballs and crawling and jumping
around inside the skin.
I did the only thing I could do: grabbed that little limp dick and
started to jerk it. It hurt—everything hurt. My hand hurt the cock, and
the movement hurt the balls. It wouldn't get up, either. It just stayed
limp as a dirty sock. But I couldn't stop; I had to drop that load, or
I'd never make it back into town.
I don't know how long I lay there with my back against a tree, pounding
my meat. I closed my eyes and called for all the help I could get from
what I could remember and what I could imagine. It was all a big mix
inside my head, and whatever helped—Britt reaching up to light a candle,
that chick I nailed down by the bridge and banged half in the water,
Liza Currier's smell when I shoved my face into her crotch, and
more—those things would no sooner stir up a little hope and begin to
stiffen my cock, when they'd remind me of tires on gravel or size-eleven
feet or the sound of a police siren or something else, and I'd lose it
again.
But I couldn't stop, and finally I made it. I have no idea how long it
took; I only know that when I was done the skin was rubbed off on one
side of my goddamn overcooked-macaroni superlimp prick, and sweat-salt
was rubbed into it, making it sting like hell, and when I came it wasn't
in any way a pleasure. You can come out of a limp dick; it isn't easy,
and it doesn't spurt but drools out like the spit out of a cow with
hoof-and-mouth disease, and the way the balls tighten just before it
happens is, if you have what I had then, one big gruesome agony.
I fell asleep, right there in the woods, and slept for the rest of the
day. I was in a hell of a shape when I woke up, but at least I could
walk without going bowlegged.
    <p>Britt Svenglund</p>

Yes it has been lonely these years, but why is it when people say the
word "lonely" it has always to be like a bad thing, or sad? You go alone
after you have been hurt, to get well, like a forest animal. Then is
getting well a bad thing, or sad? No. Mr. Currier said in church, one of
the times I went there, any person who cannot be by himself, it's
because when he is by himself he thinks he is not in good company. Also
I read a little book once about the top of the soil, just the first six
inches under the grass, and everything that happens in it. If you have a
ten-power microscope and if you take the time and care, you could spend
all day every day for more than a year seeing and understanding all the
things that are happening in just one square foot of topsoil. There are
plants and animals and chemicals growing and changing all the time in a
tiny world like that. There is a fungus which makes a noose with a
trigger, and when small creatures come into it, bang!, the noose closes
and catches them and the fungus eats the animals. There are eggs that
hatch and insects that make certain scents to call other insects to love
or to die, and much more, so much more— all in one square foot of dirt.
So how can anyone with eyes to see and a heart to question say he is
bored, there is nothing to do?
Summer and winter I work and read. In the summer I warm my body under
the sun, and in the winter I watch the fire and think. Whatever I need,
I make it or do without. Some things I must buy—flour and salt and soap
and books. Paint. For my work, almost everything I need can be found.
That is because of my art secret.
My art secret is this: there is only one sense, and it is the sense of
touch. All the other ones are just kinds of touch, the same way the
scientists say that matter and energy are only different kinds of the
same thing. Most of the artists in the world who are, or whoever were,
were painters. That's good, but a painter's work is meant not to be
touched. Sometimes you should not, sometimes you must not, touch the
work. But I have my art secret, and so when I make a picture of a
mountain I make the sky of a piece of silk, and the mountainside of bark
and bits of stone and sand, and water of glass or bits of plastic I
sometimes find. Oh, yes, I make colors. But I could make a picture of a
mountain and a sky all the same color exactly, but because the sky was
silk and the faraway hills were burlap and the near ones bark and stone,
you could see the picture anyway. Also sometimes I mix honey in my sky
color, bitter roots in my sharp rocks, smooth spices like allspice and
paprika in my smooth stone, mint and sage in my greens. You can put your
hands on my work, you can put your mouth on my work, you can smell it
here and there. So, then, why is it bad or sad to be alone? I am not sad
when in the morning I look up into the sky and taste it and when I know
the feel and smell of the faraway hills. Also I have my goats and a wild
apple tree, and things grow for me in the garden, little green promises
that, in good time, are kept: / will give you tomatos, I promise you
corn. People do not always keep their promises even when you tend their
soil. Sometimes they do, but you never know. Also when a bee stings or a
rock falls and hurts you or a knife cuts you for being careless, these
are not really attacks. These things are defending themselves or they
are giving you the results of causes— there is always a reason. People
sometimes attack you without a reason, and you never really know when,
so it is better not to be with people. Some boys climbed the hill behind
my house and saw me naked, and they threw stones. That is not a reason,
you see.
The sense of touch is a crystal with many faces. Air explodes away
between the hammer and the anvil and disturbs the air around it, which
in turn disturbs the air again, and these disturbances walk toward you
like footsteps until they touch the membrane of the ear. So it is too
with the rush of sound through the stiff feathers of a crow and the soft
ones of an owl's wing, and each has a different meaning. To see is to
touch also, and to be seen is to be touched, and this too has its many
meanings. To be seen by a cruel boy with a stone in his hand is not the
same touch as being seen by a stag or by a squirrel. If you live as I do
and know how to touch and be touched by eyes, you can feel eyes upon you
even when you cannot see them, and you can know what kind of touch it
is.
I knew there were eyes on me when I went to the garden to gather a
handful of chives and a few leaves of tender new lettuce, and all I
could tell about the touch was what it was not. It was not the touch of
a deer, which—to me on my mountain—is not fearful but merely alert; nor
the touch of a rabbit, in which you can feel total terror and, in an
instant, total forgetfulness; nor the squirrel's contact, which always
has laughter in it. What touched me was not the gaze of a carnivore
either: wildcat and fox browse you with their eyes like shoppers,
wondering and judging whether or not they can afford you. And if this
touch was that of a man, it was such a man as I had never known.
It was such a man as I had never known.
Once in my first winter in this country I saw a bird for the very first
time, on a cold morning in which there was only white which was
altogether white, and black which was altogether black. And this bird
was all the color in the whole universe of that place and time—this bird
was a clear and aching red. I have come to know it well, since, but this
was my first one; they call it cardinal. My feeling then was more than
joy, it was pride, for I thought at the moment I had produced the
cardinal, invented it. It was in my mind as I saw it that I had made it
be, by a necessity born of a world of total white and absolute black . .
. oh, please, laugh at this arrogance of mine, laugh with me, as I
laughed at the time, and laugh now to think of it, that I felt I had the
power to create a cardinal.
Now, in a world of many greens and browns, under a sky that must taste
like the inside of the skin of a concord grape, and the passing shadow
of a macaroon cloud, the man appeared. He stood just off the path
between the garden and my house, and as our eyes met he stepped back a
pace —a message that he would not bar me—and he smiled, which was a
message that I need not fear him, for he feared neither me nor himself.
He was naked, but he . . . oh, what are the words? ... he wore nakedness
like a garment; he wore it better, I think, than I. Light lay on him
like a fabric, and air, tailored to him. He was umber, amber, ocher and
gold. The modeling of his face had been done with a flat tool, and
beautifully finished, for it was all planes and rounded joinings, and
brows, eyes, and lips all parallel. His hair was red of a kind, his eyes
another red, his skin a series of others.
And the difference between my seeing this man and my encounter with the
cardinal was this: there was in that first blazing glimpse of him no
slightest feeling that I could have created him, or anything like him. I
am artist enough to acknowledge the necessity of a cardinal in the snow.
I was not, I am not, capable of such a concept as this man.
I tossed back my hair in fear that even a strand of it might interfere,
and stood with my hands full of tender young green and, nested in them
like songbirds' eggs, the very first radishes. We stood quietly looking
at one another and then he crossed one ankle before the other and sank
smoothly down to sit cross-legged on the grass. He placed one hand, then
the other, on his knees the way I might put down brushes I did not
intend to use just now. I walked by him neither quickly nor slowly and
went into the house. I put the greens down on the kitchen table and put
my forehead against the rough boards of the wall and closed my eyes. I
could see him again that way, vividly and in all his colors, so I did
that for a time.
Then I went back and stood just inside the doorway and looked out at
him. He had moved. His long arms were around his shins and his head was
down, his forehead resting on his knees. He was absolutely motionless;
he is the only human being I have ever known who could be that. I went
softly down the path to him and stood looking down. His hair was quite a
different color from the cardinal's feathers, but still and truly a red.
His upper arms were heavier, I thought, than they should be for a man so
tall and lean, and the forearms were corded. I have seen such forearms
on dairy farmers and on smiths, when I was a little girl. It became
unbearable, after a time, not to be able to see his face.
I sank down on my knees near him and spoke to him; I asked him who he
was. He raised his head and looked into my eyes for so long I began to
be afraid they would dry, but I would not close them or look away.
He said, "Godbody."
I told him my name. He nodded as if he had known it all along and was
pleased that I had told him the truth. Then he said, "Was talkin' to a
man this morning who told me his name, and it didn't mean anything at
all, not the way he said it. I had to put my hands on him before I knew
who he was."
He meant something he did not say. He did not have to say it. He meant
that when I spoke my name he believed me, he understood who I was. There
are no words to say how very much this pleased me. I think that almost
every word we speak to anyone is a way of trying to explain to them who
we are, and almost always we fail, and that is why I would rather not
try. It is a great wonder to be able to speak a single word, your name,
and be believed. There is only one of you in all the world, there has
never been another, there never will be another, and once you know this,
it is a hurtful thing to be taken as someone else or like someone else.
You begin to try very hard to announce yourself to everyone knowing in
your heart that it is as foolish as proving the existence of the sun, or
water, or pain, and as useless as trying to disprove any of them. It is
because I will not knowingly be either useless or foolish that I speak
to no one unless I must. Yet here was a man who believed that I was I
when I spoke my name to him, and it made me grateful to him and to want
to do something for him, if, if only, oh if only he would accept it.
I asked him, "Will you eat with me, Godbody?"
He nodded and smiled. Why is it people, even artists, think that a smile
turns up the corners of a mouth? It does not. The lips become longer.
When he smiled his brows and his eyes and his mouth were still parallel.
I went into the house.
I make heavy bread, the kind they call "black" though it is not, and I
like to bake it before the sky lightens, these early summer days,
because the baking warms the house when the sun-to-come stirs the air
and chills it, yet the stove is cold when the day grows warm. This
morning's bread was therefore still warm and soft at the heart; I kissed
it for its forgiveness before I broke it, and put the pieces on my
earthenware plates with some goat's cheese and the young lettuce
shredded up with the chives. I made the radishes into little roses and
dressed the salad with soured wine and a little of my precious olive
oil, stirred in a rough wooden bowl with a clove from the garlic I keep
festooned from the beams and a pinch of sea-salt. I put out the stone
jug of goat's milk with its wet cooling-cloth. I had only the one mug,
but we could share that. And there were russets taken from the hole in
the ground where they had spent the winter; ugly little things, but
mellow and sweet inside.
When it was ready I went to the door to look at him for a time, and to
call him. He had moved again. He was standing by the path looking out
across the valley and up. There was a cloud there sliding along the
skyline, and I think it pleased him.
"Godbody."
He continued to watch for a time. It was like waiting for someone who is
speaking to finish a sentence, or a reader to complete a paragraph. He
had a politeness to that cloud which demanded the same thing from me,
and I was willing to grant that in exchange for the gift of watching
him. The high sun threw the great muscles of his wide chest into fine
relief, and highlighted the three strong cables over his lower ribs, and
put his strange eyes under heavy eaves, and filled the crisp hair of his
loins with sparks. Then at last he and the cloud were done with one
another, and he came smiling up the path to me. I was moved to hold out
my arms, and he came into them, and we kissed without haste or passion.
What we performed was a Tightness, that was all, and then hand in hand
we came inside to the table. While we ate he did not kiss me, yet that
greeting kiss remained firm and sweet on my mouth during the entire
meal, and everything that passed my lips was seasoned with it; there
never has been such a flavoring for a feast.
My bed is a mound of spruce tips, and on these is a rectangle of canvas,
and on the canvas a smaller rectangle of wood, and held inside this
frame are five wonderful old goosedown quilts from the old country, and
the time of year will tell you whether to lie naked on them or to get
under one, or two, or three, and the smell of the spruce, and the sound,
tells you when it needs replacing, which you can do winter or summer. At
the end of the meal I rose and took his hand, and he came with me to the
bed.
We had not spoken since I called him. Asking and answering, pleasing and
thanking, presenting and explaining —why? We had all we needed within
reach: food, each other, the bed. Most especially we had no need for the
second great use for speech, and the one it is most used for —to fill in
the empty spaces between communication. There were no empty spaces.
We lay quietly in each other's arms for a long time, not exploring, not
stimulating. We were waiting for something. Several times I have been to
a Quaker meeting, and this waiting was very like the silence that
descends on such a meeting when God is invited and whomever He touches
may speak. I do not know if Godbody or I first became aware of the
sunbeam, or just when each of us became aware that the other was sharing
it. It does not matter; somehow we entered together a place of total
attention on something else besides ourselves, which made us far closer
than we could have been otherwise. To fix one's attention on another is
to separate "I" from "thou." To share is to use another's eye and mind
and senses.
In the window on the uphill side of my house is a box of earth, and on
that day three tulips grew there, two yellow and one scarlet, looking
like lollipops. The sunbeam passed over one of the yellow ones, touching
its tips, and probed into the heart of the red. As it moved, the light
drove through the petals, at first barely escaping the layers and
emerging as a rich dim deep claret, and then moving upward and
intensifying through cardinal to a blazing orange. Somewhere during this
amazing passage I looked away and into Godbody's eyes, just once, and it
was not away at all, for in each of them, in their cinnamon deeps, was
repeated the burning chalice of the tulip.
And when the sunbeam had passed, he had entered me. It was done by no
sudden thrust, no ritualistic preparation, no forced-draft excitement.
His manhood simply grew into the womanness of me, erected into me. Our
lower bodies were locked together, and a mere turn of my shoulders under
his hands brought our eyes into each other as well. We lay on our sides,
enfolding one another, interpenetrating, absolutely connected.
Then I wanted to move. Then suddenly, wildly, I desired to move, but
before I could, before the desire could be manifested at all, his huge
hands slid down my body and closed on my buttocks. He held me to him so
hard I all but screamed; he held me, tied me, imprisoned me, and with
his eyes he held me even harder. I understood then that this thing would
end as it had begun, by its own growth and strength and not by any
persuasions by either of us.
And grow it did, the pressure and depth of his presence inside me, the
grip of his huge hands, the tempo of the hearts which pounded at one
another through their cages of bone and flesh, and the temperature of
those incredible eyes of his. Then I, oh then I did scream, I screamed
aloud, short and piercing, and again and there was no pain in it, and I
screamed and through a haze of red I saw his red eyes turn upward, turn
and half-close and come back to me again and "Ah-h-h!" he cried, and we
burst together in flying fragments of cinnamon and ocher and cardinal
and carmine, fire and flame, flight, and finally fall.
Oh there was a dip then into a place where there was no feeling because
feeling is only the means of attaching that place to the outside. Oh.
Then the hands, though unmoving, were only gentle on my body, and our
eyes were strangely full of tears. Perhaps that was because we were here
again instead of that other place. But there was joy in being here
again, the house, the tulips, the earthenware and the sudden bleat of a
goat outside, for in that nameless place was a Presence so awesome that
one could not stay, so great that one could be only insignificant, only
a nothing which could never again merge into selfhood again. Oh, I know
what I mean, but I do not have the words.
He moved his head back from mine, still holding me close, and he read my
face, chin, brow, each eye, my mouth. He smiled and closed those
incredible eyes and instantly, I think, fell asleep still smiling. I lay
watching him and the way the light lay as a glaze on his moist cheekbone
and jaw, and as fireflies on his lashes, and curled threads mingling
with his hair. Inside he was dwindling, withdrawing not by moving but by
becoming smaller, and though the sensation was exquisite it filled me
with regret, and I tried to hold tighter; and that seemed to move him
away and out of me even sooner. So I let go, let him go, watching him
sleep and recalling to myself that of all our possessions there is only
one which cannot be taken away from us, and that is memory; to let a
beautiful moment slip into memory is only to keep it, not to lose it.
Let the moment pass ... let go . . . let go; it is yours for always.
I slipped away from him after a time and went into the kitchen corner to
hull some berries for him when he should wake. Perhaps I should have
felt eyes on me then—perhaps I did, I don't remember. I was too full of
what had happened to be aware of anything else. I remember stopping to
think, what would be perfect when he wakes? What special flower or
arrangement of vines would be right to meet his eyes when they opened?
And I thought, flame—only that. Flame, so I lit the big candle. Then
perhaps something would be blooming now that I had missed seeing in the
morning, so I ran outside, to come face to face with Hobo Wellen.
I had known him—seen him; I don't believe we had ever spoken. Some of
the women and girls in town watched him like children looking at a wolf
in the zoo, giggling and frightened; the sillies, they did not know
there were no bars. I never thought him so noble a thing as a wolf, he
seemed to me only a sick man. He had about him a neatness that nothing
could change, not even now, breathing so hard he grunted, covered with
dust and earth. I called him by name and asked him what he wanted, and
his answer was to open his clothes and take out his penis. I do not
believe that anything God made on any living thing is disgusting; but
this was, not for itself, but for the way he handled it and glared at it
and at me. It was a very large one, I think, and limp.
Then he took my wrist and pulled me toward him, oh ... It was so
unexpected. He hit me on the neck and I had a great shower of stars on a
grey background, and the mountainside wavered and swung up on end, and I
was lying on the ground, and Wellen flung himself on me. I had no time
even to be frightened. The blow was shock, not pain. Then there was
pain, but something else: Wellen had ceased to move. He lay on me with
his face close, staring away at something I could not see. I looked too,
and it was Godbody, standing over us, his face quiet. Perhaps his eyes
were longer, narrower than before. He did not speak.
Wellen scrambled to his feet and I sat up. Wellen made a long swine
sound, a oeeeeoink! and ran away backward. He fell and scrambled and
scuttled like a spider and got up again, holding between his legs and
again oeeeoink!, and he turned around and was gone.
I turned my head to look at Godbody, and under my hands, which were
still one on the other on the place Wel-len had hit me, there was a
terrible stab of pain. He knelt beside me and gently took my hands away
and ran his fingertips over the place. At the base of my neck and on the
shoulder a great knot was forming. He put his big hand on it, snuggled
it so that the contact was firm, and with his eyes took hold of mine in
that way he had.
Something began to flow, I could feel it like fluid, leaving me and
entering him. It was pain turned liquid and running out of me into his
hand. I could tell by his eyes and a tightening of his face that he felt
it as pain, too; he was taking the pain out of me and bringing it on
himself. When I realized that, I made as if to pull away—oh, why should
he, he, take my pain? But pulling away from Godbody is like pulling away
from a part of yourself. He knew what passed with me, and he would have
none of it; the hand on my neck and shoulder was welded to me until he
was finished doing what he was doing.
For he had healing hands.
At last his hand came away from my shoulder and neck and he sat back on
his heels, tiredly, his shoulders slumped. It is a burden to have
healing hands. I took the one which had healed me, and he winced and
then smiled as I lifted as gently as I could and covered it with soft
kisses. Ah well, loving is not healing, but perhaps it is the next best
thing. Yet he would carry my pain in his hand until it went away in its
own time.
He helped me up, and we went back inside. I let him sit and watch me
while I finished with the berries, and then we took them with the cool
jug of milk and the stone mug and shared them.
The sun was gone from the tulips, but the way they looked, they
remembered it. I lay down and Godbody lay next to me, close, with his
healing hand on my breast. I said part of the sun was still in the
tulips; did he think the sun would miss it?
"Oh no," he said. "It's been used. The flowers make it stronger. You got
to be used, your arms, your legs. You strap a man's arm behind his
back," he told me seriously, "it will turn into sticks and skin in a
couple years." He looked at his hands, and then he stroked me with them.
"You got to be used, all over, everything. You get stronger."
I thought of Wellen. I do not know how Godbody knew I was thinking of
Wellen, but he said, "He just don't know how. He can't make it with a
woman unless he hurts her. Didn't you see that?"
I didn't know what he meant.
Godbody said, "He got a hard-on when he hit you. Not until he hit you.
And he hurt too."
I looked deep down into those strange, warm eyes and saw the pain there.
I understood suddenly that in the presence of pain, Godbody shared it,
took it and kept it. I asked him a puzzling thing; I asked him, "Did you
take pain away from him?"
"I could of." He thought about it for a time behind his eyelids. When
Godbody closed his eyes his lashes lay right down on his cheeks. I
watched this and waited.
He opened his eyes again and said again, "I could of, but he ran away."
"But you would?" I think, for the first time, I surprised him by one of
my questions.
"Well, sure!"
I thought, the man is my lover, and Wellen hurt me. Then why would he
help him? And again Godbody seemed to hear my thinking because he said,
"He was hurting. He hurt in his balls and his guts, and he hurt in his
head."
And I thought, is that an answer? And immediately: yes, it is. What do
you do if someone is screaming and screaming and will not stop? You try
to stop it, any way you can. (Unless you are another kind of person and
hold your ears and escape.) Pain to Godbody—anyone's pain—was like a
scream, and he needed to stop it, most especially because he was one who
knew the ways.
But then . . . why did Godbody let him run away with his pain?
Godbody put his arms around me. "They got to come to me," he said, "like
you did."
Did I? Did I? Oh, yes I did, as he sat by the path to my garden, hiding
his face. Was his face, I wondered, the way it was just now when I saw
it sharing Wellen's agony, and when I saw the injury to my shoulder
flowing into his hand?
Had I been screaming, screaming, in some way? I with my life so separate
and well-ordered in the company of my green things and my sky and the
animals of the hillside? I shouted—it was a demand—I shouted and shook
him: "Godbody!"
And as usual he understood me perfectly: "You was lonesome," he said.
    <p>Willa Mayhem</p>

Flitting along the highways and byways of our dear little village I am
surrounded by bursting bud and spreading leaf and the &6ti&i HtYiiitiii
choruses of birdsong, and you don't need to be a bright-eyed little bird
to know that spring is fully here. Yitm^i MlMiMg ?>6Wi*t Stopping on a
twig to rest and look around a little the thought comes to me that
everything grows a little in the springtime, good things and, oh yes
wicked ones too.
Oh, yes, wicked ones too. I sat back into the familiar squeak of my desk
chair and looked out into the springtime. It was pushing in through the
window at me, swelling and pushing. There in the little window beside me
was a tight green bud of boxwood, bent over and tapping against the
screen, and it looked just like the head of a you-know-what, pressing
and pressing to get it. They look very tender and sensitive, but they're
not, they can push in anywhere; you can't stop them, they're so
persistent.
I bent over the typewriter and looked at what I had written. Flitting
along the highways and byways. Our dear little village is a cesspool,
gentle reader, and every time anyone draws those dimity curtains it's on
devil's work—thought, word, or deed. They've got to be watched, they've
got to be stopped. For their own good. / don't care. But some people
know the difference between mankind and the lower animals. Andrew
Merriweather does, at least I think he does, well, most times I think he
does. Well, I am tolerant. You have to be tolerant toward anyone who
carries one of those you-know-whats stuck on his body. It's a sort of
parasite. It has a kind of life of its own. It moves by itself. Edith
told me about the seventh-grade boys, how that happens to them
sometimes, and she knows they don't want it. She always makes them come
up and write on the blackboard when she sees it. She says they get
embarrassed and scared, and she believes in "association." She says if
they get embarrassed and scared every time that happens it will
associate. Then it won't happen, even when they're alone. I know what
they do when they're alone. They all do it. Oh, if I had a son I'd never
let him be alone, not for a minute, even if he had to sleep with me. I
would see to it that he thought about other things.
Wickedness can send out shoots and bud and flower, just like good, yes,
and bear fruit. This little bird knows how bitter the fruit is, not from
personal experience, ha ha!!
Ha ha. If I had any personal experience I would not be so perfectly
qualified to do what I do, for thank God I am without taint.
My dear departed husband with all his money was a dirty old man, and he
made up his mind to do it to me when I was only fourteen years old, and
for two years he kept his eye on me, and when I was sixteen he made Mama
say I could marry him. Mama never told me anything about what men did
and bless her for that, I certainly know why. That one night I thought
that old man had gone crazy, trying to touch me all over and showing me
that big pushy you-know-what. I tried to get away, but he was
strong—much stronger than anyone knew—and he held me down and put the,
you know . . . oh, I don't know what made me think of all that again. I
won't think of it ... I fainted and when I woke up he was lying on top
of me and I called his name and said, "Get off." At first I thought he
had fainted too. He was so heavy, and I was still, you know, like that
with him, but it was not the same.
I got up and took a turn around the office, and decided not to think
about that again, and that made me feel better. I sat down again at the
typewriter. The hard bud of boxwood went press-press-squeeze against the
screen. Then it was still. I slid the screen up and felt it with my
thumb and finger. It was cool .... The old man lay on top of me for a
long, long time and then I touched his neck. It was cool. It was cold.
He was cool-cold inside me.
I suppose I screamed. Somebody said, "Mrs. Mayhew, are you all right?" I
think for a second everything was whirling around in my head, then and
now, a thirty-five-year-old nightmare, the office, the dead old man on
top of me and in me too, the paper in the typewriter personal experience
ha ha! and it all cleared up and I was standing there with the broken
stem of boxwood in my hand and there was a little cut on the side of one
finger and there was blood on the bud. I mashed it and shredded it and
threw it down and I felt as if I had run a long way. I turned around and
looked at Melissa Franck, who was standing there fluttering her plump
little hands together and looking out frightened from her thick glasses
and saying, "Mrs. May-hew are you all right?"
"Of course I am, can't you see?" I suppose I spoke sharply to her,
because she winced. I looked down at my hands, red blood, green blood,
shaking. There was shredded spring-green all over my typewriter and the
desk. "Do that to all of them, there would be a lot less trouble in this
town," I said, I don't know why, and went to the sink in the back to get
a band-aid and wash my hands. The whole time I was at it she must have
been trying to puzzle it out because she suddenly called out, "Oh, was
it a cutworm?"
"Yes, it was some sort of a cutworm."
I came back to the desk. She had tidied it up. I sat down and looked at
her. I wondered as I had wondered before how a skin as smooth and
unmarked as hers could look so unhealthy. She was one of those
strong-featured, square-jawed people who are timid and squeaky-voiced.
She always wore loose sloppy sweaters and knit skirts that kept right on
sitting down after she stood up so nobody could tell what shape she was.
She dressed as if she were ashamed of it, and well she should be. She'd
been raped. She knew who it was and I knew who it was too, and she knew
it. Nobody else knew except, of course, him. I don't think there was a
day in her life she wasn't afraid I would tell or put it in the paper. I
could get a lot of work out of Melissa Franck. ... It was funny how I
found out; it just shows that it pays to have the bird's-eye view, ha
ha. Only one glimpse of Hobo Wellen talking to her across the street and
the way she laughed. Then the next day she came in cool as you like, but
sort of holding herself together. Extra busy, you know what I mean, and
always looking down. So I made her come right to my desk, I made her
look right in my eyes and she couldn't, not for more than a second or
two. So I said, "So that's it!" and that's all I needed to do, she
started to cry, and after that I had her and she will do anything I want
her to do for fear I'll say or write something about her getting raped
and everybody will think she's bad. Melissa Franck bad, imagine that! .
. . Then, of course, I let Wellen know I knew. All it took was a glance
at Melissa's back one time when he was in the office, and he knew all
right.
I keep a pretty tight watch on Hobo Wellen. I just have to know who is
good and who is evil in this time, and Hobo Wellen is a walking
proving-ground. Just watch people, especially girls. In the Old
Testament it says many times that woman is the vessel of evil, and this
is what it really means: that girls are silly. All girls are silly, but
some pass a certain point in silliness and that is where the evil
begins. You can tell—well, / can tell—-just by hearing one of them
laugh, sometimes merely by the way they walk, when a young woman is
right at that point of silliness. Now if you had a piece of chain to
test or a sample of dyed material or a shovel or a new kind of bread,
you would test it to destruction—pull it till it breaks, boil it till it
fades, tear, pound, pull apart, bathe in acid. Hobo Wellen is the acid
test, all I ever had to do was point him at one of the silly things and
it wouldn't be long before I knew. I could name more than a dozen women
and girls, right off, that I have tested that way in the last two years,
yes, and eight of them did not pass.
Seven. I've got to be fair. No one ever could say I was not fair. I
won't know if it's eight until I hear about that Britt, but I know what
I'll hear, the hussy, exposing herself that way. Oh well, to work.
But we don't have to eat the fruit of evil. We are people, not animals,
aren't we? (Well, Vm not, but that's different!!) And one of the
differences between men and animals is that we can learn. Haven't we
learned yet what happens when we eat the evil fruit? Of course we have!!
We have learned too that the fruit doesn't have to ripen, and if I may
coin a phrase, we can nip it in the bud.
Flitting about here and there, day and night, I can see where the buds
are. Oh, they grow where you expect them to grow—from seeds left by the
city trash that comes up here to teach our fine young people to take
dangerous and deadly drugs and to defy all the laws of God and man with
their horrible hair and their beads and filthy talk. All that comes from
Communist countries. I know because I have had many a serious talk with
birds-of-passage as they fly through our dear little village, and they
tell me so.
But the seeds of evil have been planted in places where you least expect
them, too. "Eternal vigilance is the price of liberty," and it's the
price of law and order and it's the only way to nip the fruit in the bud
once it is planted. Suppose I told you that a flower of evil was
blossoming this spring right in one of our houses of God?! Why else
would someone who should be blameless (and who shall be nameless) be
receiving such EXTRA SPECIAL attention from a certain person when her
husband is out earnestly doing the Lord's work?! Why is a certain
citizen, accepted for years in spite of her—well, eccentricities!!
(isn't that a beakful of a word for a little bird like me?!) —why is she
permitted to parade indecently on one of our hillsides where our young
folk might at any time be defiled by the sight?
You see, this is what is meant by "eternal vigilance." It isn't only a
matter of watching the invader. Anyone can do that (though not many
really do, do they?!). You have to watch the things you've been sure of
all along and the people you have always thought you could trust, people
that should not, could not (?!) do wrong. Washing clean is good—but you
have to wash clean every day, don't you?!
So keep yourself clean in every way, and when other people—and little
birds!!—watch you, just let them and feel glad. And you watch other
people too, and if ever you see the tiniest little seed sprouting where
no seed should be, you know what to do, don't you?! Just whisper it to
your little bird, and you'll get a thank-you. And nobody will tell on
you, ever ever. Until next week— tweet-tweet!
I leaned back into that familiar squeak of the chair and took the
typewritten sheets and put them together and read them, and I was
pleased. I thought, that will show her, the little slut. The Rev.
Currier is a man I never could quite understand. Now Mr. Grudgeon, who
had the church before—he was a man one could deal with. I think it was
because he could get angry, and because everything was very simple for
him—good and bad, God and country. Daniel Currier is always willing to
listen, and I really don't think that's a good thing in a pastor. A
leader should lead, not follow; talk, not listen. A preacher should
preach. A sermon is not what Daniel Currier calls a "dialogue." I was
suspicious of him from the first. Well, from the first time I saw that
slut. I never had a chance to get at her before, so sweet, smiling all
the time. The thing is, the thing really is: no minister of God has the
right to marry a cute-faced little slut. There are four churches in this
town, and she's the only preacher's wife who looks like that. She has no
right to look like that, and that's where it really is. And he had no
right to marry her and bring her here. If some man has started hanging
around her it's just what was to be expected. And I don't care if Wellen
is lying, because sooner or later it had to happen, and we might just as
well dispose of Mrs. Goody-Goody Liza Currier before it gets to be a
real scandal. Then maybe we can get someone in that pulpit who preaches
like a preacher, married to someone who looks like a preacher's wife.
I think I laughed just then—I do when I feel good about something—and I
looked up into Melissa Franck's silly face. She was pulling at her own
fingers harder than ever, and the end of her nose was very red, which is
what always happens when she's upset. Behind her big glasses her eyes
were going blink-blink-blink very fast.
I said, "Are you finished typing it already?"
And she began to stutter, which is the other thing that happens when
she's upset. "N-no, and I'm nah-nah-nah-not g-going to either."
"You're what?"
"I d-don't care."
"You know that copy's due at the print shop in thirty-five minutes."
"I d-don't care."
"You know if it's not ready they'll go to press without my column."
"I d-don't care."
I looked at her. I have found that with some people all you have to do
is look at them, keep right on looking without saying a word—especially
if in an argument it's your turn to talk—they will have to say something
else, and it's usually something you can use to defeat them. Well, it
made her talk, sure enough. She held up my copy and waggled the pages.
"You c-can't do this, Mrs. Mayhew."
I said very carefully and distinctly, "Melissa Franck, are you telling
me what I may or may not do?"
"You can't do this a-a-about Mrs. Currier." The end of her nose was even
redder, and mercy, I think it was wet too. I pointed a long, slow finger
at the pages she held in her hand. They were trembling: my, I could hear
them from where I sat! I said, "There is not one word in that copy in
any way referring to anyone by name. If you put constructions on
anything there, it is your horrible little mind, not mine."
Then she surprised me. She shouted! At me! "That's what you think,
that's what you always say anyway, but you know better and so does
everybody in town!" And my, she forgot to stutter! She said, "There are
four churches in this town, or three and a temple. Father Conklyn's a
priest and hasn't got a wife and neither has Rabbi Brummel since Mrs.
Brummel died, and nobody's going to think you are writing about Mrs.
Fleckenstein, so who else could it be?"
I stood up. I am much taller than Melissa Franck. I pointed at her desk
and typewriter, and I said, "You are not here to question what I do. You
are here to do as you are told. Type that column, and do it now."
When I stood up she jumped back perhaps half a foot, but she stood up a
lot straighter. She did not answer me. She merely raised the tip of that
silly wet, red nose a little bit.
I said, "You know what this means."
"I d-don't care."
"Give me the copy."
She tore the pages right in two, and put the pieces together and tore
them in two again, and put them down on my desk.
Somebody screamed as loud as they could, "You fucking cocksucking little
shit, I'll run you out of this goddam town!" and I really don't know who
it was, but it made my throat hurt as if something was torn in there,
and I could not see for a moment, and when I looked up I was alone in
the office. I sat down at my typewriter and put paper in it. There was a
tick-tick-tick at the screen and another smooth, cool, round bud was
pushing and pushing at me.
    <p>Melissa Franck</p>

I never, ever, ever did anything like that in all my whole life before.
Melissa stand up. Melissa sit down. Melissa pick up your things. Melissa
go to the store. Yes Miss Standish. Yes Mrs. Steiner. Yes Miss Grandy.
Yes yes yes Mr. Miss Mrs. Harris Boyer Petrilli sir ma'am. Yes Mother.
Yes, right away, Mrs. Mayhew.
And I was never late and I never missed a day of school, except for the
mumps, or failed a subject, but nobody ever said see how well she does
it, nobody ever said be like Melissa Franck, I guess because I never won
a prize, made the honor roll, got the highest mark, even once.
Also nobody ever laughed at me for poor-kid's clothes or dirty
fingernails or socks or a funny nose, but nobody ever said oh, what
lovely hair or see the way she walks. Nobody in all my life ever said
get out of here, but nobody ever said I want you.
Except him, that time.
But it wasn't really me he wanted.
I hurried along Maple Street after Mrs. Mayhew screamed like that. She
was going to tell it all now. But it was worse, she was going to tell it
her way. She had a way of telling how a person bought a loaf of bread or
brushed his teeth that made whoever it was sound like a devil or
pervert. Then what would she do, what would they all do, when she told
about what happened with Hobo? Even if all she told was the truth,
everybody would spit on me and talk about me, and all the men would
think they could have me, and I would have to say no, no, no until I got
tired of it and began to say yes, yes, and then soon nobody would ever
ask me any more, just laugh, because that's what happened to Sue Vines,
and after she got pregnant there was the accident. Only I know it wasn't
an accident, she opened the door of the car and stepped out into the
road at fifty miles an hour, and it was only then that Tommy hit the
tree. So you see you can get dead when Mrs. Mayhew takes out after you.
She went out after Sue Vines because she was so pretty, that's really
the reason, so young and pretty. She pushed her down a little and when
that made Sue go down a little more she pushed again and kept on until
there wasn't any Sue Vines any more. So what would she do to me after
what I'd done?
I looked behind me and hurried faster. Mrs. Mayhew was not going to wait
to write something about me in the paper and wait for people to read it,
and write more and wait more. Oh no, she would think of something much
worse, much faster. I looked back again. I would not have been one bit
surprised to see a whole mob of townspeople running after me with
torches and Mrs. Mayhew egging them on and waving a coil of rope. But
all there was was a big station wagon, coming along slowly.
I was right at the edge of town by then, at the crossroads where
Highland Road comes across and Maple Street turns into County Summit and
becomes a dirt road winding off into the mountains. I guess it was right
there I decided not to turn right or left, which would just take me back
into town. I just went straight ahead and left it all behind me.
So of course the station wagon speeded up and rumbled off the blacktop
and pulled up alongside me.
I set my face ahead and tramped on.
"Melissa. Melissa Franck!"
Oh . . . Mr. Currier. Oh, I didn't want Mr. Currier now. I said, I
suppose rudely, "What." Period not question mark: "What."
He didn't say anything, and I had to turn and look at him and then come
over to the car. I didn't want him around me now because he is a nice
man, the kind of nice man you can't just go on being rude to. If you did
he would think it was his fault, not yours. So if he wanted to give me a
lift I would say no, and if he wanted me to tell him what was wrong I
would say no, and if he wanted to take me back there I would say no, and
no, and no. I was really ready for him. "What."
"Do you know a man called Godbody?"
Oh.
I looked at Mr. Currier very carefully to see if this was a trick, but
it wasn't. He really wanted to know, and he was not interested in me or
why I was there or where I was going. I suddenly felt very normal and
real again. I said, "I'm sorry. I don't, Mr. Currier."
"I'm sorry too, Melissa. I really am. Well—I'll just look around. 'Bye."
He smiled.
" 'Bye." The car began to move and I began to cry. I don't think I have
ever been so surprised in all my life. I know I was upset, but then that
sudden thing of feeling normal, that feeling of being Melissa Franck,
nobody ever cared even enough to say get out of here, oh there's Melissa
Franck, we'll ask her where to find Mr. Godbody, if she knows, fine, if
she doesn't, we'll go on looking, 'Bye, and forget Melissa Franck . . .
this Melissa Franckishness that came on me, instead of calming me, it
made me cry. I knew then that this was not a day like other days, and
that whatever the change was that made me stand up to Mrs. Mayhew was a
permanent change and . . . and . . . and things would go on changing
with me.
Mr. Currier stopped the car and got out and walked back to me where I
stood crying. He held me. I think it was because I bawled Hoo Hooo Hoo
... all the air going out of me and then something stuck and I couldn't
get it back in and I was going to fall down. No man ever held me before,
except—
I got some air, it scalded as it rushed in but it cleared things up a
little. He kept an arm around me and took me to the car. He was a very
strong man. I put my feet down one after the other, but I don't think it
would have made the slightest bit of difference if I hadn't. He opened
the right front door and put me inside. He left the door open and got
around the car and into the driver's seat. I hunched there and
blubbered, and all he did was to open the glove compartment and pull out
a box of tissues and put them in my lap. I have no idea how long I
huddled there like that with Mr. Currier resting his hands on the
steering wheel and looking out through the windshield. I know it could
have been much longer and he wouldn't have moved until I was quite
ready. That man gave me those minutes. I mean for all those minutes he
wasn't doing anything else. That never happened to me before either.
After a time I guess I was quieter, because he asked me if I wanted to
go back to town. I shook my head because I was afraid I would start that
awful Hoo-hoo-ing if I opened my mouth. He must have known this because
he just gave me some more minutes.
Finally I said, "I'm not going back, I'm never going back, I can't."
Then I said something that seemed to mean much more than all that; I
said, "I won't."
He looked at me and then through the windshield again, ready to wait
some more. I guess I began to feel guilty about that, and I said, "You
have always been so nice to me, and Mrs. Currier is the kindest,
prettiest, nicest lady in the whole world."
He smiled a little and said he thought so too, and "Is that why you're
leaving?" I think he meant it as a sweet little kind of joke, but I said
yes.
He was looking at me again. Mr. Currier has a special way of looking
sometimes, a I-don't-understand-that-at-all kind of look, lost and
perplexed, like when they brought him to see the cats the Crendy kids
had wired together by their back legs and hung over the clothesline
until they killed each other. I said, "Mrs. Mayhew is going to say
something about Mrs. Currier in her column and I wouldn't type it, and
now she's after me."
He looked back down the empty road, it was a way of telling me nobody
was after me. He just didn't understand. I said, "You don't get away
from her if she's after you. Like Sue Vines. You have to do what she
says." I looked up at his face, and if I could have laughed I would
have. So lost.
I tried to explain it. "Mrs. Mayhew knows a lot of awful things, and if
you do something she doesn't like she will put it in the paper and then
everyone will hate you." That wasn't enough. I tried again. "I can't go
back now—I've had a fight with her, she'll tell everybody."
"Tell everybody what, Melissa? I'm sure there's no 'awful thing' about
you that anybody would believe."
"Yes there is," I said.
He didn't pry. "But then what is she saying about my wife?"
"That a man is around there all the time when you're out."
"Lots of people come in and out."
"That's not what she means and you know it." In spite of myself I was
getting a little mad at him, I think. People shouldn't walk around so
defenseless, thinking the world is good and people are good. It isn't.
They just aren't.
"But there's nothing like that. It isn't true!"
"Mr. Currier," I said to him with all my heart, "Just the way you say
that—'It isn't true!'—sounds like true or not true makes a difference.
Well it doesn't! It isn't whether or not a thing is so, it's what people
say. People like Mrs. Mayhew anyway."
I always thought about Mr. Currier that nothing could shock him. I mean
people really tried, you know, and it didn't work. He would just try to
understand, or he would get puzzled. But I do believe this shocked
him—what I said about true or not true, it makes no difference. I think
he had been hanging on to that all his life—if you could know the truth
about something, that was, well, it.
He said, "Melissa, something ..." He swallowed, he couldn't get it out.
He tried again. "Something is . . . happening." He looked at me through
those glasses; his eyes were too big, looked at that way, blue and—and
clean. Nothing not clean should ever be in a blue like that, eyes like
that. "Will you help me?"
I was astonished. "Me!"
He said, "I know what it is, but I don't have the words for it yet." He
laughed. "That sounds crazy, doesn't it? Here, let me put it this way:
you know something I don't. Mrs. Mayhew knows it too, and Mr.
Merriweather. Sometimes I think my wife does, but I'm not sure."
I let him think for a minute and didn't say anything. He was wrestling
very hard with something inside him. He sort of threw up his hands a
little and shook his head. "I can't."
I said to him gently, "Say it wrong."
"I beg your what?"
"Say it wrong, Mr. Currier. I mean if it comes out wrong you'll know it,
and you can say it over different until it's right."
"I never thought of that." He looked at me as if I'd suddenly changed
clothes or grown taller. "That's good," he said. "That's very good." He
thought for a bit. "Well then, it's as if everybody I know, almost, knew
a language I didn't know, or maybe words from some language I'd never
learned. And they—you—all of you understand each other instantly, and I
can see that you do, but I missed it. Well, then, I met a man this
morning. Godbody. You don't know him. He—he touched me." He put his hand
up under his open collar and touched his own shoulder. "And when that
happened, the thing I always thought was true . . . was true."
I didn't understand him, but I didn't dare say anything. What he was
trying to say was too important to him. So he went on, "It was true in a
way I have never known before. And what that means is that up until that
moment, all the things I have believed and preached and tried to make
other people believe just aren't so. No, that's wrong. They are true,
now. They weren't before." He looked at me very eagerly, searching to
find if I understood. I just kept looking straight at him. He said,
"When I was a construction worker I never dreamed I'd be a minister.
Never in the world. And then I got the call. I really did. It was a very
strong thing. I went back to school. Years. It was hard, too. But I
didn't mind because I believed in what I was doing."
"And you don't any more."
"Oh, I do!" he cried, and then, "But I don't. I—I mean that I am a
minister because I believe in God and I believe that God is love. And
the Golden Rule. But now none of the rest of it seems to matter so
much—maybe not at all. Not parishes or districts, maybe not the Bible,
maybe even not the cross." He gave me a funny twisted little smile; he
hurt. "There, I think I've said that right. That man touched me, and
that's all I'm left with: God is love, and you must do unto others as
you would have them do unto you."
"That's all?" I marveled. "That's a lot. It's more than I have."
He turned to look at me—straight out of his eyes at me and not inward
the way he had been doing, and he was angry. That frightened me for a
second until I saw that he was angry at himself, not me. "And here I'm
getting help from you, when you're the one needs it!"
I said, "That's all right, Mr. Currier. Nobody can help me."
Then we turned together. Someone was coming out of the woods, along the
creek bed.
It was that Britt Svenglund, who Mrs. Mayhew hated so much. She wore the
down-to-the-ground dress she was always seen in, or one like it . . .
but there was a difference, somehow. Maybe it was the material, or maybe
it was the way she moved this afternoon. I don't think I had ever been
aware of her body before, or of her having one. But then, I don't know
that I'd seen her climb rocks before either. Anyway, as she gained the
road and saw us and stopped, there was a difference I know I was sure
of; she looked simply beautiful. I can't say why. She'd always had a
nice face, nice straight nose, chiseled mouth, but.. . but this was
something else. She—she glowed.
"Miss Svenglund—hello."
"Ah, Mr. Currier." I think she liked him, the way she smiled. He said in
that marvelous open way of his, "You look wonderful today—wonderful,"
and she gave him none of this coy "Do I really?" or "What do you mean?"
She smiled even more and said, "Yes."
He looked at her and at me, I thought apologetically, as if he had no
right to think of anything but me just now. But he asked, "Do you know a
man called Godbody?"
If her face was glowing before, now it seemed to release a burst of
light. "How did you know?" What a strange answer. And when I looked at
Mr. Currier, he was exchanging something with her with his eyes—it
seemed like something very glad. Funny; he'd just been saying something
about other people having a language he didn't understand. I felt very
left out. Britt Svenglund said, "You too?"
Mr. Currier said, "I want to see him again. Do you know where I can find
him?"
She nodded but said nothing. I asked, "Who is God-body?" and I guess my
left-out feeling showed in my voice, because they both turned to me as
if I had stubbed a toe.
"You should meet him." Britt Svenglund said nothing, and they both
looked at me, pressured to say something. Mr. Currier suddenly found
what, I suppose, he would call his manners: "Oh, this is Melissa Franck.
Do you know each other?" We did, a little. We nodded a little.
And then Mr. Currier said again what he had just said— said it like a
brand new thing. "You should meet him." He turned to the woman with real
excitement. "She should, you know. She really should. Miss Svenglund,
Melissa is one of the good ones. Really she is. And—Melissa, do you
mind?—she's in trouble right now and very unhappy. And it isn't her
fault, it's other people. I think Godbody ..." He sort of floundered to
a stop. Again they both looked at me, knowing something I didn't. I
thought, they're not going to make me do one single thing that . . . and
then I kind of floundered to a stop too. It was the way they were
looking at each other.
"I've got to go into town," she said suddenly. "He's at my house. He's
sleeping." A beautiful small smile came and went. If you just listened
to her words, they would be saying No, you can't see him. But if you
listened to the way she said them, she was saying, Mr. Currier, I trust
you and if you think it's right for Melissa to see Godbody, I'll help.
And he answered in the same language, "I'll take you in, then." Britt
Svenglund walked around the car and stood by my door. "You know where my
house is?"
I shook my head. She said, "Go up the creek bed until you see some log
steps set into the bank on your right. Just go on up."
"I can't," I said, "I just can't, I don't know him. He doesn't know me.
He'll think . . . and anyway, he's sleeping, you said so." But while I
was blurting all this I was getting out of the car. She got in and
closed the door. "I won't be long, Melissa," she said and smiled, first
at me, then at Mr. Currier. They were doing a thing that pleased them.
Mr. Currier started the car and backed it around. I stood where I was
until the sight of them was gone, and the sound of them was gone, and
there was nothing but mountain shadow and the voices of the forest. I
didn't know what to do. I certainly didn't want to do what they wanted
me to do. I wanted to run away, the way I had been doing when I was
interrupted. I said into the evening, "No. No!" and then I climbed down
the bank and started up the creek bed.
Who is Godbody?
He became the crooked creek bed ahead, he became the loom of the
darkening mountain shoulder, and around a turn of the bank he looked
like shelves cut into the earth with split logs set into them, a winding
stair. Up, and turn, and turn again, and the air became lighter, lighter
out of the shadows, lighter to breathe. Godbody's up there: where? In
the little house nestled against the hillside, with three times the roof
a house needs, just to shelter some of the outdoors and bring it inside.
Godbody's there. I hear the soft bleat of a kid and the cry of a mouse;
an awakened owl ghosts between me and the house (as a gnat can fly
between raindrops so can an owl fly between one sound and the next,
carrying silence with him). Somehow all this is Godbody, only because if
I say, where is Godbody? I must point to all this and say, there.
I moved under the wide eaves breathless, and it wasn't the steep stairs
alone that had winded me. Who is God-body? An open door and a shadowed
kitchen ell with a great burning candle swung from a chain; and as I
walked under it on feet educated by the owl's wing, I stopped and let
the candlelight's soft dartings, the suffused late skyglow through the
windows and roof-light, say yes, say yes, there is Godbody, there he is.
Who is Godbody? Long limbs, long body, long hands relaxed and
defenseless, unconcealed, abandoned to a bodily, mind-ly completeness.
Everything fit Godbody, limbs to body, light to skin, his grace to his
strength, and the colors of skin and hair and eyes.
Eyes. Open.
I put my two hands tight together and stopped breathing. I was very
frightened.
He came up sitting with one easy motion. If anyone else had done that
(but then, who else?) I would have said he was pretending sleep all
along, but I knew that Godbody had passed from total sleep to complete
wakefulness in a blink. It taught me too that doubtless he slept the
same way, instantly and altogether, when he was ready.
He spoke to me.
"Hi. Who're you?"
"Melissa."
He put out his hand. I went to him and knelt. I was not afraid that he
was naked, but I was filled with a new something. New to me. I think it
is called awe. And I had never seen a naked man before. He put his
outstretched hand, strong and warm, on the side of my neck by the
shoulder. "Yes, you are," he said. I knew what he meant. He meant I had
said I was Melissa, and he believed me. I cannot tell you all I mean by
this, but there it is.
"She said I could come to see you."
He understood me. He always understood me. "You want to tell me about
it."
I hadn't known that, but I nodded. He did too, and got up, taking my
hand so I got up too. "I want to show you something first," he said.
"All right."
"You'll have to get out of your clothes."
I couldn't believe what I heard then. I couldn't believe it, my own
voice, instant and easy, saying again, "All right." (Who is Godbody?) I
took off the white blouse with the silly lace trim down the front. It
was never silly before. I took off the belt and the pepper-and-salt
straight skirt. (That's what those skirts are called, but they were
never straight on me, not after the second time I wore them.) I took off
the bra-slip and my pantyhose. He didn't look at me, he didn't not look
at me. When I stood on one foot to take off the hose, he put his hand on
my shoulder to steady me, and when I didn't need it he took it away.
When I was finished I turned to him and he took my hand.
He led me through the kitchen and outdoors, along a little path to a
garden at the edge of the bit of level ground on which stood Britt
Svenglund's house. We stood together on a point of rocky ground looking
out at a day dying and a night being born.
He squeezed my hand a little and smiled at me. "What's it like?"
I said the only thing I could think of, the single overwhelming thing I
felt. "The wind doesn't blow on me, it blows right through me."
"That's what I wanted to show you," he said, and hand in hand, we went
back inside. He sat cross-legged on the bed and I knelt again. It felt
right. We stayed like that for a time. Then he said with a laugh, "A
naked person can lie to another naked person. But it ain't easy."
I looked down at myself. I've never done that much. I hadn't liked or
disliked my body until then. Somehow the attention I'd gotten from other
people had always begun with my face and my way of. . . oh, whatever my
way was . . . and drifted away before it got to my body. So I'd kept it
clean and covered up and had come to forget about it the way everyone
else did.
"It's a good one," Godbody said gently. He had a way of knowing what you
were saying deep inside yourself and talking with it. Mr. Currier had
the same sort of knack, but he talked to it. "It's good just because
it's a real woman's body. Women's bodies," he said with total modesty,
speaking out of his own really superb body, "women's bodies are good-er
than men's, just for openers, and then yours is a good one of them." If
I had said an eye-batting "thank you" to that, I'd have wanted to wash
out my mouth with soap. So I said nothing but looked down at my body
again and touched it, on one breast and on my hip. I have never been so
pleased in all my life.
"Then what is it?" Godbody asked me after a time.
I looked at him, waiting so easily and patiently, and suddenly I was in
a room in a house in a town in a world. "Oh." And I didn't know where to
begin.
Godbody said, "Everything's part of everything else, Melissa. Begin
anywhere."
"I'm leaving."
All right, a beginning. Did you ever talk to someone who simply and
totally listens? Do you know how rare that is? Haven't you ever realized
that nobody wants to listen except to get ready for the next thing
they're going to say, or to catch their breath, or to get ammunition
from you for their next sentence? Most of us want the listener to say
"uh-huh" and "yes" all the time, too, to tell us they're still
listening. But suppose you know someone is listening, and he knows you
know it, so he never says "uh-huh" or "yes." It puts you into yourself
in a way you've never known before. If you come to a place where you
can't go on for a while, he'll wait. He's not afraid of silence, and
sometimes that can be very disturbing. So I talked, and Godbody listened
to me.
"There's a man in town, they call him Hobo. He works night shifts in the
coil-winding place in town, four to twelve, so he's kind of around all
the time. There's a woman called Mrs. Mayhew, she owns a newspaper. She
watches everything and everybody. There's a Mr. Merriweather at the
bank, and he does, too. The one thing the two of them can't watch is the
underside, the dirty part where Hobo lives. He knows everything there.
Mrs. Mayhew knows some things about Hobo, and she hangs that over his
head and he has to do what she wants. I've been typing in the newspaper
office for Mrs. Mayhew."
I had to stop there for a bit to be sure I had all the pieces out in
plain sight. I didn't want to say a lot about how I felt about these
people or the things they did. I just wanted to say what happened.
Feelings could come later.
"You can't work in a place like that with people like that without
finding out what they are and what they're doing. I mean what they're
really doing—not putting out a paper or running a bank or scoring with
girls in the sickest possible way, but pulling secret strings and
watching people jump a long way off, and having power over everything
and everybody in the town. The way they use the power mostly is to stop
anything from changing and to stop anything that could be fun or loving,
and to fight anything that's beautiful or young just for that reason
alone—that's the worst thing, that really is the enemy.
"So I found out . . . more than I wanted to. Believe me, it was much
more than I wanted to and I tried for the longest time not to notice,
and then not to let any of it matter. And I don't think I really
realized until today why it was that she—
"Oh, but I've got to go back and tell about Hobo. Hobo is kind of
slick-looking and swaggers around, and there's a lot of talk about him.
I mean 'nice' girls don't go out with him, and some girls think he's
dangerous—which he is— and stay away from him because of it, and some
girls get right in his path or even chase after him because of it.
"I didn't do either one. I knew a lot about him—more than he knew I
knew—but when he stopped me on the street and was nice to me . . . oh,
even to notice me was to be nice, you'd have to be me really to
understand that. So I said I'd meet him later on down by the bridge. He
said he had something to tell me, and he hinted that he was in some kind
of trouble that I could help him with because of my job . . . oh, it
doesn't matter what he said, it was easy, easy, easy for him. It was the
first time in my whole life a man had ever said to meet him somewhere.
Not even after school. Not even in the high-school cafeteria for a
forty-five-minute lunch.
"It was dark down there—he must have known it would be a dark night with
the moon rising late, and at first I thought he hadn't come, that it was
a cruel joke. And I blamed myself for that, not him—can you understand
that? —because he talked with me on the street and made me laugh. So
when I heard him call my name I could have cried with joy. Relief.
"I made it so easy for him!
"He was down off the road, on the riverbank, almost under the bridge. He
said to come down and I did. I tore one of my stockings at the knee, and
I remember thinking at first that that was a disaster and then being
glad that it was so dark, surely he wouldn't see.
"There—you see? I began that meeting as one who could care about a torn
stocking. I ended with—oh ..."
This was one of the times Godbody waited without speaking, as if he was
listening to my silences as he listened to my words. He watched me the
same way, speaking or not, receiving. It was during this silence that I
wrestled with the problem of words. The words I would have to use if I
told him everything. I knew I could hint and talk around and suggest,
and I knew I could be very clear and exact with what are called "decent"
words, and I knew I could say none of it and sprinkle the story with
"you-knows" and "his thing" and "doing it, " but I couldn't, not with
Godbody. He would listen and perhaps he wouldn't mind one way or the
other—but I would. I would because he was Godbody, and because I was
naked with him. I understood, in that quiet time, something I had heard
Mr. Currier say once in a sermon: "Words have meanings—words mean
things. There are a lot of things to be afraid of, and that's all right,
but don't ever be afraid of a word." I was afraid of nothing, here with
Godbody, least of all words. I went on telling him.
"I got down to the riverbank, and I couldn't see him. I couldn't see
anything. I called out quietly, 'Where are you?' and his voice said,
'Right here.' I looked into black shadows, right, left. 'I can't see
you.'
" 'Yes you can. Have a look,' and it was like lightning, a sudden glare
of light so bright I screamed. The light was a patch maybe a yard off
the ground, but it was too bright and sudden and too brief for me to
make anything out.
" 'Know what that is?' It was Hobo all right, but this was not the voice
that had made me laugh, made me meet him here. It was different. Rough,
like pain or anger. I closed my eyes hard and studied the after-image
still fading behind my lids. Something vague, soft, somehow convoluted,
yellow-peach.
" 'I don't know.' I really didn't. I said, 'Hobo, what was it? Where are
you?'
" 'I'll give you another look at it then,' he said from somewhere, and
again the light came. This time it stayed a little, and I realized it
was a big flashlight and he was shining it on his penis. He had his
pants all the way open and the penis and testicles hanging out. It
looked very big and soft and it hung down and swung back and forth a
little. I think he was turning his hips to make it do that. 'Now do you
know what it is?'
" 'It's your pay-nis,' is what I said. I had never seen one before
except on pictures and statues. I had never had occasion to use the
word, and nobody had ever spoken it aloud to me as far as I could
remember, so I pronounced it the way I had learned in school to
pronounce Latin words.
"He said roughly, 'It's my cock, and I'm going to fuck you with it, you
dumb cunt.'
«<Hobo—don't!'
" 'Hobo don't,' he mimicked me, and the patch of light moved a pace
closer to me; then angrily, 'Are you telling me what to do?'
"I didn't want him angry. I said, 'No, oh no. I mean don't keep that
light on, someone will see.'
"He turned the light off. 'All right, you're not so dumb, you're just a
cunt.'
" 'What's a cunt?'
"My eyes were still dazzled from the light, and the afterimage was much
clearer and more upsetting. I had no idea he had moved closer until I
felt his hand roughly between my legs. 'That's your cunt.'
"I remembered then that I had heard that, somewhere. I said, I guess a
bit stupidly, 'Oh, that's right. My mother used to call it my peewee.'
"He said, 'Oh, good Christ. Peewee. You're too goddam much, Melissa."
"I said, 'Hobo, let's go someplace else. I don't like it here.'
'I like it here.' Angry again. Oh, I didn't want him angry. I said
quickly, 'All right. All right, Hobo. We can stay here. . . . What do
you want?'
"That's when he said it, the thing that made all the difference, the
words that even now, when I understand so much better, still come back
to me and give me a glimmer of that great choking explosion of joy. He
didn't say it gently and he didn't say it with any warmth at all, but he
said it, he said it. He said, 'I want you.'
"How can I ever find words to tell you how much that meant, coming that
way, so unexpectedly, words so far remote from anything I ever thought
I'd hear? I know I'm not too bright and I guess I was so terribly hungry
to hear that, or something like that, from someone, anyone, that
everything else in the whole world just dropped away and became less
important. I said, I guess I sang, 'Hobo, oh Hobo, you do? You really
do? Oh, tell me how, tell me what you want me to do!'
"I know how crazy that sounds, sitting here telling it. I wouldn't
expect anyone to believe it. But this was me, you see, me. And that's
what I said. And I reached out for him.
" 'Get your goddam hands off me.' I heard him jump back. I heard him
breathing. My eyes were beginning to let me see one dark thing from
another. I saw where he was and moved closer. He moved back, stumbled.
He cursed, some word I didn't know and can't remember now. 'Keep away.'
"I thought I was doing it all wrong. I said, 'I'm sorry, oh, I'm sorry,
Hobo. Tell me what you want me to do. Please.'
" 'Really too fucking much,' I heard him murmur; I think he was talking
to himself. He asked me suddenly, 'Are you scared?'
"I tried hard to tell him the truth because I didn't want to lie to him,
not in any way. But I was afraid of making him angry again, so I said,
'Yes I am, Hobo. Awful scared. I never did anything like this before.'
And then quickly, quickly, 'But it's all right, it's really and truly
all right, I won't run away, I'll do anything you say. Anything.' I
began to cry.
" 'Oh, shit,' he said. Not to me, I think; to the night around him. I
said, when I could, 'Let me help you, Hobo. Please let me help you.'
"His voice was angry again, angry and suspicious, and I could have died.
I just couldn't do anything right. 'What makes you think I need help?'
He barked it, and from the little I could see, I think he was going to
hit me. I was going to duck away, but I fought that and won, too, and
stayed where I was.
" 'You said you did. This afternoon.'
"That seemed right. I didn't know why. Anyway it made him slump back
again. He muttered, 'Oh, that.' And that's when he jumped on me. Just
then, without any warning of any kind. He came at me out of the
darkness, diving like a football player, and knocked me right over. It
hurt—my shoulder, my elbow. He held me down with a forearm across my
throat and with his other hand he began clawing at my panty-girdle. I
don't know why I'd worn the panty-girdle that night. I guess I thought I
might look a little nicer in it. It fits very tight and it's a good one,
mostly nylon with panels at the sides that stretch a little but not much
stretch at all on the leg hems. He tried to tear it, and it just
wouldn't tear. He tried to get his hand up inside, and there just wasn't
room. I cried out 'Oh, wait, don't, don't, Hobo —wait!' and somehow that
made him make a soft growling, grunting noise and try twice as hard, but
it just wasn't any good. 'Will you wait!' I yelled in a flash of
irritation I didn't know I could ever feel, and I kind of flipped
myself, my whole body. I guess it caught him off balance or something.
We were on the edge of a steep place on the bank and there was a flash
of agony as his weight came on the forearm across my throat, but only a
flash; he rolled right off me and down and away. I scrambled to my feet
panting and pulled up my skirt and hooked my thumbs on the waistband of
the panty-girdle and skinned out of it as if it was two sizes too large.
That's when I lost my sandal, I guess. Hobo came scrambling up the
slope, and I was able to see his hand thrust out, and I put the girdle
into it and said, 'There! There, you see? You didn't have to do that.
You just had to ask me!'
"He stood very still for a little while, breathing hard, and then he
passed the girdle from one hand to the other and just dropped it on the
ground. He sat down where he was and put his head in his hands. I knelt
down next to him. I was afraid to touch him. After a long time I spoke
his name softly. 'Shut up,' he said.
"But I wouldn't. I was much too upset. I pleaded with him. I said, 'If
you really want me—I'm here. You don't have to force me. I guess you
think I'm just awful, but I don't care, I'm telling you the truth. I
know I'm doing everything wrong, but it's all so new, and if you'll only
tell me what to do ... '
"He growled at me, 'You have really fucked it up.'
"I didn't understand that and said so. And I said, 'All you've done this
whole time is shout and grumble and act rough, and you just don't need
to, Hobo! Why don't you just tell me what's wrong?' I thought I was
going to cry again, but he startled me so much I guess I forgot to. He
grabbed my wrist and turned himself around, sitting with his legs wide
apart. 'Here, put your hand on it.'
"He put my hand on his penis. He almost shouted, 'Grab hold, don't just
touch it.' I said, trying to gentle him, 'All right, Hobo,' and took
hold of it. It was very big, I could barely get my hand around it, and
it was soft, soft as new-baked bread wrapped in silk. 'Now do you
understand?' he cried hoarsely and flung my hand away.
"It came to me then that Hobo Wellen was in some kind of anguish, and
I'd have given away anything—my soul, if I have one—to know what it
meant, to be able to do something for him. I had to say the truth, 'No,
I don't understand. I'm sorry as I can be, Hobo, but I just don't.'
"I think there was real hate in his voice then, and oh, that hurt. 'You
just got to hear it in so many words, don't you? You just want to hear
me say it and laugh at me.'
" 'Laugh!' I was horrified by the idea, and I do think he believed me.
He said, in simpleton-simple words, 'I can't get it up. It don't get
hard. I can't do a fucking thing with it with you. Now I said it, so
laugh. And tell everybody, too!'
"So then I put my arms around him, not because I completely understood
it all, because I didn't, but just because he was hurting so. He sat
there frozen with tension for a moment and then slumped down into my
arms, onto my lap, and began to cry. I never knew men cried—not like
that. I guess it hurts them when they do it. I thought he was going to
hurt his throat. I stroked his face in the dark. His cheeks were twisted
up and knotted like leg-cramps, and his eyes were swirled down closed
like healed scars, and his face was wet. I said a lot of words and
things that weren't words, and kissed him a bit and stroked his hair,
all the while not knowing, kiss by kiss, stroke by stroke, whether or
not I was doing it wrong again.
"He began talking into my lap, so at first I didn't know what he was
saying. ' . . . know what it's like, nobody knows what it's like, goddam
lousy no-good prick won't work unless a chick is scared or I hurt 'er,
put 'er down, cuss her mother-guts.' There was more mumbling I couldn't
catch and something about 'balls bust open Tore I could serve the first
six months,' which I didn't understand, and then he writhed around to
look up and was talking to me. 'You, you're a goddam turn-off. You can't
help it but you are.'
" 'Tell me what to do!' I cried.
" 'You can't.'
" 'I can. I will. Anything!'
"And he cried out, almost the way I had, 'You can't! I got to take, you
dumb bitch—take! How the hell can I take if you just lay there and
give?'
"We were still for a time then, his head in my lap. I think something
had exploded out of both of us and left us exhausted. Finally I said, 'I
could pretend . . . '
"He said, 'Shit.'
"Then he shook his head angrily and sat up. 'I'll have sore balls for a
week over this. God damn that Mayhew bitch.' And that's the remark I
didn't understand until today.
"He was going to get up, he was going to leave me. 'Isn't there any way
at all I can—'
' 'Not a damn thing. Short of knockin' you out and cold-cockin' you.'
" 'Then do it.'
"He couldn't believe me. 'You're crazy.'
" 'All right, I'm crazy. Hobo, I said anything.'
" 'Lost my flashlight,' he complained.
" 'What do you need the flashlight for?'
" 'I wouldn't want to hit you with a rock. I could get into trouble if
you got hurt bad.'
"So we crawled around in the dark under the bridge looking for his
flashlight. We found it at last—I found it, near where he had rolled off
me that time. I brought it to him. 'Will it leave a mark?' 'Christ, no!'
he said, 'You think I'm asking for trouble?' I asked him where he was
going to hit me—on the head? He said, 'I guess back here,' and he
touched me high on the back of the neck, to one side.
" 'All right,' I said and lifted my hair away from the place and turned
sideways to him. Jesus, Jesus,' he said; it was like an angry sobbing.
He held the flashlight—it was a big one—by the lens and hit me.
"There was a shower of stars and then the earth lying up against me—it
was not like falling at all. I was face down, and he rolled me over and
fell on me. He was gasping, 'You out?'
" 'No.' It was hard to talk and hard to say that, too, but I had to tell
this man the truth.
"He took my hand and pulled it down to his penis. 'Grab ahold. Feel
that?'
"I felt that all right. The shaft was . . . pulsing—no, that's not the
word, because pulsing is an in-and-out, or larger-smaller kind of thing.
This was larger-larger-larger in quick heartbeat surges, firmer,
stiffer, harder. I thought hazily that this must be what he meant by
getting it up. I suppose if I had not been so dazed I'd have been
terrified of it, but I wasn't.
"He snatched it out of my hand and rammed it hard up between my legs. It
was a bruising blow but not a penetrating one. I guess I'm just too
small for a man to enter. One more thing I can't do right . . .
"He settled the big rounded tip against me and pushed. It hurt but it
wouldn't go in. I could feel it suddenly begin to collapse, and he cried
out in fury and took a handful of my hair and twisted my head to one
side and hit me with the edge of his hand. I can't say clearly exactly
what happened after that. I know it was big and hard again almost
instantly, and Hobo mouthed some shrill soft curses and then moaned, and
a lot of warm thick wetness happened all over my belly and thighs. He
became limp-heavy on me, and I swirled away down into some place blacker
than under any bridge.
"When I woke up the sky in the east was lightening with moonrise, and he
was gone. I was cold and the wetness on me was clammy and . . . oogy,
and my head and neck hurt a lot. I pulled my skirt up out of the way and
sat up, and then I had to stay there until the world stopped going round
and round me. I got up shakily, gathered the skirt high around my waist
with one hand, and like a three-legged animal worked my way on two feet
and a hand down the bank into the shallow black water. I stood in it up
to my knees and splashed and washed myself as much as I could. It felt
wonderful after the first shock.
"I walked home in the dark, carrying my one sandal. Nobody saw me. I
thought nobody knew, but then Mrs. Mayhew found out. I really think she
knew just by looking at me, just by the way I acted. I don't know how to
act, you know.
"But it wasn't until this morning that I figured out the rest of it, the
bad part. She, that Mrs. Mayhew, gave me her column to type and it was
all about Mr. Currier's wife, it was filthy. And I'd seen Hobo coming
out of the rectory earlier, and I'd seen him go into the newspaper
office, and now this story . . . and suddenly I knew, I knew the whole
pattern.
"She has something on Hobo—who knows what?—it could be a half-dozen
things. I know some myself. And he's afraid of her. And she sends him to
do rotten things, and if he can do them, she has somebody new to know
something about, so she can use them.
"That one thing Hobo said, under the bridge—'God damn that Mayhew
bitch'—when I was so much trouble for him ... I don't know why, but that
came crashing back into my head when I read her rotten column. And it
all fell into place. She made him do it, she put Hobo onto me.
"What I lost—oh, what a loss ... I guess to anybody else it wouldn't be
so much, but to me . . . He said he wanted me. He said he wanted me.
Well he didn't, and he would never even have talked to me out in the
street if it weren't for her.
"And why? Why? . . . Because I worked for her, that's why. Because I
couldn't help but find things out, more and more, and I couldn't help
learning what she did with the things she found out—I couldn't help
learning about her. So she had to be able to protect herself, she had to
get something on me. And there's nothing, nothing, nothing in my life
she can use against me, how could there be? Nothing, nobody ever
happened to me! So—she made something happen, and now she has something
she can use if ever I wake up to how much power I have over her.
"I can't fight her. I can't stay. All I can do is run. I told her I
wouldn't type her filth any more and I ran away. I won't go back. I
haven't got very much, I'm all alone, I'll just leave it all."
Godbody waited for a time. It had grown dark. We found ourselves looking
at the chain-swung candle and the pattern of links thrown on the beams.
I looked at his face and his body, so clear, so untroubled. He met my
eyes and smiled. "Leave it all to go where, and do what?"
I thought about that and then said, "Do you know, I just don't care! For
a while I don't want what I've been, and I don't care where I'm going.
I'm—out of it, for now, anyway." I reached back and touched my skirt,
folded on a three-legged stool. "It's all like those clothes, off me.
I'm out."
"The story too."
"Story?" Oh . . . Hobo, Mayhew, the bridge. All told and done with, and
here I was with it folded away, out of it. "Yes. Off my back. Now, for
now anyway, I'm just . . . being. I like it."
"Just being," said Godbody, "is a good way to be."
We were quiet together for a good long time then. We were alone
sometimes, wandering about in our heads, and following one another
sometimes, like the moment I found myself watching his face as he
traveled some passage purely his own, which resolved itself in a smile
which was also his alone; and sometimes we shared the sleepy bleat of a
baby goat or a nightbird or the simple candlelit fact of being together,
and of being. We did not touch again.
And then there were voices.
I didn't know how rigid I'd gone until he spoke to me. The voices were
coming closer, climbing the log steps, and Godbody saw into my mind and
said, "You going to put it all back on?"
I looked at him and at the clothes. I shook my head.
People came in:
Britt Svenglund. She set down two heavy baskets, removed a string of
beads made of drilled river stones, and lifted the long gown up and over
and off. She had quite the most beautiful body I have ever seen. She
went to Godbody where he sat on the bed and laid her right wrist on the
side of his neck for a moment while their eyes met, and then turned to
me. She repeated the strange touch, but with both wrists on the sides of
my neck. Something flowed from skin to skin—extraordinary!—and I fell
right into her eyes, and when she straightened and stepped back, the
contact somehow was not broken.
Mr. Currier came in, carrying two heavy shopping bags, bending to get in
the low doorway, and behind him was his wife. I love that woman. The
sight they saw brought them to some sort of peak—you could see that—but
it wasn't shock or disapproval. I had a sudden flash of a story I'd
read, where people who had lived for three generations underground came
out one night and for the first time saw the sun come up.
And behind them, someone else—quite the last person in all the world I
expected or wanted to see anywhere again, but most especially not here.
There was one tiny intense moment of total panic, when the three-legged
stool back there in the shadows became the most important thing in all
creation—a goal, a refuge, an absolute necessity—and I turned my head to
find myself looking in Godbody's eyes, which with total attention asked
me Well?, and if I had an answer, it was // is well. I sat back, and I
smiled.
    <p>Andrew Merriweather</p>

My wife has a little poodle named Boo. Boo will hump any available
outstretched arm or crossed leg. My wife, who is ever so genteel, says,
"Oh, naughty, naughty Boo to do such a dirty thing!" Boo doesn't listen.
The other day I got fed up with Boo frantically humping my leg, so I hit
him across the nose with the Wall Street Journal and suggested to my
wife that she either let him out to take care of his natural urges or
take him to a vet. She replied that it would be dangerous because "Boo
is just a little little boy—so very young yet."
The dog is eight years old.
I get tired of watching television with a perpetual background of "Oh,
naughty Boo. Oh, how dirty, Boo!" so sometimes I just get up and leave.
If I happen to come back later, I can expect to see her absorbed in
television, with Boo humping away at her crossed leg. Every so often she
will look down and give the dog a maternal smile. It gives me the
creeps. And if I go in she uncrosses her legs and says, "Oh, naughty
Boo."
All of which is why I prefer the company of Willa Mayhew to that of my
wife. Willa confines her hypocrisies to that syrupy little bird in her
column and deals with me with her insanity wide open. Willa, I think,
would rap Boo's nose for humping if she were alone with him but would
encourage it if I were present. Demonstrations of evil are the breath of
life to Willa Mayhew, and I am only too happy to encourage her in it.
Everything humanity has become and has produced goes back not to the
arch and the wheel, but far earlier to the recognition of straight lines
and flat surfaces. Where a human being is strictured he is channeled,
and like water in a pipe, the smaller the diameter the greater the
pressure. To say nothing of the control in direction .... To accuse me
of being against the natural thing is to misunderstand me. I do happen
to prefer a box hedge to a bougainvillea, because the latter can only
diffuse itself while a box becomes more dense the more you cut it back,
and will willingly accept training in any direction and still stay
healthy. The choice of plants which thrive under discipline is the
secret of business and of individual people as well.
I do not operate under rules-of-thumb, but if I did, I would deny a bank
loan out-of-hand to anyone who is, on first meeting, what is called
"warm" or (mistakenly) "human" or seductive or cheerfully ingratiating.
Let such people grow like weeds on someone else's property. I surround
myself with practices, people, activities, and plants which can be
contained and directed. I pride myself that there exists no passion, no
emotional circumstance, which can cloud my clear vision of its worth and
my ability to find a direction for it.
All of which again brings me to Willa Mayhew and my pleasure in her
company, for in me these things are learned things, the product of a
long and arduous and purposeful effort. Willa was born with them or
acquired them early. Her instant and complete comprehension of these
verities never ceases to amaze me, and bears out my conviction that
intuition is not a magical leap from premise to conclusion, but a form
of superspeed computation in which the individually reasoned steps are
passed too quickly to be retained in the memory—but passed, not
bypassed.
She has her own reasons for doing what she does, and I have mine for
doing what I do to direct her. It is rather amazing how often our
completely separate reasons call for the same action. For example: in
the matter of the Rev. Currier, I have found the man intractable in a
number of ways. True, he has increased attendance and therefore
collections—as Trustee for the chuch's accounts I am well aware of
that—but in some other matters his attitude is something less than could
be desired.
The church owns a two acre lot on Hedgerow Street which has been, for
nearly a century, a children's playground. The little it brings in in
community goodwill is not enough to pay for its upkeep, whereas the
construction of a two-story, sixteen-unit Sunset House—a residence for
senior citizens—could bring in very substantial funds, church-owned and
tax free. The tax-free status of such property is, I think, doomed in
this country eventually, and it seems a matter of elementary wisdom to
take advantage of it while the taking is good.
The Rev. Currier, however, is adamant on the subject, and without his
approval the playground cannot be replaced. The issue is greater than it
seems, however. I would like to see a less popular man, if I must, in
that pulpit, if he could be better managed. The Rev. Currier can be
swayed only by logic powerful enough to upset his convictions, and his
hold on those is often harder than one might suspect. Mr. Currier, in
sum, is just too hard to handle, and some mild scandal might be of
assistance in moving him along to some parish where his gifts might be
better appreciated, while his replacement would almost certainly be more
reasonable. Men of Currier's ideological stubbornness are rare in the
clergy—rare, indeed, everywhere else.
Willa Mayhew, on the other hand, has always had a deep instinctive
dislike of the Curriers, I think because of the rather startling beauty
of his wife Liza, which has always struck Willa as a calculated affront.
It does not matter whether or not this makes any sense—it motivates her
in quite the right direction, and I can only be pleased.
Her ingenuity and resourcefulness are a source of great enjoyment to me.
Her carefully nurtured relations with the town constabulary, the
Sheriffs Office, the State Police and the county and state C.I.D.'s make
it quite possible for her to call a raid, small or large, at any time on
anyone. She uses this power sparingly and well, and knows as well as
anyone that a raid all by itself can accomplish a great deal even if no
convictions result from it. And her stable of what I secretly call
"operatives''—like the Harrisonbury woman and the Wellen creature, who
can be made to jump when she snaps her fingers—is a real delight.
Interestingly enough, we have never compared notes on this matter of
motivation. If I feel pressure should be applied at some vital spot in
the quiet picturesque little town of ours, Willa always seems to be able
to find the weak spot where pressure can be most effectively applied.
More: she probably found the weak spot months ago and has it filed away
ready for use at a moment's notice. The Svenglund woman, for example. I
feel basically that she is a harmless eccentric and would have no
objections to her hermiting out there on South Mountain forever, except
for my knowledge that she holds clear title to the best deposit of road
shale within miles of here. The only way to get that shale for the
state-federal highway project, due through here not fifteen months from
now, is to get her out of there, for her house is built right on top of
it. Public opinion, of the Mayhew variety, can accomplish this more
quickly and more cheaply than any other known method.
All these thoughts reeled through my mind in Food Mart, our local
supermarket, when I glimpsed the Svenglund woman and the minister
pushing a shopping cart through the aisles and talking avidly. I paused
a moment to watch them, trying to see them through Willa Mayhew's eyes.
In her mind the presence of a man with a woman—any man with any woman—is
a coupling, with all that the term implies, and I remember thinking how
splendid an arrangement like that, involving these two people, would be.
Just think: a liaison between the minister and this shameless eccentric
from South Mountain. A vision of her property populated by bulldozers
and loading machines was superimposed on another of a nice new Sunset
House on Hedgerow street, honoring its aged tenants while with pleasing
frequency they broke their leases by dying off. Then regretfully I let
the visions fade. Planning is one thing, wishful thinking another. A
couple with evil knowledge does not engage in open conversation in a
supermarket—especially not these two. Still.. . there must be a way to
profit by some combination of their weaknesses. I had determined to
discuss it with Willa, meanwhile still wishing there was something I
could think of to do with them right now, when they solved the problem
for me.
"Andy. Andy Merriweather!"
I approached them. In their cart were apples, cheese, black
pumpernickel, some early plums, a five-pound bag of whole-wheat flour
and some raw sugar. I wished fleetingly that they had bought beer. "Yes,
Dan. Evening, Miss Sven-glund."
"Andy, I'd like to talk to you. Do you have a few minutes?"
"Of course, Dan. What is it?"
They looked at each other quickly. Ah—it involved both of them.
"Not here. Could you come up to the house?" Ah, again. I detected the
signs of the nontrivial.
"If it's important—certainly. Let me call my wife, and then I'll be with
you."
"Andy, thank you. Thank you very much," he said earnestly, and if there
is anything in the world that offends me more than an ankle-humping
poodle, it is a preacher's earnestness. How I feel about what I have to
put up with as a banker, vice chairman of the Vestry Board, and Church
Trustee is known only to me and God. "Why don't youjust go on up to my
house? We'll follow in a few minutes," he said.
Ah, that "we." Ah, that quick decision without consulting the Svenglund
woman, meaning an understanding between them. Ah. "See you soon, then."
Outside the double glass doors of the market there is a phone booth, and
it was in use. There is a technique for handling this situation,
involving jingling coins impatiently in front of the caller, starting
away and turning back and so on. There is another technique, however,
when one feels concern about the caller and his messages, which involves
leaning back against the wall beside the booth where he cannot see you
and looking carefully away, so that the world sees your studied
disinterest while your ear is aimed at the imperfect soundproofing.
The man in the booth was Hobo Wellen, looking as if he had been decanted
from a concrete mixer full of rock dust, and he was so angry that he was
yelling.
"No, I ain't going to tell you any more right now. All I want you to
know is I saw him myself, a big redheaded guy. Just who and where and
how, I'll say in my own time, so let's you and me be real nice to each
other until then." He slammed out of the booth and ran blindly right
past me, out into the parking lot.
The conjectures possible in the face of evidence like this were so
numerous that I simply set them all aside, content to memorize what I
had heard and file it away in my "Future Use" compartment. I was tempted
to play with it: Who would Hobo Wellen be promising part of a story to,
for example, and why was he so angry, and why was he raising his price?
(For that "be real nice to each other" would be a treasure to him.) And
finally, what was his story about a "big redheaded guy?" ... It pleased
me to be able to set it all aside for now, so certain was I that I could
have the whole story virtually at will. I called home.
"Don't wait dinner for me," I said when she gave me the genteel Hello.
"Church business." I then held the receiver away from my ear until I
heard a pause, with a rising inflection: question. I said, "I didn't get
that last."
She demanded, "Did you get Boo's din-din?"
Now if a preacher's earnestness is irritation, baby-talk is absolutely
infuriating. "I did not," I said.
"But I asked you to, and you said you were going to the market."
"I am not," I said, looking up at the market's huge pillared sign,
"going to the market." I do not lie.
"Then what about poor Boo's din-din?" she wailed gen-teely. With some
years of practice this becomes possible. I said reasonably, "Give him my
din-din."
Immune to sarcasm, she cried, "Oh, but that might make him sick!"
"Yes," I said, "it might," and hung up. I got my car and drove to the
rectory. Liza Currier let me in.
"Andy, how nice!" It startled me. She always welcomed me because she
always welcomed virtually everybody—part of her job. But this was
different. It couldn't have been anything about me that produced this
warmth and sparkle —this is not modesty, but cold pragmatism—so it must
be something that had happened to her. I wondered what would happen to
the warmth and sparkle when next week's paper came out. I wondered, too,
watching her stride as she ushered me into the living room, what life
would be like with a woman like this as part of the daily—and
nightly—environment instead of the well-bred bundle of inanities I had
selected as my life's partner.
A strange—for me, very strange—thought occurred to me as I followed Liza
Currier those few steps from the door to the living room: that the
boundaries of my wife's being were her clothes, but that Liza's body
began inside her garments . . . that my wife seemed to be, through and
through, weavings and stitches and seams and cloth; no bones, no flesh,
no veins, intestines, organs; just factory-finished preshrunk
moisture-retardant, man-made or totally processed fibers; whereas Liza
Currier wore clothes the way the earth wears weather, and they really
began at her skin, beneath which she was actual warm flesh and blood.
Mind you, I was not making a qualitative comparison; I was not saying
that to be like Liza was a better way to be. If naturalness is better,
then perhaps we should never have left the trees and the caves. Liza
would be totally unsuited to the position in my life in which I had
placed my wife. I had chosen a wife to be what my wife had become, and I
felt no need to criticize my own decisions. Yet. . . there was a
difference between the two, and it emerged rather vividly in the few
seconds during which I watched Liza Currier walking. I said, "Dan's at
the market and on his way back here with Britt Svenglund."
"Oh," she said, "How nice. Isn't she beautiful?"
"Is she?" This was a response, not a question; Liza did not attempt to
answer it. I sat down in the not-quite-expensive, not-quite-worn wing
chair supplied its pastor by the congregation, and she excused herself
and flew into the kitchen.
Thoughts of my wife returned to me. Comparisons are not odious, as the
old saw has it: comparisons are comparisons. My wife approaches the
kitchen sedately and on time.
Over the years she has developed (at my suggestion and insistence) a
basic collection of eight dinner menus. There are eight because there
are seven days in a week, and therefore one does not have, say, chicken
on successive Tuesdays. Arranged this way, meals are anticipated, but
not monotonous; shopping is not subject to impulse buying; food
preparation becomes increasingly expert (although I must say my wife's
skill in overcooking a lamb roast has reached an unimproveable peak of
tastelessness), and the appearance of leftovers in the refrigerator is
absolutely predictable, which takes care of her lunches during the week
and mine on weekends. So . . . never does she "fly" into the kitchen.
She is, I suppose, like the emu and the cassowary, a flightless bird in
all respects. Flights of language, flights of imagination, and certainly
flights of passion are quite alien to her and always have been. I met
her when I was a teller at the First National Bank, and she impressed me
in a number of ways. Not especially talented in anything, she had
applied herself diligently in high school and for a year in business
college, supporting a most creditable record purely on the ability to do
exactly as she was told and absolutely nothing else. She was punctual
and neat and had the admirable ability to listen attentively and talk
very little. When I gained my assistant managership and was to be
transferred here, and had carefully assessed the advantages of being
married in a community such as ours, we became engaged one evening in an
inexpensive restaurant and, after a suitable interval, were married. We
had planned to go to Atlantic City or Niagara Falls for three days, but
when I was offered the opportunity of attending an interbank conference
on teletype credit procedures, I took her to Poughkeepsie, New York. She
waited in the hotel room armed with some magazines and the Gideon Bible
while I attended the sessions, and after a quiet dinner in the hotel
restaurant we retired to our separate beds. I felt it premature to
introduce her to all the facets of marriage at once, so the occasion
passed very peacefully. And a good thing, too: twice she had fits of
depression and crying at night, which was certainly no time to upset her
with unseemly advances.
Inevitably, of course, these matters had to be included in our
relationship. It was, after all, a marriage. We were both extremely
young—I had not yet reached my mid-thirties— and I handled it the way I
have handled any new enterprise: learn all one can, consult the experts,
and then proceed with caution. I read everything I could find on the
subject, which in those days was not very much. Some of this, of course,
could be discarded at the first glance—the works of Havelock Ellis, for
example, I regard as nothing but pornography. Poetic pornography, I will
grant, but pornography nonetheless. Dr. Willey's heavy volume I found
too clinical, too explicit, and almost devoid of moral values, while his
profuse illustrations obscured their information in (for me) clouds of
embarrassment. Dr. Stopes was more to my liking, and I patterned my
approach on her advice, except for her assertion that the wife should
possess all this information as well as the husband. I firmly believe
that any man who permits his wife to know as much as he does about
anything is a fool.
But as always caution prevailed, and before initiating these practices I
sent my wife to Dr. Krebs (now deceased) to be fitted with a diaphragm.
Not that I was particularly modern-minded in such matters. I just feel
that everything should be planned.
Dr. Krebs was an aging German with an accent just thick enough to make
him seem cultivated and to conceal a view of things I can only describe
as coarse. "Anty," he said with a ribald gleam in his eye, after he had
sent my wife out of his examining room and called me in, "Anty—" (there
was, I think, something offensive in the way he used my nickname) "dere
is somesing vitch hass to be done zat if I do it wiss my instruments it
iss a sin against God."
I stood right up to him. "Don't be irreverent, Doctor. What has to be
done?"
"Ze t'ingyou haff to do mit your instrument, dumkopf. She hass a
regrettable condition which needs correction. She iss a virgin."
I very much disliked his expression of suppressed laughter. This was a
serious matter. I asked him how to proceed under the circumstances, and
he became quite inarticulate. It was some time before I could explain to
him that it was not the basic procedure I wished to discuss but only the
matter of contraception. He was then able to tell me what to ask for at
the drug store. I wrote it down in my notebook and took my wife home.
The next day I drove to a neighboring town and bought the prophylactics.
They came three to a box. That night after dinner I told my wife that I
would sleep in her bed. She colored violently and bowed her head. I
think she misunderstood me because, after having given her sufficient
time to get ready, I entered the bedroom and fumbled across the dark
room to her bed only to find it empty. Taking me at my word, she had
taken my bed. As things turned out, this was by far the best thing that
could have happened, because I had had a series of misadventures in the
bathroom while preparing myself. On opening the little box I had bought
at that distant drugstore, I found three rather surprisingly long, limp
rubber sheaths, but no leaflet of instructions of any kind. A serious
oversight of the manufacturers. I understood, of course, the principle
of the things, but the knack of stuffing a small limp male organ into
one of them was beyond me. The first one I broke with my thumbnail. The
dry rubber against my dry skin was recalcitrant. The second one I
lubricated inside with soapy water. It slid on easily but fell off as
soon as I stood up. By this time my manipulations had brought about a
local excitement which disturbed me very much. I had been taught early
that excessive handling of the genitals was dangerous to the mind and
soul, and was to be avoided at all costs. I took immediate measures: a
cold shower, which took so long to bring about a normal relaxation of
the organ that I caught quite a chill. I then put on the third sheath,
having struck the right degree of lubrication by having it wet but not
soapy. It was much longer than it needed to be and it was necessary for
me to hold it in place with one hand the whole time I was getting into
my pajamas, but I succeeded. Under the circumstances, finding her bed
unoccupied was a rather welcome surprise.
It was almost a week later that I had another opportunity to go out of
town and return to that pharmacy, where I asked to see the pharmacist in
his back room and lodged a complaint. The idiot kept saying, "What?
What?" and looking at me strangely, but I persisted, and he sold me
another brand which, he said, were ready-rolled and would give me no
trouble. I returned home with them and found them much more
satisfactory. I performed my marital duty as quickly and as forcefully
as I could. I had no intention of being forceful, but it turned out to
be much more difficult than I had thought. At first it seemed absolutely
impossible to penetrate her, and I think I became a little angry. When
the tissues yielded she screamed and after that cried a good deal, but
anyway it was done, and I went back to bed satisfied, at least in my
mind. The animal part of me satisfied itself during the night, which
quite disgusted me. All in all, it was not a pleasant experience, and I
understood the wisdom of the Creator who associated these organs so
closely with the other disgusting functions. When I tried to explain
this point to my wife at breakfast she said, "You didn't even kiss me,"
and burst into tears, a non sequitur which forced me out of the house
without my second cup of coffee and put my whole day out of step.
In due course Dr. Krebs completed his fitting—without the pleasure of my
company, you may be sure—and in another week the diaphragm arrived in
the mail. This, I learned (much later) looked like one of the second lot
of prophylactics I had bought, all rolled up, but about five times as
large. The rubber rim concealed a coil spring, and there were, unlike
the male's devices, voluminous instructions on preparation, insertion,
removal, cleaning and maintenance. My wife is, as I have mentioned, an
expert on doing exactly as she is told, and I was certain that she could
manage these rituals quite handily. My surprise and irritation is
therefore understandable, I think, when the appointed occasion arrived
and I awaited her in the bedroom, and she came in, turned on the light
and sat down on the edge of her bed with a woebegone, frightened and
embarrassed expression on her face. She held like a scepter in her hand
what looked like an oversized blue plastic toothbrush handle, minus the
bristles and bearing a small spur partway down and, at the tip, two
blunt prongs.
"What," I demanded, "is that?"
She looked at it as if she had forgotten she had it and quickly and
uselessly tried to hide it behind her back. She was then forced to
explain that it was an insertion device for those of such delicate
sensibilities that they could not bring themselves to touch that area of
their bodies with their hands, which I can certainly understand.
It was not easy to get a coherent explanation from her beyond "It's
gone, Andy. I can't find it," to which I responded with some asperity
that she wasn't supposed to find it until afterward. She then explained
to me that I didn't understand; it was not where I evidently thought it
was. It seemed that she had not been able to insert it at all, and now
it was "gone, Andy. I can't find it!"
Further discussion brought some tears and, from me, a good many
get-to-the-points and, at last, an account of what had happened. Given
several alternate choices of postures to assume in performing this act,
she had chosen to lie on her back in the dry bathtub with her knees
raised and separated. The diaphragm, well anointed with a jelly that
came with it, was to be stretched from the two prongs at the tip of the
applicator and hooked to the spur below. According to the instructions
it could then be inserted to the correct depth, where a slight rotation
of the applicator would disengage the object from its position on the
handle and it would then snap in place internally.
She did everything properly up to the point where she was ready to
insert the contraption. She lay back in the tub, and the instant her
eyes came off what she held in her hand, there was a sound . . .
During the subsequent discussion and search I forced her to reproduce
that sound. It was the only clue we had . . . like phutphooPLOP. She
raised her head to identify it and found her scepter empty of the rubber
device. Puzzled, she rose out of the tub and began searching. She
searched everywhere in that bathroom, getting down on her hands and
knees, even going prone on the cold tiles to look under the tub. At last
in despair she had come to me for assistance, still blindly carrying her
fairy wand.
When at last I had absorbed the situation, I got out of my bed, and into
my slippers and robe, and gave her what I am sure was an eloquently
scornful look. I stamped into the bathroom while she tiptoed timorously
after me.
A quick glance around failed to produce an instant discovery. I glared
at her again and moved the shower curtains and stooped and peered and
shifted. I then descended to my knees and, on them, walked painfully
around that bathroom searching. Ultimately, I was flat on my stomach
peering under the tub.
Nothing.
I sat on the floor and looked up at her. "Why couldn't you have been
just a little bit careful?" I demanded. She wailed that she had so been
careful. It was at this point that I had her keep trying to reproduce
that sound until she was satisfied that it was right. I tried it until
we were both satisfied that I had it down properly. PhutphooPLOP, we
said to each other. PhutphooPLOP. I then began to analyze the sound.
Phut we agreed was the sound of the spring-loaded diaphragm leaving the
applicator. The phoo was rather more special. Unaspirated, it was more
of a whir or silent whistle than anything else, and we agreed that it
must have been the sound of it flying through the air. The PLOP,
however, eluded us.
Disgusted and giving up at last, I shook my head and stood up, bringing
my still shaking head up on the underside of the sink. I felt as if I
had been most unjustly attacked and said an angry word to my wife, whose
eyes were very round and most of whose knuckles were in her mouth. I
then turned to assess the damage and found myself looking straight at
the diaphragm, which, by suction and by its lining of viscous jelly, had
adhered to the very center of the mirror.
"Here it is," I said, "as any fool can plainly see," and, with my
dignity intact, I stalked out, leaving the silly woman to make up her
mind what to do next. I went to my bed and in due course she went to
hers, which, I suppose, was the only possible ending to the episode.
All of which, unaccountably, flickered through my mind in the brief few
minutes between Liza Currier's quick graceful exit and the entrance of
the minister and the Svenglund creature.
"Andy, I really am grateful," Currier said, coming over to me and quite
unnecessarily shaking my hand. "Don't get up." I wasn't getting up.
"Britt—do sit down."
Britt. Ah! Not Miss Svenglund.
The woman, in her long robe, slid across the room as if legless and on
tracks, turned and settled on the divan. She had not spoken a word to me
in the market, and she did not here. I wondered why.
Currier murmured something polite and left the room, presumably to
salute his wife. What I did on returning to my home was to glance about
out of the corner of my eye to see if my wife was visible and if the
evening paper was on the end table. If so, I said, "Ah, the paper," and
if not, I sighed. Then I caught myself making comparisons again and
wondering why. I looked up and saw Britt Svenglund looking at me.
I am not accustomed to being looked at in that way. Women, I have
discovered, do not look at me very much at all unless they are about to
speak. If I catch them at it, they smile. Well, most people do. Most
smiles are as unnecessary as a preacher's handshake, and mean very
little. Even angry people smile. Most people smile even when you turn
them down for a loan. I have never been able to understand why, but they
do.
Britt Svenglund did not.
The few people who do not persistently and vapidly smile are either
disinterested or mean to be offensive. Britt Svenglund was neither. She
looked at me levelly, with great attention, and though there appeared to
be no hostility in her, I found the experience most disturbing. I
shifted in my chair and am sorry to say I smiled at her. I did not want
to, and the effect must have been rather ghastly. After that I could do
nothing but return her gaze.
I had seen her around town, every now and then, for years, but now I had
to admit to myself that I had never seen her. She was markedly taller
than I might have recollected, if indeed I had bothered to recollect
her, and more full-bodied, and her face was stronger and more regular
than I might have realized, the eyes larger and farther apart. Really,
rather impressive.
Could Dan Currier be forming a liaison with this woman? I had the awful
feeling that I was about to ask her, and that if I did she would tell
me.
Rather to my relief the Curriers returned, with her hand in his while he
said persuasively, "No, no, Liza—I want you in on this. It concerns you.
Never mind the coffee." They seated themselves on the divan next to
Britt Svenglund and joined their gazes to hers. I felt impaled.
"Andy—you spend considerable time with Willa May-hew. You must know more
about how her mind works than anyone/'
I said drily, "I never considered myself especially perceptive, Dan."
The message was, I'm not going to help you, and I think he got it.
He leaned forward and grew intense. Oh, I do hate it when a minister
gets intense. "Look, Andy, I'll level with you. I've discovered that
Willa intends to print something about Liza in the paper next week,
something pretty awful."
"About me!"
He took her hand, and I said carefully, "I don't think it's her practice
to mention anyone, Dan. Not by name."
"No one ever doubts who she means, and you know it."
"What's she saying?" Liza asked.
''That you're—what's the term one uses?—entertaining men while I'm out
on calls."
"Dan!"
"Sweetheart, I'm not concerned about what she says. I know it isn't
true. I want to know why."
He was making that demand of me, and I was not comfortable. I said, "If
it isn't true then there is nothing to be afraid of."
And then Dan Currier really surprised me. He said, "Andy, I want you to
know first of all that I am not afraid of anything—not any more.
Secondly, I have discovered that we don't live in a world where 'true'
or 'not true' makes any real difference to people. We should, but we
don't. It isn't whether or not a thing is so, it's what people say, and
how they're made to say it, and most especially, why."
Again, but with a great difference, Liza cried, "Dan!" and when he
looked at her, added, "I didn't know you knew that."
I hadn't known either. I looked at the minister and for the first time
realized that he could after all be an angry man —more: that he was
angry now. It is hard for me to put in words how deeply disturbing this
was. There are things one knows and counts on: the laws of gravity and
the cycle of seasons; Wellen is a sexual psychopath; there is money to
be made from religious respectability; Daniel Currier is not a realist.
On these things one builds one's structures, and using them, one
manipulates things and people. Doubt any one of these, and it casts
doubt on them all. I took refuge: I said nothing.
He pursued me. He spoke to me as he had never spoken before to me or, as
far as I know, to anyone before. He made no attempt to be polite or to
let me know (as he always had before) that perhaps I might be right for
reasons that he was ignorant of, and in that case he was ready to
listen. Gloves off, and most uncharacteristically (from what I knew of
him) sure of himself, he laid it down.
"Andy, you run this town—you and Willa Mayhew. No— don't interrupt me!
Don't give me a lecture about the town board and local ordinances and
county and state laws and a regulated school district. You know what I
mean. I am not going to discuss what motivates you; I just want you to
know that I know what you are doing. I know too that you do whatever you
can to strengthen the structure that exists —only because it exists and
not because it is good. Only because you can use it, and the stronger it
is, the stronger you are. You use the church for that, and the bank, and
also you use Willa Mayhew and her newspaper.
"I don't think you are attacking Liza for any personal reason, or any
simple reason either. It's more likely that you are attacking me. The
reason you're doing it this way is that it's more effective this way.
You see, I don't think you're a coward, Andy. Far from it. If a direct
attack would work better, I'm sure you'd use one. So let me ask you
straight: why are you attacking me?"
I liked none of this and said so. I stood up and said, "I don't have to
stay here and listen to this." Whereupon the minister gave me my second
surprise in this astonishing evening. He put both hands on my shoulders
and said, "Oh, yes you do," and I found myself seated again so abruptly
that I felt a tingling in the bridge of my nose. He is a very large man,
and the weight of those two hands seemed to dissolve my knees and my
jaw. I sat with my mouth open, looking up at him as he returned to his
place and put his arm around his wife. She was as astonished, I think,
as I, but unlike myself, she seemed to be full of joy. The Svenglund
woman was looking at him too, and though her face was impassive still,
her large eyes were very bright.
"The ques—," I began, but somehow my voice failed me. I swallowed, and
there was nothing in my dry mouth to swallow. I cleared my throat. "The
question is, uh, out of the question," I fumbled. "I have not seen
Willa's column." My shocked brains began to work. "Neither have you—
have you?"
He did not answer. He did the worst thing to me he could have done—said
nothing, made no gesture, gave me nothing to use to change the subject.
I said, "I don't pretend to understand Willa or what she does. I have no
evidence that she is attacking anyone, but if she is, her reasons are
her own. You should be asking her, not me." Again I waited, and again he
waited me out. I began to be afraid of this man. "You have no evidence
that I have ever attacked you. Have you?" Silence again. I yelled, "You
can't prove it!"
"You can't deny it. You've just said a lot of things, Andy, but not once
have you denied it. I know you—you do not lie. Can't you take that one
small step that will make you tell the truth?"
I said, from the depths of my being, "I want to go home
"Oh God," Currier cried suddenly—and it came from him in a priest's
voice, it was a priest's prayer: "Who can make this man tell the simple
truth?"
And Britt Svenglund spoke up, spoke the only word I had heard from her
in this insane encounter:
"Godbody," she said.
    <p>Harrison Salz</p>

Picked up speeder on Winter Road by the bridge. It was Councilman
Pruett, let him go. Stopped a couple kids hitchhiking. Homely girl, bad
skin. Hassled them a little but no fun, they just took it. Kicked his
ass. Got a kitten out of tree for old Mrs. Amplick. Give me a drink and
five dollars. Think she smokes pot. Well, let her. Checked in 8:03,
Chief wouldn't let me take the car home. That's that for night riding.
The boys'll be sorry about that. Knockin around the back roads with a
couple beers and a couple friends is livin.
Walkin home, car pulls up, someone calls me. I see the car is Hobo
Wellen's shot-rod. Some day the top crust is going to quit coddlin Hobo
Wellen, and he'll get his. Meanwhile you best listen, and sure enough,
he's got Mrs. May-hew in the back.
"Get in, Harry."
I get in but I say, "I got to—" and she says with that special honk in
her voice, "You're coming with us," so I say "Well okay."
Nobody tells me nothin so I don't ask. Some day, boy. Some goddam day
there won't nobody be able to "Get in Harry" me. Somebody wrote in the
paper part-time constables got too much power. They should know. Half
the people hate you, most of the rest laugh, you got to take every
chance you can to show 'em who you are. You work when the Chief feels
like it, and when he don't you don't, but boy you better be on call
twenty-four hours anyway or else. Too much power. Boy.
I says, "Where we goin?" and Wellen says, "South Mountain," same time as
Mrs. Mayhew says, "wait and see." I know who to listen to so I shut up
again. My time will come, but it ain't come yet. Mrs. Mayhew, she had my
number since I was on the force sixty days. How she found out about
Denette I don't know. Night shift, summertime, just making the rounds,
saw this Denette Francosi two o'clock in the morning out on the Ridge
Road in her nightgown. In and out of her nightgown. Had only the one arm
through it, the other side hangin down, the one tit out. Stopped. She
come up past the car and begins to pass. Had to get out, she wouldn't
answer. Caught up with her, grabbed her, she hangs on to me, starts to
cry. Says she's sleepwalkin. Never even tries to cover up. Get her into
the car, try gentlin her, get hot. Next thing she's tearin at me, gets
it out, goes down on me. I come, she swallows the load. She squirms down
on the back seat, I give her a good bangin and take her home. Very next
mornin get a call to go down to the newspaper office to look at
scratches on the door, was someone tryin to get in? Wasn't no scratches,
was Mrs. Mayhew, she says it's time we got to know each other, she tells
me about some town policeman stopped a girl two in the mornin
sleepwalkin, made her do somethin unnatural (that's what she said),
raped her, took her home. I didn't say nothin, but lookin at those
serious crazy eyes of hers I knew she knew, she wasn't guessin. Got out
of there, went and found Denette at the playground where she worked
twice a week, cussed her out for tellin, she swore she never. Mrs.
Mayhew all the time talks about a little bird sees every-thin. I almost
believe it. Unless she got somethin on Denette made her lie to me about
tellin. Got to thinkin for awhile maybe even Mrs. Mayhew put her up to
it but that's just too crazy. Ain't it? The next thing is old Ogilvie's
accident, run off the high shoulder on the County Road, so drunk I took
him home. Mrs. Mayhew stops me on the street to tell me next day she
knows about the $18.50. I could swear Ogilvie was passed-out drunk and
never seen a thing, so how did she know, how did she know how much?
There was plenty left in his wallet, I ain't stupid. So either she got
Ogilvie to act out the whole thing because she had somethin on him too,
which nobody is goin to believe, or she really has got that little bird.
I ain't afraid of no man alive, although I know when to keep my mouth
shut and when to wait my chance, or no woman either, but I am afraid of
that little bird.
So here we are goin through the intersection and up the dirt road and
Wellen stops at the bridge over the dry creek. Mrs. Mayhew she honks at
him, what does he think he's doin, move on up a piece and hide the car.
"Oh, sorry," he says, and he's mad, and I think you too? I can imagine
what the little bird seen him doin, he's a dirty kink, everybody knows
that. We go on around the bend and Hobo stops and backs the car through
a shallow ditch into the woods. We all get out and Mrs. Mayhew passes
out flashlights to us and she has one too, then it comes to me it was
not no accident she happened along when I got off shift, it probably
wasn't no accident the Chief wouldn't let me take the car.
"Don't use the lights unless you have to," she tells us, and we come
back down the road to the bridge and off the end and down the bank to
the creek bed. "Oh," I says, "the squarehead," meaning the kook
Skywegian broad that lives up here, nobody else does. She says, "Shut
up, Harry," which sometimes is a thing I swear is wrote on my forehead
and everybody I meet reads it off to me, shut up, Harry.
Well it was hard to shut up and not to use the lights, we all three done
it and talked up too, mostly Ow and Shit and I will not stand for that
language. That last is her. Because believe you me that is the roughest
road in the dark you ever want to hit. Finally when we come to the steps
the squarehead cut in the bank, do we walk up 'em? We do not. We do the
mountain-goat bit up the other side, slippin and fallin and tryin not to
cuss till we come to a flat place with burrs, thorns and somethin or
other that makes my head itch an my eyes water, I don't know what, but
anyway it's right across from the house. We get settled down and it's
too far away for me to see, but Mrs. Mayhew, she unslings a big pair
binoculars from a leather case and props 'em up. She's quiet a long
time, so are we, then I hear her smackin her lips. Yes I mean smackin
her lips. After a while Ahhh, she's sayin, ahhh, ahhh. It sounds like
she's seein somethin good, but I know her and I heard that before, I was
on raids with her, that Ahhhh means real bad trouble for somebody.
Hobo says, "Listen!" and I hear it too. Somebody's comin from the road,
more'n one, more'n two . . . more'n that I can't say. Not tryin to be
quiet neither, and they have a light.
"Harry," Mrs. Mayhew says, "quick nip over there by the house where you
can see in and hear. I want to know everything. Every last thing, you
understand that? Quick, before they get there. Don't be seen. There are
people inside the house already. Jump!"
Oh never a please and never a do you mind, and what the hell is nippin
and can you do that and jump too? Oh lady, some fuckin day . . . but I
jumped or nipped or whatever and got my ass down the slope and across
the creek and up the steps without nobody seein me but a baby goat I
stepped on a little bit under that big wide eave she's got. I scrabbled
back and around huntin till I found a place I could hunker down under an
open window. I could hear real good, but I didn't want to put my head
up. I felt around, and there right at the edge of a board the mill had
sawed through a knot and it had fell out, and somebody, I guess the
squarehead, had stuffed it full of what felt like moss with some sticky
hard stuff in it—balsam, it smelt like. I got out my knife and worked at
it careful, careful, doin it up and under so's the bits all fell out on
my side. Real soon I had a pinprick of light in the hole, and then I
slowed down a lot and gentled it all out. It was great. Best peephole I
ever had on the job, I could sit on my ass to use it, yes and a peep
show to go with it.
Bare-ass nekkid. That's the first thing hit me, wow. Bare-ass nekkid.
And would you believe it, Melissa Franck. Holy Christ, and who would
ever know she had a build like that. You go for the centerfold in girlie
books, well fine, so do I, but you ain't never goin to see the likes of
this there. Like she ain't thin, but anyone says she's fat is wrong.
Like if you say she's big, you'd be wrong because she is not tall. I
know the word I want to use, but I will not use it.
Then, the guy. Stranger. Better'n six foot, wide and flat. Redheaded
with a long dong on him. They must of fucked already because they wasn't
doin nothin, not even talkin. He was on a kind of bed thing in the
corner, leanin back on one arm. She was kneelin on the floor next to
him, like watchin his face. His face I could see pretty good by the one
big candle swung from a chain. I never seen a face just like that one.
You couldn't say how old. There's a kid in town fourteen has a face old
like two hundred years, I don't mean wrinkled, but how he looks at you,
what he knows. This guy was like that.
I seen a light, I heard some talk from the people comin, but I can't say
who. I hunkered down and got flat against the boards to be sure they
wouldn't see me, not that I had to worry, they'd of had to come right
around to the side of the house and turned the light right on me and the
door was up at the other end. When I was sure they had got there I
heaved up and looked again.
First in was Britt Svenglund, my God, she reached down and lifted the
long dress right off, and I always thought she didn't wear nothin under
it and I was right. Oh Jesus God in heaven what a build on her. You
don't see that kind in no centerfolds either but that's just because
they can't get one. She goes straight to the redhead and does a funny
thing, she puts her two wrists against the sides of his neck and looks
into his eyes. If you should ever see anyone do that do you know what?
You want to do it too. Then she goes to Melissa Franck and does the same
thing.
Meanwhile who should come in the door loaded down with groceries but the
minister, I mean Currier himself, and his little wife Liza. If this was
goin to be the time I would see Liza Currier bare-ass it was goin to be
a day to remember. There is not a guy in town under eighty that hasn't
thought that one over. Oh, she is a dish. Currier puts down his bundles,
and she moves close to him and they stand there lookin at those three
nekkid people, and who should walk in the door then but Mister
Merriweather the banker. He didn't come far. Soon as he seen those
nekkid people he stopped dead, and the only reason he didn't turn around
and walk out I think is he couldn't.
The minister started toward him and so did Britt Svenglund. Walked
straight up to him, he didn't know where to look. She says, "You are
welcome to this house." She says it in that funny squarehead way of
talking she has. She says, "I would like you to understand about my
house." She says, "If I were to come to your house I would obey your
rules. Here in my house you may obey your rules too." Then she says,
very serious: "But in my house you may not expect me to obey your rules.
I will not do it. Now come in—truly you are welcome."
Mister Merriweather opens his mouth and starts to turn, and Mr. Currier
puts out a hand and turns him right back again. The hand slides down to
his arm, and he walks him in. He is a big man, the minister is. Mister
Merriweather walks past Britt Svenglund nekkid and Melissa Franck
nekkid, and I really don't think he is goin to make it. Mr. Currier
marches him to the redheaded man and turns him loose. "Andy, this is
Godbody."
Godbody stands up. He comes up so smooth it's like he's growin fast and
like he's not goin to stop. When he stops he's lookin down and Mister
Merriweather has to look up. Godbody reaches out his two hands, and I do
believe if Mr. Currier wasn't standin there still he'd of bolted like a
rabbit. Godbody lays his wrists against the sides of Mister
Merriweather's neck and holds them there.
Now I couldn't say this if I didn't happen to be just in the right place
and just then Britt Svenglund didn't light a lantern in a bracket on the
far wall so the light come across Mister Merriweather's face.
Mad-scared, just scared, slow surprised. I got to tell you, he is
surprised three different ways onetwothree fast as that, you could see
it happen, and then he is hung in this Godbody's eyes like with
fish-hooks and leaders. Then when Godbody takes his hands off him he all
but drops. I mean his knees buckle.
He says, "Who are you?"
"Godbody. Who are you?"
Know what Mister Merriweather says then? He looks to the right and to
the left and I bet he sees nobody, nekkid or not, and he says, "I don't
know."
The squarehead takes hold of his hand like he was a scared kid. She
says, "Come, come," and leads him away, but you know what, he backs away
from that Godbody. I mean I seen a movie one time, there is this king
and nobody leaves him walkin straight, they back out. It's like that.
"Come help me." She takes him to the far end by the door, it's fixed up
like a kitchen, she begins takin stuff out of the bags and baskets.
The preacher stands there smilin down at Godbody while the redhead folds
himself back down on the bed. "It's good to see you again, Godbody."
"Good to see you, Dan. Who is that?" The redhead points at Liza Currier.
The preacher gets the funniest smile on his smile, if you can see what I
mean. He waves her over where she's still standin, and she starts movin.
"Why don't you ask her?"
I never hear people talk the way these people talk. I never seen people
like these, neither. It has to be these people actin this way, anybody
else and it would be just plain crazy. There's somethin happenin in
there makes everythin right.
The naked man puts out his two hands and Liza Currier goes slowly down
on her knees, lookin into his eyes, and he touches her too that way,
wrists on her neck, and says, "Who are you?"
"Liza Currier." She whispers it.
Next to her Melissa Franck is kneelin too, but sittin back on her heels,
and she's watchin all this, smilin like she knows somethin. Godbody
takes away his hands and smiles at her. He says, "You sure are, Liza.
You sure are." And next thing you know the reverend is down on his knees
too. You don't know if this is just because the redhead is on the bed
and the bed is low and there ain't no chairs or if it's ... if it's—some
other reason they kneel. I mean, I'm out there in the dark, peekin, and
I am like spooked.
Currier is kneelin next to Melissa, and he says, "How is it now," and
she turns her face away from Godbody and gives him such a smile I got to
squinch up my eyes. She says it's all right now—it's all right. And he
smiles back and reaches across and takes his wife's hand. He says to
Melissa, "This may be a strange thing coming from an ordained minister
of Christ, but there once was a goddess who had many names—Cybele,
Demeter, lots of others. In her earliest form she was known as the Great
Mother of the Gods —she's about the oldest deity we know about.
"And if there ever was such a goddess, such a woman, she must have
looked like you."
"Oh," Melissa says. "Oh. Oh." And that Godbody, he says a whole bookful
with one word. "Hey . . . ," he says. And for a second I can't see
what's going on because the whole scene melts and runs down my face. God
damn it. You see what I mean. It was weird. I am sittin there wipin my
eyes because the preacher used the word I was afraid to use even inside
my head.
Britt Svenglund has one hell of a big wooden bowl, somebody must of
burned a big tree stump to hollow it out, then cut it away and scraped
it, I don't see how else you could make such a thing without you got a
turret lathe. She had it piled full of fruits and nuts, stacked just so
and so, with all the colors fixed to show, and there was other things in
it, black bread cut in rounds and diamond shapes with white homemade
butter spread on it, and flowers too, here and there, and there was a
couple of those dried Indian gourds from last fall, with all the colors
and warts and funny shapes, and early berries. I don't know nothin about
flower arranging, but some people do and there is whole clubs about
that, and books too, so there must be somethin to it, and this Britt
Svenglund she has it all down. That bowl, it sure was pretty. So anyway
she's got these big stone or clay platters with bowls of sour cream and
butter, and five, six kinds of cheese, and apple slices, and a couple
stone jugs, I guess milk and cider, and she brings them to the place by
the bed where everybody is kneelin, and she goes back and reaches for
the bowl, and like I said, it is a big bastard of a bowl. And what do
you know but Mister Merriweather takes it away from her. She is probably
twice as strong as that dried-up moneychanger, but the way he does it
she kind of curtsies. You never seen a nekkid woman curtsy. Well, she
did, and he come on down the place slow and careful like in the movies
with organ music, one of those the-king-of-Russia-gettin-married things.
Mister Merriweather.
And everybody moves over and moves back and he sets the bowl down on the
floor, a lot of hands comin up to help as he lowers it down or else he
just has to drop it, he ain't picked up anythin heavier'n a mortgage
form for twenty years. And he kneels down. Maybe after totin that bowl
he had to, I dunno. And then Liza Currier—
Oh Jesus and then Liza Currier drops her husband's hand and puts her two
hands down, crossin her arms, takin the edge of the pullover in her
hands, and she gives him such a beggin look like I never saw. He hangs
in there for a long time lookin at her and then he says, "Liza darling,
of course!" like they are mindreadin or some such, and I got to stop
breathin as she whips the sweater up and off over her head, and stands
up and kicks off her sandals and drops her skirt, and she got no
underwear and any woman put together small and solid like that don't
need it, oh Jesus, there isn't nothin more perfect than that little
woman, she got tits much bigger'n you suppose and almost no hair on her
pussy, more like soft shadow you can see the pink meat through. All
that, but I got to say too you can't talk dirty about that once you see
it bare. I mean, you can long as you work it up in your head, but once
it's there it's so goddamn perfect the dirt falls off. Oh, shit, I don't
know what I mean.
And everybody watchin looks glad but not hard-on glad. And they all look
at Godbody, and he stretches out his hands over the big bowl of fruit
and flowers and he says thank-you for this. I think then he is goin to
reach for some of it when he sits straight up and holds up the one hand
like a traffic cop, and everybody stops talkin, breathin too, I guess.
Godbody says, "There's someone outside."
Well I was in the service and I done a stretch in jail once which nobody
knows but Mrs. Mayhew and I been on the force a year and a half or
better and I seen a lot and I never yet chickened out, but this time I
damn near. And it wasn't just gettin caught, which always makes a man
feel like a fuckin moron, and it wasn't what they might do to me in
there because when you get right down to it there wasn't nothin much to
be scared of except maybe that Godbody . . . about him you just couldn't
tell, he wasn't like nobody else I ever seen. It was somethin else.
There was somethin happenin in there that had not happened yet if you
see what I mean, and if this stopped it I wouldn't get to see it. And
maybe I thought if this stopped, it would be a goddam shame.
Anyway I quit breathin and hung my eye in that hole mostly because I
couldn't move. Godbody and the preacher was on their feet and out the
door like they was yanked by the same string. I drop down in the angle
between the house and the dirt and press myself into it, wishin there
was mole in my family tree. It is dark and I'm scared and somehow mad at
myself and someone comes skiddin round the corner and all but steps on
me an kicks a spray of gravel in my face and then there's an Ooof! and a
squealin like a stuck hog, one long squeal, and a lot of breathin and
stampin and there I am layin there tryin to believe that the whole thing
is done and it's got nothin to do with me. And I got to believe it
because it's so, and I get my eye back to the hole.
And here comes Godbody and Mr. Currier and in between them, glassy-eyed
and spit on his chin, is the scared-est Hobo Wellen I ever did see,
throwin his head side to side an makin little bits of that squealin
noise.
Melissa Franck, she jumps up and runs over there callin, "Hobo, Hobo,"
and tries to put her hands on him. God-body says real quiet, "Let me,
Melissa," and turns loose of Hobo. Mr. Currier keeps a hold, I don't
think to trap him, I think to hold him up. Godbody takes Hobo Wellen by
the chin and turns his face up. Wellen is whimperin like a cur-dog and
his eyes is rollin. Godbody just holds his chin so's his head can't move
and looks into his eyes and those eyes slow down and pretty soon stop,
they're lookin back at Godbody. Godbody makes a wave with his free hand
go back, and Mr. Currier lets go of Hobo and steps out of the way.
Godbody lets go of Hobo's chin. Now here was a man scared right out of
his mind, it took two big men to catch him and hold him, but now nothins
got him but Godbody's eyes.
I dunno how long Godbody held on to him like that, with everybody
watchin. One funny thing, Melissa's face is wet, she's holdin her two
hands together tight but I never hear a sound from her. After a time
Godbody reaches out one big hand and begins strokin the side of Hobo's
head. I never seen a man do just that, not just that way, to any thin
but a horse. It was a gentlin. He kept on holdin him with the eyes, but
you could see the starch go out of Wellen's shoulders and arms and he
quit that fast tight breathin too. His mouth come open like a little kid
does first time he sees a elephant or a grown person cryin or somethin.
Godbody's hand stops and he takes it away. Nobody says nothin for a time
but Wellen is tryin, his face and mouth keeps workin. I get the crazy
idea that maybe he is talkin after all but some way you can't hear. I
get the crazy idea too that Godbody can hear it, because when he talks
it's like he answers something: "No," he says, "it's for loving."
Then Wellen says, "It's no good."
Godbody says, "It's for loving with. It ain't for loving by. If you can
do the loving with or without it—you can love with it."
Wellen says, "I don't know what you mean."
Melissa says somethin. It makes me jump. What is hap-penin in there has
me so hung up I don't expect another voice. She says, "I know."
Godbody takes his eyes off Wellen at last, which makes him blink, and
turns them on Melissa Franck. "Yeah," he says, "you do." He did not tell
her to do nothin, but she went straight to Hobo and takes his hand. They
go outside. I get scared they are goin to come around where I am, and
I'm right, they do. It's so dark out there they can't see a damn thing,
but I been out here now a long time. I can see enough so I know they're
standin there, and she puts her arms around him.
He says, "What are you doing?"
She says, "You can hit me if you want to, Hobo, but you don't need to."
He has a funny voice now, half funny, half scared. "How the hell can I
rip your clo'es off you're already nekkid?"
She says, "Touch me." She sits down on the ground, so does he. She lays
back. "Touch me."
I don't know if he does or not. I can't see. I stick my eye back to the
hole.
They're sittin around the big bowl on the floor, eatin. Godbody eats
like he really digs it, both hands, mouth full, chewin quick to get more
in soon. Mister Merriweather is like a squirrel, holdin himself all
together tight, nibblin real fast. He says "I feel very strange. Very
strange. As if I'm not here."
The preacher nodded his head. "I know what you mean, Andy." His wife
said, "I don't. I'm here. I think I've spent all my life just on the way
here." The preacher says, "That's it. I'm still on the way." And Mister
Merriweather wags his head a lot and says, "That's it, that's it." He
looks very sad at Godbody. "I don't think I can get all the way here,
like you people."
"I can," says the preacher, and all of a sudden his wife kneels up and
kisses him on the mouth. He says to the banker, "I don't know when. I've
got a lot of unlearning to do—more than you, I think."
"Yes," says Mister Merriweather, sad, "but you're not afraid."
In the nearby dark I hear Hobo Wellen whisperin excited, "Feel that,
feel it. Hard as a rock and I never hit you."
"Take off your clothes ..."
There's a shufflin and shiftin around in the dark. He says, "I never
been nekkid with a girl before."
"You're always naked," she says; she sounds like God-body the way she
talks. "Everyone always is, under their clothes."
"Oh, it feels good, up against you. Oh, it feels good."
"Yes ..."
He says, "I'm afraid I'll hurt you with it, so big."
"Don't be afraid. Don't ever be afraid again."
He cries out, after a time, "Oh, I can't, you're too little, oh, it
won't work!"
"That isn't your fault, it's mine," she says, and he cries out again, "I
told you, I told you—it's going away!"
She says to him real fierce, "Now this is what Godbody meant, this is
the time you have to remember what he said and believe. You have to
love, Hobo. Not me, if you don't want to, but—but, well, women, a woman.
Love with your penis, but if you can't, love some other way. Love with
it, not by it. Now do you understand?"
"I never loved nothing or nobody," says Hobo Wellen, like he's findin
somethin out for the first time. "How do you learn a thing like that?"
"I don't know," she says, "you just—do it, I guess. Hold me, Hobo. Hold
me and be still."
He says "Melissa . . . "
"Yes, Hobo."
"Could I kiss you?"
"Yes, Hobo."
They got quiet again.
Inside they all got quiet. It's like they are waitin for some-thin.
From the dark I hear Hobo whisperin, "It's coming back."
I am lookin at Britt Svenglund, layin across the bottom of the bed by
Godbody's feet, Godbody lookin at the big candle flame, her lookin at
him the same way. The Curriers are holdin hands, him in his clothes, her
nekkid and shiny like she had a light inside her, happy. He's rasslin
somethin in his head, you can see. And Mister Merriweather the banker
hunkered down, his face hid, lookin miserable. I think I know. It's like
there's more on him than he can handle.
All of a sudden I wish I could be part of it.
Melissa: "Ah! Don't stop."
Hobo: "I don't want to hurt you."
Melissa: "Don't stop!"
I wish I could be part of that, too.
She give a gasp and then a long shaky sigh, and he said, like it was
tore out of him, "I . . . love . . . you," and right then they both give
a real quiet shout, that's the only way to say it, and they did it
again.
And Mister Merriweather the banker was on his feet look-in around, and I
never seen such a face in all my life. I had to think it was because he
hears the two outside but it isn't that, it's something much bigger. It
was like he was a man standin all alone top of a mountain and he seen
somethin —somebody standin in the valley so tall he got to look up.
That dried-up, cold-blooded little bastard was somehow on fire, how the
hell do you say somethin when it ain't like nothin you ever seen before?
Mr. Currier, he's scared, he yells, "Andy! Are you all right?" and right
away Godbody is kneelin by him, put his hands on him, "Let him be. Let
him be. I seen the like before. He's Godstruck."
Mr. Currier sits back, watchin the banker. Godbody goes back to the bed.
Mister Merriweather is lookin up, lookin through the roof, lookin
through the sky I'll swear. The waitin feeling starts to grow and grow.
I am like paralyzed. Somethin's comin at me through those walls like
when you open a furnace door, but it ain't heat.
Around the side I hear Melissa Franck, it's like singin: "I thought I
could never do it!" and Hobo, "Me too, me too!" "Come on," she says.
So I know it ain't just me, because when they show up at the door, the
both of them nekkid and with an arm around each other and smilin, they
stop sudden at the sight of the man standin there swayin, and they creep
in quiet and kneel down with the others. And Mister Merriweather begins
to speak in a great big brand new voice:
"This is the answer!
"The answer is not in getting and keeping, but in getting and giving.
"The answer is not in saving and preserving, but in growing and
changing.
"The answer is not in making things stop, but in making things go.
"The answer is not in covering and hiding, but in touching and sharing.
"The answer is not in thinking, but in feeling.
"The answer is not death, but love.
"Not death, but life.
"Not death!"
And then that man sang a note. It was a great big Ahhhh, on and on,
louder and louder, he held up his arms and that note come from him in a
voice so much bigger'n him you couldn't believe it. And I knew what it
was: it was all the things he said wasn't all he had to say, all the
rest he had to say there was no words for but it had to be said and it
come out in that great big sound he made, holdin up his arms and turnin
and turnin; oh, it went on too long for it to be really him, somethin
was singin that note through him, it wasn't him at all.
And he went to Godbody who jumped up eager and he kissed Godbody on the
mouth, and he turned to Britt Sven-glund and he put his arms around her
and he kissed her on the mouth, and then he kissed Hobo Wellen, and Hobo
hugged him close and willin, and he kissed Melissa Franck and Dan
Currier and each one he touched seemed somehow to light up and the tears
was streamin out of their eyes and I'm only a goddam pissant part-time
cop but I'm here to tell you that I will never live so long I'll stop
regretting I was not there in that room to have that man kiss me, and
you can think what you like. And the last one he went to was Liza
Currier and she put out her arms and came to him laughin, and at that
very moment somebody grabbed hard at my shoulder and tipped me away from
the house wall and a hard hand goes down to my hip and snatches out my
police special and I fall back and look up and there standin over me
flooded with light from the open window is Mrs. Mayhew, her face twisted
up like somethin straight out of hell.
She is lookin in at nekkid Liza Currier flyin to the open arms of Mister
Merriweather, and she don't give a damn if they can see her and she says
with spit flyin out of her mouth, "That rotten little bitch I'll kill
her," and she points my gun and pulls the trigger. And I am up off the
ground and grab her wrist with my left and let her have a punch
alongside the jaw I swear spins her around twice before she hits the
ground outside in the dark, and then I'm in through the window, the
whole thing happenin so fast it's like the gun was goin off and every
thin went on durin the one bang.
There was blue sneezy smoke and Mister Merriweather holdin Liza Currier
in his arms, and between them and me big nekkid Godbody with a little
hole in his chest. He smiles at me and turns around and in the middle of
his back is another hole you could put almost your fist in. Still turnin
he goes down like a tall tree.
Oh, there is a terrible scream, the one scream from Liza and Britt and
Melissa, a scream so big it taken three throats to make it. And from the
three men come a growl I hope never to hear again because, but for a
miracle, it's the last thing a man is likely to hear. I got my miracle.
But for Godbody them three would have tore me in pieces like wolves.
Godbody cries, "Stop."
Already the women have him to the low bed, already tryin that useless
dabbin of the blood. "It ain't him," Godbody says. "It was a woman out
there."
"Mrs. Mayhew," Melissa says like spittin.
Godbody said, "This guy tried to stop her. Who are you?"
"Harry Salz."
He got a funny small smile. "I guess you are, but you can do better."
The smile went away fast. This guy hurt. One of the women started to
cry. Godbody said a very strange thing then, he said, "It's always like
this. Usually not so soon, though." He untwisted his face and looked at
everybody gathered around. He raised up his head and kind of clumsy
pushed aside the cloth Britt was holdin on his chest.
He looked at the hole. Blood filled and emptied in it, filled and
emptied. "This really is a hell of a way to make a living," says
Godbody, and his eyes close.
I think we all stop breathin just then, but he opens his eyes again and
looks all around again. The way his eyes are I think we must look kind
of misty to him by then. His voice is goin into a fog too when he talks.
"Are you of a mind to listen to me?" He did not need any answer to that.
"Then when that Mrs. Mayhew comes in, don't hassle her." He could still
smile a little. "I know what you're thinking, Dan: 'Forgive them, they
know not what they do.' It's sort of like that, she don't know what
she's doing, but I want you to know it's God's work. Yeah.
"What I want, what I really want you to do is what she says long as
she's here. Later maybe, play it by ear, but for now, yes Mrs. Mayhew,
no Mrs. Mayhew, you're right Mrs. Mayhew, no matter what she says or
does. You hear? No matter what. If you can do that everything is cool."
He closes his eyes again and again nobody breathes. Then he says, "Try
to remember me. If you're goin to tell what I said, make it what I said
and not what somebody thinks I said or what somebody wishes I'd said.
Also don't anybody forget I sweat and stink sometimes, and some
people-stinks are better'n all the roses in the world. Also I talk
people-talk and try to keep things simple. I got no rules to recite
except love each other; God, if you'd all only do that, you wouldn't
need no other rules at all, not one.
"Outdoors naked is all the cathedrals I ever want in my name, all the
robes and collars as well. Straight, simple, honest talk is all the
services anybody ever needs to hold for me, and if you work out a form
for it I won't come.
"If ever you want to touch the hand and the heart of God Almighty, you
can do it through the body of someone you love. Anytime. Anywhere.
Without no middleman.
"I'll see you around." He died.
She come in while we was all cryin. Yes, me too. I don't want to talk
about it. We said yes Mrs. Mayhew and the rest. She made it plain she
had us each and every one by the balls. She made it plain she was goin
to cover for us, her and Mister Merriweather who would now do what she
said. We knew damn well she would cover for us because if she blew the
whistle we would all be taken away from her one way or the other. Once
she was satisfied Godbody was a stranger around here she give us our
orders, get rid of him. Get rid of "it" is what she said. Britt has
enough acres of hillside and rocks, she could find where. She took me
aside and told me to remember.
We said yes Mrs. Mayhew, and she left us alone with our dead. She took
the Currier's car.
That was Friday.
    <p>Sunday</p>

Eleven o'clock worship Service proceeded neatly and decorously as usual,
with the usual amount of unusual. There were always strangers, up from
the city, often a backslider returned (would it be just once?) and
occasionally a hopeless secularite, suddenly and astonishingly appearing
in the pews. This particular Sunday the usual unusual was supplied by
Hobart Wellen, shined and pressed, accompanied by surely the town's
least brazen hussy, Melissa Franck. To the truly discerning student of
the unusual, one would have to add the special size and shine of three
pairs of eyes: those of Britt Svenglund (paying one of her rare visits),
Liza Currier and the aforementioned Melissa. The brightness of tears,
perhaps, or love newly found, or of foreknowledge. Who could possibly
imagine that it might be all three at once? Then there were the two
kinds of righteousness displayed by Mr. Mer-riweather and Mrs. Mayhew
(appearing as usual in one of her capital-H Hats) and the really
astonishing phenomenon of Mrs. Merriweather, usually a grey-on-grey
(with dog hairs) composition but today, looking fifteen years younger
and smiling all the time, wearing bright yellow and some real flowers in
her hair. (One of the things she was smiling about was a Mrs. Holloway's
reaction to her response about Boo.) "And how is dear Boo?" Mrs.
Holloway, who gossiped about Boo, had asked mischievously, and little
Mrs. Merriweather had answered, "Very happy, thank you. We put him in
the kennels yesterday, out to stud."
Hymn and collect, creed and hymn, neat and orderly. Who noticed the firm
closed lips of the minister during the I believe? Later, there would be
many who said they did. As a matter of strict truth, there were quite a
few who sat through even this sermon nodding gently, with small benign
smiles on their faces, who did not hear a word and who worked up their
passionate opinions on the whole matter only after Wednesday's paper
came out.
Here is the sermon as delivered by Dr. Daniel Currier.
Goodbye.
A long pause—so long that feet began to shift audibly. Dr. Currier stood
on the pulpit (which always seemed so small for him) with his elbows
resting comfortably on the lectern and waited until the balance between
waning interest and waxing irritation suited him.
"Goodbye" is a word, a little clumping of words, which means God be with
you. I mean this for you all with all my heart.
You must know that I am not, I have tried very hard not to be, the
biblical scholar out to make biblical scholars of his congregation,
making himself obscure with true Aramaic and Greek pronunciations. Yet I
shall confess to you that for nearly thirty hours yesterday and this
morning I have been locked up with my books, playing the scholar.
I have discovered some extraordinary things. The most extraordinary
thing of all is that I did not have to go near the extraordinary part of
my reference shelf. Anyone can find what I have found—what has changed
my life and the lives of some very dear friends, and what may well make
a drastic upheaval in some of yours—with nothing but a Bible, a
concordance and any fairly competent history of Christianity. Let me
tell you what I have found.
We are Christians—that is to say, worshippers of the Christ Jesus of
Nazareth, in Whose name we have established this sanctuary and all the
forms, written and unwritten, which go forth in it.
From Sunday to Sunday, it seems there is a comforting sameness to this
house of worship and its services, the way they are conducted, and the
way we behave on either side of the altar rail. Yet there have been
changes. A perfect example is this: The careful and modest clothes worn
by you ladies here today would have been unacceptable not only in the
church, but on the beach, within the living memory of some of our senior
parishioners. Right, Mr. Malcolm? Miss Schutz?
Miss Schutz, aged 84, had been fast asleep since the second hymn, but
old Malcolm nodded vigorously and scanned the ladies. about him with
rather more gusto than they liked.
We are using a modern-English Bible, and many of our hymns are new or
have been rearranged. There will certainly be further changes. Whether
we like that or not, we can regard the idea soberly because they have
not happened yet. We know there have been changes, too, but it seems a
little harder to understand that changes in Christian worship did not
begin twenty years ago, or fifty, or at the moment Martin Luther nailed
his manuscript to a church door hundreds of years ago. The real changes
began with the death of the last of the disciples—the men who actually
talked with Jesus and were taught by Him.
We liked to lull ourselves with the idea that changes are all to the
good—that what we have is an improvement on what we had. Well, in some
ways that is so. For all their quarrels and disagreements, the Christian
churches have millions of supporters and own billions of dollars worth
of real property. If that is an improvement over what the Apostles had,
then sobeit.
But is it an improvement in Christianity, as Christ saw it and taught
it?
What was the early worship like?
There is one really fascinating way to find out. All through church
history you can find references to councils, called for the purpose of
setting forth church doctrine and church practices. In announcing that
thus-and-so should henceforth be done, they also announced what should
not be done.
And that's the important point. You do not forbid something unless
people are doing it.
Through a study of what these councils have forbidden, we know what
Christians were doing at the time. Where Christianity was changed, it
was changed gradually, and this kind of study shows us step by step how
these changes were brought about—and why. You see, what I am getting to
is not what changes have been made, but what Christianity was before it
was changed.
Let me tell you now, without documenting all the steps with dates and
place—but mind you, that can be done— just what the worship of God
through Christ was as it was left to us by Jesus of Nazareth and his
disciples.
There was no house of worship. Sometimes by choice, often to hide from
persecution, the worshippers met at some quiet, secret place.
There was no officiating priest.
There were no distinctions as to race or age, wealth or poverty or sex.
The greatest appeal of Christianity, as a matter of fact, was to the
masses, the slaves, and women, all of whom were accepted equally. It is
interesting to note here that in our church, ordination of women has
occurred only within the past fifteen years, and less than half of
one-percent of our ministers are women.
There was the "kiss of peace." On gathering, each person embraced every
other.
There was a feast—it was called Agape. It was a real meal.
Afterward, the people sat together in an aura of love and replenishment,
and awaited theolepsy—a word which means "seized of God." You have heard
of— laughed at—people who "speak in tongues," who work themselves up
into religious frenzies, who fall into fits or wild dances. This seems
far removed from our decent modern practices—yet it was precisely this
which the apostolic Church courted and welcomed. It is said over and
over in Scripture and in commentaries that this was a real and definite
experience, and that once a person had experienced it, he was forever
changed. Even to be in the presence of this experience, when it happened
to another person, is said to have been an unforgettable adventure, and
one which one would seek out again for the rest of one's life. It is
this which enabled the Christians in the Roman era to march into the
arena smiling and singing and thanking God as they were stabbed and
burned and torn to pieces by wild animals ... A fascinating aside on
this—the word "thank" in English derives from the same root as the word
"think." These people could do what they did, not through sheer courage,
but because they were "thinking God"—reliving the theoleptic experience
. . .
With this picture in mind of an early Christian worship service, watch
what happened:
First the Eucharist—the bread and wine symbolizing the body and blood of
Christ—was introduced into the Agape, the love feast. Then came the
ruling that an Agape could not be held unless a bishop were present to
bless the food. Next came the order that the bishop was to remain apart
and standing—above—the celebrants. Then it was ordained that instead of
kissing one another, everyone had to kiss the priest, and later still, a
piece of wood which was handed around and passed to him. Then the kiss
was abolished altogether, and in 363 the Council of Laodicea forbade the
celebration of the Agape inside the churches, at which point it was
forever separated from the Eucharist. Finally it disappeared altogether.
One writer has remarked that champagne at a wedding, and port wine at a
funeral, are all that is left of fundamental Christian worship!
This is not strictly true. Our good friends the Quakers have something
remaining of it, when without a priest they sit at meeting and await the
holy urge to speak. Even that, however, is a far cry from the early
worship practiced by the people who actually knew Jesus.
You have a right to ask why—why were these changes made? For they were
made by men, not God, out of their own inventiveness, and not by
Scripture. Most of these changes came about in the third and fourth
centuries after Christ died. And mind you, these were not three or four
modern centuries, with widespread reading and printing and great
libraries and archives to consult: these were primitive centuries when
events of five or ten years back must have seemed like remote myths and
were subject to dilution from every word-of-mouth transmission. One
might say recklessly that modern Christian worship was born, not in
Galilee and on the Mount and Golgotha, but hundreds of years later by
remote strangers.
Again: why? I will tell you why, but I will warn you that the discovery
chilled my blood.
When we take up our collection in this sanctuary, what happens? The
ushers pass the salvers, collect them, and bring them to me. I take
them, turn my back on you, and hold them up to the altar. Fix on
that—take a snapshot of that. Use it as a symbol of what we do here when
we practice worship. Let the offering represent worship. You give of
this substance and it is collected and brought to me. Only through me
does it reach the altar, or God. This is what a minister, pastor, priest
has become—a channel so that only through channels can the congregation
reach God.
And why did these stepfathers of the early church want this?
This is the chilling answer: so they could eliminate theolepsy—the
direct contact between man and God.
And why eliminate that?
Because, my friends, this is the only way possible for the organized
church to make a buck.
I hope you'll forgive the vulgarity in this holy place, but it is the
truth. Unless the church stamped out real religious experience, it could
not control the worldly aspects of church organization—money and power,
which, as I'm sure you know, the church has sought and found for two
thousand years . . .
I must say a word about prayer here. It is seldom, indeed, that anyone
can reach a religious rapture by praying alone. Theolepsy seems to be a
group experience—something about the presence of a group seems to bring
it about in the God-struck individual . . .
Not ten years ago there was a sudden resurgence of "speaking in tongues"
in the Episcopal church, and it was firmly put down. It always is—it
always will be in any church of any size.
I see some of you looking uncomfortable. Let me show you this paper
before you begin to think in terms of complaining to the District or to
my superiors about what I have said here today. This is a carbon copy of
my resignation, effective as of noon today—when I walk through these
doors. I shall leave it here on the lectern for your examination.
From the sanctuary: gasps, and a hiss of whispering.
I shall sum up now. Please hear me out.
I have dedicated the most important part of my life to the understanding
of the teachings of Jesus, and my efforts have been equally dedicated to
passing these on to others. I have now come to a point where I feel that
I am in the wrong place. The wrong place is a place which by its very
nature prohibits—worship. The wrong place is a place which takes the
prime teaching of the Man of Nazareth—that he voluntarily relieved us of
sin and therefore of guilt—and has turned it into the most efficient
guilt-factory ever known on this planet. It was Paul —who, by the way,
never knew Jesus—who put the onus on sex, not Jesus; and it was a whole
series of his successors who set up controls on the two most powerful
motivations we have—to procreate and to worship. I want my God for my
pastor, not my bishop nor any other man. I want to love without shame
and to worship without dilution; and feeling so, my friends, I feel
myself disqualified for this job.
In closing and farewell, let me follow precedent by giving you texts,
with chapter and verse:
Acts, 7:48 and 9: Howbeit, the most high dwelleth not in a temple made
with hands . . . Heaven is my throne, and earth my footstool; what house
will ye build me? saith the Lord. First Corinthians, 20: Therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's. You'll
say I took that out of context, and you're right. Matthew, 6: 5: But
thou, when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are . . .
standing ... in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen of
men. But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and shut the
door, pray to thy father which is in secret, and thy father which seeth
in secret shall reward thee openly.
God be with you all, which is to say—
Goodbye.
They filed out: this was the time of greeting, of shaking hands. Daniel
Currier stood just outside the door as two lines, not one, pushed
past—the one shouldering out, angry, haughty, bewildered, frightened;
the other stopping to speak to him: can't mean it, good for you, waited
years to hear the like, discredit to your church, your town, your
profession and your God, what about the Tuesday tea?
Want my check back from the Building Fund. "There's more to this than
meets the eye; I know where the body is buried." (Thank you, Mrs.
Mayhew; a nice figure of speech.)
And about one in five said to him softly, "Dan, where are you going?
Because wherever you go with that kind of talk, I want to be there too."
These he sent to the oak tree at the corner of the parking lot to wait
for him.
It was over at last, and the reaction set in: joy, release, fatigue, and
the deepest desire to be naked with Liza in his arms. He told her this,
and she closed her eyes and turned up her face to be kissed. Then
hand-in-hand they went to the oak tree, followed by the glares, the
frightened glances, the envious stares, the tittering, the grumblings,
the whispers of the people. Awaiting him was a small crowd: Wellen and
Melissa, the Merriweathers, Harry Salz the policeman, and Britt
Svenglund looking lovely in an unadorned but beautifully draped long
gown of forest-green jersey. Along with them were some friends and some
strangers: a man with a blind girl who said to him heartily, "Rev, I'd
follow you to hell even if you were wrong, and I think you're right,"
and two schoolteacherish types and a thin young man with a pipe who kept
saying, "Wow. Oh, wow." All in all, twenty-odd.
He hadn't meant to address them all, but he had to; they fell silent
when he began to speak to the hearty man. He said, "I don't want to lead
anyone. That's for pastors— shepherds—and I've had my fill of sheep.
This afternoon I am going to the mountain with some friends and pay my
respects to someone I love. If you'd like to be there, you're welcome,
but do not follow me because I will not lead."
They wanted to know where, and Britt told them, and Liza told them that
if they knew of anyone else who felt as they did, bring them along.
"Three o'clock."
It was half-past noon by then, and the Curriers hurried to the parsonage
as they usually did for Sunday dinner. Someone had thrown half a brick
through the front-door glass, and on the floor were two papers slipped
under the door. Dan Currier picked them up and looked at them and
laughed like a trumpet, for one said, "God bless you/' and the other,
"God have mercy on you/' He locked the inner door and they never even
bothered with the kitchen but crossed the living room, where the boxes
full of personal linens and books were piled, and went upstairs. Someone
knocked and they ignored it. The phone rang and Liza knocked it off its
cradle in passing, using her elbow because with both hands she was
unbuttoning the brown-and-yel-low dress. The bedroom was awash with sun,
more than ever before with the drapes down. Liza was out of all her
clothes before Dan had his jacket off.
"When we get where we're going," he said, "I won't wear clothes at all,
but if I have to, they're going to be clothes that can come off faster
than yours."
"You'd look cute in my brown-and-yellow dress."
"Seriously," he said, "there's a lot of sense in unisex clothes. I've
read all sorts of horrified comment about them, how they're trying to
homogenize the sexes. I don't think that's so. I think that you and I
dressed in identical clothes—clothes that fit, idiot—could be spotted
unmistakably as a man and a woman at two hundred yards, even if we had
the same length hair."
"I think you're right," she said. "Do hurry . . . Dan, d'you suppose
manly men's clothes and girly girl clothes are really for people who
aren't sure what sex they belong to?"
"I do believe you're right!" He flung himself down beside her. "Anyway,
I know what sex you belong to."
"Really, sir? Which?"
"Me," he said, and suddenly the bantering and the chatter were gone and
he knelt up and bent over her. He rubbed his cheek and hair over her
body, he flung her legs wide and pressed his face into the scant fine
hair between them. She smelt clean and animal and female and good; he
tasted her, mildly salt-bitter at first and then sweet and smooth. He
moved back and looked at her vulva, the brown-pink-rosy folds of it,
neat, ingenious, welcoming. "Oh God," she cried, "I love your eyes on
me, your hands."
"I love you," he said. "I love you so much."
"And so well," she crooned as he brought his weight on her. He smoothed
her hair away from her face and kissed and kissed her while they made
calm and knowing adjustments, each to the other, and his penis slid in
gently, untouched by hands. "Do you suppose ... he can see us?"
"I hope so," he said into her warm neck. They gave themselves up to each
other, sunlit, glad.
But the subject was still there afterward, when, spent, he rolled away
and lay on his back. She touched his stomach and said, "Nobody, not even
Godbody, could tell if this is your sweat or mine," and all of a sudden
the salt stung his eyes and, seeing it, she began to cry too. "It didn't
have to happen," she wept, "it didn't."
Oddly enough, that stopped his tears, and something greater than grief
moved within him. "Maybe it did," he said.
Three o'clock, and the hillside dotted with people, about fifty by now,
a camera or two, even a ferret-faced girl with a tape recorder. Just
what word had gotten around was hard to say, but there was an air of
windblown excitement, a feeling of something impending. Dan Currier,
walking up the slope past the ledge on which stood Britt Svenglund's
house, found himself liking the looks of most of these people. There
were a lot of hard hands around, and women fit for breeding and
compassion and being close, not distant, when things were bad; children
with early tans and the bloom of winter windburn under it, and lovers
looking newly at the world tinted the other lover's colors. A God-body
kind of crowd, he thought, and Liza beside him turned and smiled into
his eyes, doubtless with the same thought. It could have been no other.
Then, screams.
Currier raced up over the rocky slope and into the woods. In the
shadowed green he caught a flicker of a green more luminescent: Britt
Svenglund's long gown, held high as she bounded down the hill. "Britt!"
he called. "Over here!" He stopped, partly to be sure she saw him and
partly to wait for Liza, whom he had far outdistanced. She came up
panting.
"Dan—what is it?"
"Britt. Oh, there's Melissa too."
"Why did they go up there?"
They exchanged a startled look and then turned again up hill, leaping
and scrambling. Britt and Melissa, having seen them, turned and went
back up, which meant yes, that's where they were going.
Winded, they reached the high glade and stopped.
Across a small clearing was a sheer rock wall, and its secret was raped.
Here was a small deep cave, here they had carried a burden and wept, and
then Currier and Wellen, Merriweather and the policeman had pried the
rubble away from a huge boulder a little upslope from the cave mouth,
had carried rocks downhill from it, had used a two-man tree trunk as a
lever and had started the boulder moving, where with their rocks for
guides it had rolled down and planted itself solidly in the cave-mouth.
It had rolled away again—uphill.
Britt and Melissa stood terrified, holding each other.
"Britt—"
"He is gone," she said. She wept. "Oh, I might have seen him once more,
even like that, but I wasn't here, I wasn't here."
Melissa stroked her long hair. Currier demanded, "Who moved the rock?"
"Nobody could move that rock," Liza said.
They approached the cave, bent and crowded in. It was empty.
Outside, they heard the noise of people approaching.
Currier, suddenly, released a great boom of laughter that flung itself
about the echoing rock. "I can tell them now. Don't you see? It doesn't
have to be our secret."
"Corpus delicti," said Liza, and suddenly she too laughed wildly. Britt
looked at her, almost horrified. Liza hugged her and kissed her cheek.
"Oh darling, I'm sorry," she cried, "but I couldn't help it. Mrs. Mayhew
came up to us after service and reminded us that she knew where the body
was buried."
"She can't have us now," said Dan Currier, and went out to meet the
people, to talk about God the pastor and how He could be touched through
the body, and how the currents of life could save life, and how to
thwart those who wanted to stop.
. . . While down on Britt's ledge the blind girl waited for her father
to come back. She heard a step, not his, and a voice. "What's your
name?"
She told him and suddenly felt the hard smoothness of his wrists against
the sides of her neck. "Well, so you are," he said, and then,
ingenuously, "Listen, you don't like being blind, do you?"
"Like it?"
"Well, I thought I'd ask. Some people do. Here, I'll fix it for you."
He put his hands on her face. They were enormous. The fingertips probed
gently and the hands slid over her eyes. She heard him murmur, "Now ..."
and there came a pressure, increasing not quite enough to hurt, and then
held steadily. "Now ..." he murmured again, and something indescribable
happened in her sockets and behind them, and also at the base of her
brain—not quite a fever, not exactly a headache. Suddenly a very new
thing began to happen to her—not possible to describe to anyone the
feelings of a lifelong sightless person having the experience called
"pink."
"Keep your hands over your eyes for a while," he told her cheerfully,
"because the light's awful bright at first. Then when you get used to
light, you'll have to teach those pretty eyes how to work."
"But they said I—"
"They said wrong. They didn't know me."
"Oh! Oh! ..." She still could not believe it, but she would. "What's
your name?"
"Godbody."
"Godbody, don't go away. Please don't."
"I got to. Got another job to do, and it's a long way. But —you'll be
seeing me."
She heard his light long-paced footsteps striding away. "I'll be seeing
you?" she whispered, "Be seeing you?"
She held on to a sapling and waited, wondering aloud, "Who is Godbody?"
    <p>AFTERWORD</p>
    <p>BY STEPHEN DONALDSON</p>

I grew up in India, lived there through my high school years; my father
was a medical missionary. As what some people called a "mish-kid," I had
access to an extremely erratic supply of books. So I read whatever I
could get my hands on: the Hardy boys and Paul Tillich; Dave Dawson, "WW
II Fighting Ace," who singlehandedly won every air battle of the war;
Agatha Christie; Bomba the Jungle Boy and Leon Uris. By the time I
graduated, I got my hands on exactly three sf novels. I remember each of
them distinctly, in part because they were so different from the rest of
my reading, and in part because they were excellent. They were: A.J.
Budrys' Rogue Moon; Alfred Bester's The Stars My Destination; and
Theodore Sturgeon's More Than Human.
Of those three, in my case More Than Human represented by far the most
improbable triumph of communication, the most dramatic outreach of
imagination from one mind to another across the barriers of language,
culture, and ideology. Of those three books, More Than Human is much the
most down-to-earth. For that reason, it deals the most directly with
issues of morality and religion. The other two were safer because they
were so much further removed from my personal life.
Whatever the qualities of my imagination at that age, I was
intellectually narrow-minded, religiously fundamentalist, socially
protected, culturally conservative. And yet Sturgeon came through.
Somehow he contrived to thrill me with his notion of gestalt humanity—an
idea that challenged all my preconceptions about identity and ethics,
about the responsibilities of relationships. Rogue Moon may be
intellectually tougher; The Stars My Destination a more bravura
performance. But against all the odds More Than Human hit me where I
lived.
Under the circumstances, it was a good thing I didn't read "Microcosmic
God" until later in life, when I was better able to handle its
implications. Imagine a mish-kid trying to explain to his parents the
concept of being responsible for God.
I mention all this because I consider this capacity to come through
against the odds to be one of the special elements of Sturgeon's
particular genius. And because it happened to me again in Godbody.
By most normal standards, I'm the last writer in America who ought to be
asked to comment on this book. I'm disqualified by personality,
preconception, and conviction. Despite all my "liberal" attitudes, I'm a
closet Puritan where sex is concerned. My knee-jerk reaction to nudists
is that they are out of their minds, like mothers who wrap their kids in
aluminum foil to protect them from Martian rays. And I believe that the
whole notion of Godbody (sex is the highest form of religion) is
palpable nonsense. When I was offered the manuscript, I squirmed inside.
I already knew I was going to hate it.
But I read it anyway, because I've read enough Sturgeon to realize that
my personality, preconceptions, and convictions were irrelevant: he
could reach me if I gave him the chance. And the result is another
improbable triumph of communication.
More a meditation than a novel, Godbody lacks most of the usual
apparatus of fiction. Superficially, it is little more than an
interlocking series of character sketches, culminating in tragedy and
affirmation: God is love; and the tragedy is that we make a distinction
between love and sex; and the affirmation is that sex can be love, the
purest expression of God. But the book is by no means superficial.
Precisely because it is so specific, so rooted in particular characters
who react and speak and need in such particular ways, it becomes as
profound as the word "meditation" suggests: an aching and immediate
occasion for thought.
Somehow, Godbody overcomes all the intervening personal, cultural, and
theological hinderances. It comes through.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