Main Page | Recent changes | Edit this page | Page historyPrintable version | 
Disclaimers 
Not logged in 
Log in | Help 
Other languages: Deutsch | ??? 

The Foundation Series

(Redirected from Foundation Series) 

Hari Seldon, founder of the Foundation 

The Foundation Series is an epic science fiction series written by Isaac Asimov 
over the span of forty-nine years. It consists of ten volumes (about one-million 
words), which, although they can be read separately, are closely linked to one 
another. The term 'Foundation Series' is often used more generally to include 
the Robot Series and Empire Series, which are set in the same fictional universe. 
They have a combined length of fourteen novels and dozens of short stories 
written by Asimov, and six novels written by other authors after his death. 

Warning: Plot details follow. 

The premise of the series is that mathematician Hari Seldon has spent his life 
developing a branch of mathematics known as psychohistory, a concept devised by 
Asimov and his editor John W. Campbell. It uses the law of mass action to 
predict the future on a large scale, such as of planets or empires. Using these 
techniques, Seldon foresees the fall of the Galactic Empire, which encompasses 
the entire Milky Way. He also predicts that there will be a thirty-thousand-year 
dark age before the next great empire rises. To prevent this, he decides to 
create a small haven of technology in a corner of the galaxy (on the planet 
Terminus) called the Foundation, whose job it will be to preserve knowledge from 
the collapse, thus reducing the time required for the next Empire to rebuild. If 
done properly, it will take only a thousand years before the next empire rises. 

Table of contents [hide]  
1 The trilogy

2 The sequels

3 Merging with other series

4 The prequels

5 Other authors

6 Foundation on screen

7 Cultural impact

8 List of books

8.1 Robot short stories
8.2 The Robot novels
8.3 The Caliban trilogy
8.4 The Empire series
8.5 The Foundation novels

8.5.1 The Second Foundation Trilogy
8.5.2 The Foundation Trilogy
8.6 Books not included

9 Major characters

10 External links

The trilogy 
The series started as a series of nine short stories, eight of which were 
published in Astounding Science Fiction magazine (between May 1942 and January 
1950) and a ninth which was written a few years later when the series was first 
published in book form. The stories vary in length from about 7,000 words to 
about 50,000 words. The early stories are very closely based on Edward Gibbon's 
The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (Asimov said he did "a 
little bit of cribbin' from the works of Edward Gibbon" when describing the 
influence of that work on the Trilogy). 

These were then collected and published as Foundation, Foundation and Empire, 
and Second Foundation in the early 1950s by Gnome Press. These three books are 
thus known collectively as The Foundation Trilogy. 

The sequels 
Asimov unsuccessfully tried to end the series at the end of Second Foundation. 
But, because of the predicted thousand years until the rise of the next Empire (of 
which, only a few hundred had elapsed), the series lacked a sense of closure. 
For decades, fans pressured him to write a sequel. 

In 1982, following a thirty-year hiatus, Asimov gave in and wrote what was at 
the time a fourth volume: Foundation's Edge. This was followed shortly 
thereafter by Foundation and Earth. Foundation and Earth (which takes place some 
600 years after Seldon) ties up all the loose ends, but opens a brand new line 
of thought in the last dozen pages. As a result, as a finale to the series, it 
failed. According to his widow Janet Asimov (in her biography of him, It's Been 
a Good Life), he had no idea how to continue after Foundation and Earth, so he 
started writing the prequels. 

Merging with other series 
The series is set in the same universe as Asimov's first published novel, Pebble 
in the Sky, although Foundation takes place approximately ten thousand years 
later. Pebble in the Sky became the basis for the Empire Series. Then, at some 
unknown date (prior to writing Foundation's Edge) Asimov decided to merge the 
Foundation series with his Robot series. Thus, all three series are set in the 
same universe, giving them a combined length of 15 novels and a total of about 1,500,000 
words. 

The prequels 
The prequels, written last in the series but chronologically first, tell the 
life story of Hari Seldon and (simultaneously) the development of Psychohistory. 
The first prequel, Prelude to Foundation, starts with a young Hari Seldon 
presenting a paper outlining the possibility of psychohistory, and ends about a 
year later. The second novel, Forward the Foundation, takes place at intervals 
starting about ten years after Prelude to Foundation. It tells how psychohistory 
becomes functional, all while Hari loses loved ones and the Galactic Empire 
continues to break apart. Forward the Foundation ends just as Hari finishes 
recording the messages to be played throughout the original trilogy. 

Other authors 
Asimov's novels covered only 600 of the expected 1,000 years it would take for 
the Foundation to become a galactic empire. After his death, the Asimov estate 
at the request of Janet Asimov approached Gregory Benford and asked him to write 
another Foundation story. He agreed, and at that same time suggested that it 
should form part of a trilogy with Greg Bear and David Brin writing the other 
two books, which they agreed to do. All three take place between Asimov's two 
prequels. These three books are now known collectively as the Second Foundation 
Trilogy. Many fans, eager for the second trilogy to fill in the gap, were 
disappointed. 

Also, shortly before his death in 1992, Asimov approved an outline for three 
novels, known as the Caliban Trilogy by Roger MacBride Allen, set between Robots 
and the Empire and the Empire Series, telling the story of the terraforming of 
the Spacer world Inferno, and about the robot revolution started by creating a 
No Law Robot and then New Law Robots. 

The Foundation universe was once again revisited in Foundation's Friends (ISBN 
0312931743 hardback, ISBN 0812509803 paperback), a collection of short stories 
written by many prominent science fiction authors of today. Orson Scott Card's "The 
Originist" clarifies the founding of the Second foundation shortly after Seldon's 
death; Harry Turtledove's "Trantor Falls" tells of the efforts by the Second 
Foundation to survive during the sacking of Trantor; and George Zebrowski's "Foundation's 
Conscience" is about the efforts of a historian to document Seldon's work 
following the rise of the second Galactic empire. 

There are novels by various authors (Isaac Asimov's Robot City series, Isaac 
Asimov's Robots and Aliens series, and Isaac Asimov's Robots in Time series) 
loosely connected to the Robot Series, but they contain many inconsistencies 
with Asimov's books, and are not generally considered part of the Foundation 
Series. 

Foundation on screen 
There are currently preparations being made by Twentieth Century Fox for two 
movies based on the first Foundation trilogy, entitled Foundation and Second 
Foundation. The director is going to be Shekhar Kapur - further details are not 
yet known. 

Several of Asimov's robot stories have also been made into films or television 
series episodes. See: Asimov's robots on screen. 

Cultural impact 
An eight-part radio adaptation of the original trilogy, with sound design by the 
BBC Radiophonic Workshop, was broadcast on BBC Radio 3 in 1973 - one of the 
first BBC radio drama serials to be made in stereo. A BBC 7 rerun commenced in 
July, 2003. 

In 1965, the Foundation Trilogy beat several other science fiction and fantasy 
series (including the Lord of the Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien) to receive a 
special Hugo Award for "Best All-Time Series". It is still the only series so 
honored. 

George Lucas used elements of the Foundation series to construct the universe in 
which Star Wars is set, including propulsion by hyperdrive and the Galactic 
Empire (although Lucas' Empire was by definition evil, while Seldon openly says 
that in principle the First Empire isn't evil). Additionally, Coruscant, the 
imperial capital planet covered completely with buildings, is a direct borrowing 
of Asimov's Trantor (although visually they are not exactly similar; Trantor is 
covered in domed cities, while Coruscant's buildings are open to the air. 
Trantor's domed structure is a little more practically designed, in terms of 
exposure to inclement weather). 

In 1995, Donald Kingsbury wrote "Historical Crisis", which he later expanded 
into a novel, Psychohistorical Crisis (ISBN 0312861028). It is not set in the 
same fictional universe as the Foundation series, but the universe described in 
it is very much similar to that of the Foundation series, being a clear and 
conscious borrowing. The novel explores the ideas of psychohistory into a number 
of new directions, inspired by more recent developments in mathematics and 
computer science, as well as by new ideas in science fiction itself. 

It has been speculated (most prominently in the science fiction 'zines Ansible 
172, (November 2001) and Locus) that the Foundation trilogy, which has had 
considerable success in the Middle East, was the source of the name of the 
terrorist group Al-Qaida. This speculation, however, fails to account for the 
fact that the term Al-Qaida, Arabic for "The Foundation", was first used by the 
United States to describe followers of Osama bin-Laden and is not used by that 
group to refer to itself. 

Also, the Aum Shinrikyo terrorist sect in Japan (which attacked the Tokyo subway 
with Sarin gas) was trying to build a community of scientists after the model of 
the Foundation and used this book as their bible. 

List of books 
Prelude to Foundation contains Asimov's suggested reading order/chronology for 
his science fiction books in the introduction. The recommended reading order of 
the books is: 

Robot short stories 

I, Robot (1950), the first collection of Asimov's robot stories, which were all 
included in The Complete Robot, though it also contains interesting binding text 
(Mind and Iron), no longer in The Complete Robot. 

The Complete Robot (1982), Collection of Asimov stories written between 1940 and 
1976. 

Robot Dreams, Anthologized in a book with the same title. 

The Positronic Man (1992), A novel based on Asimov's short story The 
Bicentennial Man, co-written by Robert Silverberg 

The Robot novels 

The Caves of Steel (1954) 

The Naked Sun (1957) 

The Robots of Dawn (1983) 

Robots and Empire (1985) 

The Caliban trilogy 

Isaac Asimov's Caliban (1993) by Roger MacBride Allen 

Isaac Asimov's Inferno (1994) by Roger MacBride Allen 

Isaac Asimov's Utopia (1996) by Roger MacBride Allen 

The Empire series 

The Stars, Like Dust (1951) 

The Currents of Space (1952) 

Pebble in the Sky (1950) 

The Foundation novels 

Prelude to Foundation (1988) 

The Second Foundation Trilogy 

Foundation's Fear (1997) by Gregory Benford 

Foundation and Chaos (1998) by Greg Bear. 

Foundation's Triumph (1999) by David Brin. 

Forward the Foundation (1991) 

The Foundation Trilogy 

Foundation (1951) 

Foundation and Empire (1952) 

Second Foundation (1953) 

Foundation's Edge (1982) 

Foundation and Earth (1986) 

Note that this list corrects several mistakes found in the list in Asimov's 
Prelude to Foundation. It also adds six novels that were published after Asimov's 
death in 1992. 

Books not included 
While not mentioned in the above list, the books The End of Eternity (1955) and 
Nemesis (1989) are considered part of the series by some. 

The End of Eternity is vaguely referenced in Foundation's Edge, where a 
character mentions the Eternals, whose "task it was to choose a reality that 
would be most suitable to Humanity". In Forward the Foundation Hari Seldon 
refers to a twenty thousand year old story of "a young woman that could 
communicate with an entire planet that circled a sun named Nemesis," an obvious 
reference to Nemesis. 

On the other hand, these references might be just jokes by Asimov, and the 
stories mentioned could be just those really written by himself. Furthermore, 
Asimov himself did not mention The End of Eternity in the series listing from 
Prelude to Foundation. As for Nemesis, it was written after Prelude to 
Foundation, but in the author's note Asimov explicitly states that the book is 
not part of the Foundation series, but that some day he might tie it to the 
others. 

Major characters 

Hari Seldon, the founder of the Foundation 

R. Daneel Olivaw 

The Mule 

Dors Venabili, Seldon's wife 

Emperor Cleon I 

Salvor Hardin 

Bel Riose 

Golan Trevize 

Janov Pelorat 

External links 

books.guardian.co.uk: Terrorism and the Foundation series 

Isaac Asimov's Foundation Series website including UK Voyager cover artwork 

Worlds mentioned in the Foundation series from AsimovOnline 

The 'Galactic Encyclopedia' - comprehensive listing of characters from Robot/Foundation 
series 

The Foundation Trilogy: Notes, Articles, and Links 

Preceded by:  Series:
Empire Series  Foundation Universe  


Edit this page | Discuss this page | Page history | What links here | Related 
changes
Other languages: Deutsch | ??? 
Main Page | About Wikipedia | Recent changes | 
This page was last modified 22:02, 24 Apr 2004. All text is available under the 
terms of the GNU Free Documentation License (see Copyrights for details). 
Disclaimers. Wikipedia is powered by MediaWiki, an open source wiki engine. 

Main Page 
Recent changes 
Random page 
Current events
Community Portal 

Edit this page 
Discuss this page 
Page history 
What links here 
Related changes 

Special pages 
Contact us 
Donations 
