{112521
010331033{}{;000;00255;0255255;02550;2550255;25500;2552550;255255255;
00128;0128128;01280;1280128;12800;1281280;128128128;192192192;}{}{}119161680072072031251354
1201631701198402 41372090312532600000 241033103310331033 {The Dead Past

Copyright 'a9 1956 by Street and Smith Publications, Inc. Arnold
Potterley, Ph.D., was a Professor of Ancient History. That, in itself,
was not dangerous. What changed the world beyond all dreams was the fact
that he looked like a Professor of Ancient History. Thaddeus Araman,
Department Head of the Division of Chronoscopy, might have taken proper
action if Dr. Potterley had been owner .of a large, square chin,
flashing eyes, aquiline nose and broad shoulders. As it was, Thaddeus
Araman found himself staring over his desk at a mild-mannered
individual, whose faded blue eyes looked at him wistfully from either
side of a low-bridged button nose; whose small, neatly dressed figure
seemed stamped "milk-and-water" from thinning brown hair to the ne atly
brushed shoes that completed a conservative middle-class costume. Araman
said pleasantly, "And now what can I do for you, Dr. Potterley?" Dr.
Potterley said in a soft voice that went well with the rest of him, "Mr.
Araman, I came to you because you're top man in chronoscopy." Araman
smiled. "Not exactly. Above me is the World Commissioner of Research and
above him is the Secretary-General of the United Nations. And above both
of them, of course, are the sovereign peoples of Earth." Dr. Potterley
shook his head. "They're not interested in chronoscopy. I've come to
you, sir, because for two years I have been trying to obtain permis-sion
to do some time viewingchronoscopy, that is in connection with my
researches on ancient Carthage. I can't obtain such permission. My
research grants are all proper. There is no irregularity in any of my
intellec-tual endeavors and yet" "I'm sure there is no question of
irregularity," said Araman soothingly. He flipped the thin reproduction
sheets in the folder to which Pot terley's name had been attached. They
had been produced by Multivac, whose vast analogical mind kept all the
department records. When this was over, the sheets could be destroyed,
then reproduced on demand in a matter of min-utes. And while Araman
turned the pages, Dr. Potterley's voice continued in a soft monotone.
The historian was saying, "I must explain that my problem is quite an
important one. Carthage was ancient commercialism brought to its zenith.
Pre-Roman Carthage was the nearest ancient analogue to pre-atomic Amer-
ica, at least insofar as its attachment to trade, commerce and business
in general was concerned. They were the most daring seamen and explorers
before the Vikings; much better at it than the overrated Greeks. "To
know Carthage would be very rewarding, yet the only knowledge we have of
it is derived from the writings of its bitter enemies, the Greeks and
Romans. Carthage itself never wrote in its own defense or, if it did,
the books did not survive. As a result, the Carthaginians have b een one
of the favorite sets of villains of history and perhaps unjustly so.
Time viewing may set the record straight." He said much more. Araman
said, still turning the reproduction sheets before him, "You must
realize, Dr. Potterley, that chronoscopy, or time viewing, if you
prefer, is a difficult process." Dr. Potterley, who had been
interrupted, frowned and said, "I am asking for only certain selected
views at times and places I would indicate." Araman sighed. "Even a few
views, even one ... It is an unbelievably delicate art. There is the
question of focus, getting the proper scene in view and holding it.
There is the synchronization of sound, which calls for com-pletely
independent circuits."

"Surely my problem is important enough to justify considerable effort."
"Yes, sir. Undoubtedly," said Araman at once. To deny the importance of
someone's research problem would be unforgivably bad manners. "But you
must understand how long-drawn-out even the simplest view is. And there
is a long waiting line for the chronoscope and an even longer waiting
line for the use of Multivac which guides us in our use of the
controls." Potterley stirred unhappily. "But can nothing be done? For
two years" "A matter of priority, sir. I'm sorry. . . . Cigarette?" The
historian started back at the suggestion, eyes suddenly widening as he
stared at the pack thrust out toward him. Araman looked surprised,
with-drew the pack, made a motion as though to take a cigarette for
himself and thought better of it. Potterley drew a sigh of unfeigned
relief as the pack was put out of sight. He said, "Is there any way of
reviewing matters, putting me as far forward as possible. I don't know
how to explain" Araman smiled. Some had offered money under similar
circumstances which, of course, had gotten them nowhere, either. He
said, "The decisions on priority are computer-processed. I could in no
way alter those decisions arbitrarily." Potterley rose stiffly to his
feet. He stood five and a half feet tall. "Then, good day, sir." "Good
day, Dr. Potterley. And my sincerest regrets." He offered his hand and
Potterley touched it briefly. The historian left, and a touch of the
buzzer brought Araman's secretary into the room. He handed her the
folder. "These," he said, "may be disposed of." Alone again, he smiled
bitterly. Another item in his quarter-century's service to the human
race. Service through negation. At least this fellow had been easy to
dispose of. Sometimes academic pressure had to be applied and even
withdrawal of grants. Five minutes later, he had forgotten Dr.
Potterley. Nor, thinking back on it later, could he remember feeling any
premonition of danger. During the first year of his frustration, Arnold
Potterley had experienced only thatfrustration. During the second year,
though, his fru stration gave birth to an idea that first frightened and
then fascinated him. Two things stopped him from trying to translate the
idea into action, and neither barrier was the undoubted fact that his
notion was a grossly unethical one. The first was merely the continuing
hope that the government would finally give its permission and make it
unnecessary for him to do anything more. That hope had perished finally
in the interview with Araman just completed. The second barrier had been
not a hope at all but a dreary realization of his own incapacity. He was
not a physicist and he knew no physicists from whom he might obtain
help. The Department of Physics at the university consisted of men well
stocked with grants and well immersed in specialty. At best, they would
not listen to him. At worst, they would report him for intellectual
anarchy and even his basic Carthaginian grant might easily be withdrawn.
That he could not risk. And yet chronoscopy was the only way to carry on
his work. Without it, he would be no worse off if his grant were lost.
The first hint that the second barrier might be overcome had come a week
earlier than his interview with Araman, and it had gone unrecognized at
the time. It had been at one of the faculty teas. Potterley attended
these se ssions unfailingly because he conceived attendance to be a
duty, and he took his duties seriously. Once there, however, he
conceived it to be no responsibility of his to make light conversation
or new friends. He sipped abstemiously at a drink or two, exc hanged a
polite word with the dean or such department heads as happened to be
present, bestowed a narrow smile on others and finally left early.
Ordinarily, he would have paid no attention, at that most recent tea, to
a young man standing quietly, even diff idently, in one corner. He would
never have dreamed of speaking to him. Yet a tangle of circumstance
persuaded him this once to behave in a way contrary to his nature. That
morning at breakfast, Mrs. Potterley had announced somberly that once
again she had dreamed of Laurel; but this time a Laurel grown up, yet
retaining the three-year-old face that stamped her as their child.
Potterley had let her talk. There had been a time when he fought her too
frequent preoccupation with the past and death. Laurel wou ld not come
back to them, either through dreams or through talk. Yet if it appeased
Caroline Potterleylet her dream and talk. But when Potterley went to
school that morning, he found himself for once affected by Caroline's
inanities. Laurel grown up! She h ad died nearly twenty years ago; their
only child, then and ever. In all that time, when he thought of her, it
was as a three-year-old. Now he thought: But if she were alive now, she
wouldn't be three, she'd be nearly twenty-three. Helplessly, he found
himself trying to think of Laurel as growing progres-sively older; as
finally becoming twenty-three. He did not quite succeed. Yet he tried.
Laurel using make-up. Laurel going out with boys. Laurelgetting married!
So it was that when he saw the young man ho vering at the outskirts of
the coldly circulating group of faculty men, it occurred to him
quixotically that, for all he knew, a youngster just such as this might
have married Laurel. That youngster himself, perhaps. . . . Laurel might
have met him, here a t the university, or some evening when he might be
invited to dinner at the Potterleys'. They might grow interested in one
another. Laurel would surely have been pretty and this youngster looked
well. He was dark in coloring, with a lean intent face and a n easy
carriage. The tenuous daydream snapped, yet Potterley found himself
staring fool-ishly at the young man, not as a strange face but as a
possible son-in-law in the might-have-been. He found himself threading
his way toward the man. It was almost a for m of autohypnotism. He put
out his hand. "I am Arnold Potterley of the History Department. You're
new here, I think?" The youngster looked faintly astonished and fumbled
with his drink, shifting it to his left hand in order to shake with his
right. "Jonas Foster is my name, sir. I'm a new instructor in physics.
I'm just starting this semes-ter." Potterley nodded. "I wish you a happy
stay here and great success." That was the end of it, then. Potterley
had come uneasily to his senses, found himself embarrassed and moved
off. He stared back over his shoulder once, but the illusion of
relationship had gone. Reality was quite real once more and he was angry
with himself for having fallen prey to his wife's foolish talk about
Laurel.

But a week later, even while Araman was talking, the thought of that
young man had come back to him. An instructor in physics. A new instruc-
tor. Had he been deaf at the time? Was there a short circuit between ear
and brain? Or was it an automatic self-censorship because of the
impending interview with the Head of Chronoscopy? But the interview
failed, and it was the thought of the young man with whom he had
exchanged two sentences that prevented Potterley from elabo-rating his
pleas for consideration. He was almost anxious to get away. And in the
autogiro express back to the university, he could almost wish he were
superstitious. He could then console himself with the thought that the
casual meaningless meeting had really been directed by a knowing and
purposeful Fate. Jonas Foster was not new to academic life. The long and
rickety struggle for the doctorate would make anyone a veteran.
Additional work as a postdoctorate teaching fellow acted as a booster
shot. But now he was Instructor Jonas Foster. Professorial dignity lay
ahead. And he now found himself in a new sort of relationship toward
other profes-sors. For one thing, they would be voting on future
promotions. For another, he was in no position to tell so early in the
game which particular member of the faculty might or might not have the
ear of the dean or even of the university president. He did not fancy
himself as a campus politician and was sure he would make a poor one,
yet there was no point in kicking his own rear into blisters just to
prove that to himself. So Foster listened to this mild-mannered
historian who, in some vague way, seemed nevertheless to radiate
tension, and did not shut him up abruptly and toss him out. Certainly
that was his first impulse. He remembered Potterley well enough.
Potterley had approached him at that tea (which had been a grizzly
affair). The fellow had spoken two sen-tences to him stiffly, somehow
glassy-eyed, had then come to himself with a visible start and hurried
off.

It had amused Foster at the time, but now . . . Potterley might have bee
n deliberately trying to make his acquaintance, or, rather, to impress
his own personality on Foster as that of a queer sort of duck, eccentric
but harmless. He might now be probing Foster's views, searching for
unsettling opinions. Surely, they ought to have done so before granting
him his appointment. Still . . . Potterley might be serious, might
honestly not realize what he was doing. Or he might realize quite well
what he was doing; he might be nothing more or less than a dangerous
rascal. Foster mumbled, "Well, now" to gain time, and fished out a
package of cigarettes, intending to offer one to Potterley and to light
it and one for himself very slowly. But Potterley said at once, "Please,
Dr. Foster. No cigarettes." Foster looked startled. "I'm sorry, sir.";,
"No. The regrets are mine. I cannot stand the odor. An idiosyncrasy. I'm
sorry." He was positively pale. Foster put away the cigarettes. Foster,
feeling the absence of the cigarette, took the easy way out. "I'm
flattered that you ask my advice and all that, Dr. Potterley, but I'm
not a neutrinics man. I can't very well do anything professional in that
direction. Even stating an opinion would be out of line, and, frankly,
I'd prefer that you didn't go into any particulars." The historian's
prim face set hard. "What do you mean, you're not a neutrinics man?
You're not anything yet. You haven't received any grant, have you?"
"This is only my first semester." "I know that. I imagine you haven't
even applied for any grant yet." Foster half-smiled. In three months at
the university, he had not suc-ceeded in putting his initial requests
for research grants into good enough shape to pass on to a professional
science writer, let alone to the Research Commission. (His Department
Head, fortunately, took it quit e well. "Take your time now, Foster," he
said, "and get your thoughts well organized. Make sure you know your
path and where it will lead, for, once you receive a grant, your
specialization will be formally recognized and, for better or for worse,
it will be yours for the rest of your career." The advice was trite
enough, but triteness has often the merit of truth, and Foster
recognized that.) Foster said, "By education and inclination, Dr.
Potterley, I'm a hyperop-tics man with a gravities minor. It's how I
described myself in applying for this position. It may not be my
official specialization yet, but it's going to be. It can't be anything
else. As for neutrinics, I never even studied the sub-ject." "Why not?"
demanded Potterley at once. Foster stared. It was the kind of rude
curiosity about another man's pro-fessional status that was always
irritating. He said, with the edge of his own politeness just a trifle
blunted, "A course in neutrinics wasn't given at my university." "Good
Lord, where did you go?" "M.I.T.," said Foster quietly. "And they don't
teach neutrinics?" "No, they don't." Foster felt himself flush and was
moved to a defense. "It's a highly specialized subject with no great
value. Chronoscopy, perhaps, has some value, but it is the only
practical application and that's a dead end." The historian stared at
him earnestly. "Tell me this. Do you know where I can find a neutrinics
man?" "No, I don't," said Foster bluntly. "Well, then, do you know a
school which teaches neutrinics?" "No, I don't." Potterley smiled
tightly and without humor. Foster resented that smile, found he detected
insult in it and grew suffi-ciently annoyed to say, "I would like to
point out, sir, that you're stepping out of line." "What?" "I'm saying
that, as a historian, your interest in any sort of physics, your
professional interest, is" He paused, unable to bring himself quite to
say the word. "Unethical?" "That's the word, Dr. Potterley." "My
researches have driven me to it," said Potterley in an intense whisper.
"The Research Commission is the place to go. If they permit" "I have
gone to them and have received no satisfaction." "Then obviously you
must abandon this." Foster knew he was sounding stuffily virtuous, but
he wasn't going to let this man lure him into an expres-sion of
intellectual anarchy. It was too early in his career to take stupid
risks. Apparently, though, the remark had its effect on Potterley.
Without any warning, the man exploded into a rapid-fire verbal storm of
irresponsibility. Scholars, he said, could be free only if they could
freely follow their own free-swinging curiosity. Research, he said,
forced into a predesigned pattern by the powers that held the purse
strings became slavish and had to stag- nate. No man, he said, had the
right to dictate the intellectual interests of another. Foster listened
to all of it with disbelief. None of it was strange to him. He had heard
college boys talk so in order to shock their professors and he had once
or twice amused himself in that fashion, too. Anyone who st udied the
history of science knew that many men had once thought so. Yet it seemed
strange to Foster, almost against nature, that a modern man of science
could advance such nonsense. No one would advocate running a factory by
allowing each individual worke r to do whatever pleased him at the
moment, or of running a ship according to the casual and conflicting
notions of each individual crewman. It would be taken for granted that
some sort of centralized supervisory agency must exist in each case. Why
should direction and order benefit a factory and a ship but not
scientific research? People might say that the human mind was somehow
qualitatively differ-ent from a ship or factory but the history of
intellectual endeavor proved the opposite. When science was young and
the intricacies of all or most of the known was within the grasp of an
individual mind, there was no need for direction, perhaps. Blind
wandering over the uncharted tracts of ignorance could lead to wonderful
finds by accident.

But as knowledge grew, more and more data had to be absorbed before
worthwhile journeys into ignorance could be organized. Men had to
special- ize. The researcher needed the resources of a library he
himself could not gather, then of instruments he himself could not
afford. More and more, the individual researcher gave way to the
research team and the research institu-tion. The funds necessary for
research grew greater as tools grew more numer-ous. What college was so
small today as not to require at least one nuclear micro-reactor and at
least one three-stage computer? Centuries before, private individuals
could no longer subsidize research. By 1940, only the government, large
industries and large universities or research institutions could
properly subsidize basic research. By 1960, even the largest
universities depended entirely upon government grants, while research
institutions could not exist without tax concessions and public
subscriptions. By 2000, the industrial combines had become a branch of
the world government and, thereafter, the financing of research and
therefore its direction naturally became centralized under a department
of the government. It all worked itself out naturally and well. Every
branch of science was fitted neatly to the needs of the public, and the
v arious branches of science were co-ordinated decently. The material
advance of the last half-century was argument enough for the fact that
science was not falling into stagna-tion. Foster tried to say a very
little of this and was waved aside impatiently by Potterley who said,
"You are parroting official propaganda. You're sitting in the middle of
an example that's squarely against the official view. Can you believe
that?" "Frankly, no." "Well, why do you say time viewing is a dead end?
Why is neutrinics unimportant? You say it is. You say it categorically.
Yet you've never studied it. You claim complete ignorance of the
subject. It's not even given in your school" "Isn't the mere fact that
it isn't given proof enough?" "Oh, I see. It's not given because it's
unimportant. And it's unimportant because it's not given. Are you
satisfied with that reasoning?" Foster felt a growing confusion. "It's
in the books." "That's all. The books say neutrinics is unimportant.
Your professors tell you so because they read it in the books. The books
say so because professors write them. Who says it from personal
experience and knowledge? Who does research in it? Do you know of
anyone?" Foster said, "I don't see that we're getting anywhere, Dr.
Potterley. I have work to do" "One minute. I just want you to try this
on. See how it sounds to you. I say the government is actively
suppressing basic research in neutrinics and chronoscopy. They're
suppressing application of chronoscopy." "Oh, no." "Why not? They could
do it. There's your centrally directed research. If they refuse grants
for research in any portion of science, that portion dies. They've
killed neutrinics. They can do it and have done it." "But why?" "I don't
know why. I want you to find out. I'd do it myself if I knew enough. I
came to you because you're a young fellow with a brand-new education.
Have your intellectual arteries hardened already? Is there no curiosity
in you? Don't you want to know? Don't you want answers?" The historian
was peering intently into Foster's face. Their noses were only inches
apart, and Foster was so lost that he did not think to draw back. He
should, by rights, have ordered Potterley out. If necessary, he should
have thrown Potterley out. It was not respect for age and position that
stopped him. It was certainly not that Potterley's arguments had
convinced him. Rather, it was a small point of college pride. Why didn't
M.I.T. give a course in neutrinics? For that matter, now that he came to
think of it, he doubted that there was a single book on neutrinics in
the library. He could never recall having seen one. He stopped to think
about that. And that was ruin. Caroline Potterley had once been an
attractive woman. There were occa-sions, such as dinners or university
functions, when, by considerable effort, remnants of the attraction
could be salvaged. On ordinary occasions, she sagged. It was the word
she applied to herself in moments of self-abhorrence. She had grown
plumper with the years, but the flaccidity about her was not a matter of
fat entirely. It was as though her muscles had given up and grown limp
so that she shuffled when she walked, while her eyes grew baggy and her
cheeks jowly. Even her graying hair seemed tired rather than merely
stringy. Its straightness seemed to be the resul t of a supine surrender
to gravity, nothing else. Caroline Potterley looked at herself in the
mirror and admitted this was one of her bad days. She knew the reason,
too. It had been the dream of Laurel. The strange one, with Laurel grown
up. She had been wretched ever since. Still, she was sony she had
mentioned it to Arnold. He didn't say any-thing; he never did any more;
but it was bad for him. He was particularly withdrawn for days
afterward. It might have been that he was getting ready for that
important conference with the big government official (he kept saying he
expected no success), but it might also have been her dream. It was
better in the old days when he would cry sharply at her, "Let the dead
past go, Caroline! Talk won't bring her back, and dreams won't ei-ther."
It had been bad for both of them. Horribly bad. She had been away from
home and had lived in guilt ever since. If she had stayed at home, if
she had not gone on an unnecessary shopping expedition, there would have
been two of them avail able. One would have succeeded in saving Laurel.
Poor Arnold had not managed. Heaven knew he tried. He had nearly died
himself. He had come out of the burning house, staggering in agony,
blis-tered, choking, half-blinded, with the dead Laurel in his arms. The
nightmare of that lived on, never lifting entirely. Arnold slowly grew a
shell about himself afterward. He cultivated a low-voiced mildness
through which nothing broke, no lightning struck. He grew puritanical
and even abandoned his minor vices, his ci garettes, his penchant for an
occasional profane exclamation. He obtained his grant for the
prepa-ration of a new history of Carthage and subordinated everything to
that. She tried to help him. She hunted up his references, typed his
notes and microfilmed them. Then that ended suddenly. She ran from the
desk suddenly one evening, reaching the bathroom in bare time and
retching abominably. Her husband followed her in confusion and concern.
"Caroline, what's wrong?" It took a drop of brandy to bring her around.
She said, "Is it true? What they did?" "Who did?" "The Carthaginians."
He stared at her and she got it out by indirection. She couldn't say it
right out. The Carthaginians, it seemed, worshiped Moloch, in the form
of a hol-low, brazen idol with a furnac e in its belly. At times of
national crisis, the priests and the people gathered, and infants, after
the proper ceremonies and invocations, were dextrously hurled, alive,
into the flames. They were given sweetmeats just before the crucial
moment, in order that the efficacy of the sacrifice not be ruined by
displeasing cries of panic. The drums rolled just after the moment, to
drown out the few seconds of infant shrieking. The parents were present,
presumably gratified, for the sacrifice was pleasing to the gods. . . .
Arnold Potterley frowned darkly. Vicious lies, he told her, on the part
of Carthage's enemies. He should have warned her. After all, such propa-
gandistic lies were not uncommon. According to the Greeks, the ancient
Hebrews worshiped an ass's head in their Holy of Holies. According to
the Romans, the primitive Christians were haters of all men who
sacrificed pagan children in the catacombs. "Then they didn't do it?"
asked Caroline. "I'm sure they didn't. The primitive Phoenicians may
have. Human sacri- fice is commonplace in primitive cultures. But
Carthage in her great days was not a primitive culture. Human sacrifice
often gives way to symbolic actions such as circumcision. The Greeks and
Romans might have mistaken some Carthaginian symbolism fo r the original
full rite, either out of igno-rance or out of malice." "Are you sure?"
"I can't be sure yet, Caroline, but when I've got enough evidence, I'll
apply for permission to use chronoscopy, which will settle the matter
once and for all." "Chronoscopy?" "Time viewing. We can focus on ancient
Carthage at some time of crisis, the landing of Scipio Africanus in 202
b.c., for instance, and see with our own eyes exactly what happens. And
you'll see, I'll be right." He patted her and smiled encouragingly, but
she dreamed of Laurel every night for two weeks thereafter and she never
helped him with his Carthage project again. Nor did he ever ask her to.
But now she was bracing herself for his coming. He had called her after
arriving back in town, told her he had seen the government man and that
it had gone as expected. That meant failure, and yet the little telltale
sign of depression had been absent from his voice and his features had
appeared quite composed in the teleview. He had another errand to take
ca re of, he said, before coming home. It meant he would be late, but
that didn't matter. Neither one of them was particular about eating
hours or cared when packages were taken out of the freezer or even which
packages or when the selfwarming mechanism was activated. When he did
arrive, he surprised her. There was nothing untoward about him in any
obvious way. He kissed her dutifully and smiled, took off his hat and
asked if all had been well while he was gone. It was all almost
perfectly normal. Almost. She had learned to detect small things,
though, and his pace in all this was a trifle hurried. Enough to show
her accustomed eye that he was under tension. She said, "Has something
happened?" He said, "We're going to have a dinner guest night after
next, Caroline. You don't mind?" "Well, no. Is it anyone I know?" "No. A
young instructor. A newcomer. I've spoken to him." He suddenly whirled
toward her and seized her arms at the elbow, held them a moment, then
dropped them in confusion as though disconcerted at having shown
emotion. He said, "1 almost didn't get through to him. Imagine that.
Terrible, terrible, the way we have all bent to the yoke; the affection
we have for the harness about us." Mrs. Potterley wasn't sure she
understood, but for a year she had been watching him grow quietly more
rebellious; little by little more daring in his criticism of the
government. She said, "You haven't spoken foolishly to him, have you?"
"What do you mean, foolishly? He'll be doing some neutrinics for me."
"Neutrinics" was trisyllabic nonsense to Mrs. Potterley, but she knew it
had nothing to do with history. She said faintly, "Arnold, I don't like
you to do that. You'll lose your position. It's" "It's intellectual
anarchy, my dear," he said. "That's the phrase you want. Ve ry well. I
am an anarchist. If the government will not allow me to push my
researches, I will push them on my own. And when I show the way, others
will follow. . . . And if they don't, it makes no difference. It's Car-
thage that counts and human knowledge, not you and I." "But you don't
know this young man. What if he is an agent for the Commission of
Research." "Not likely and I'll take that chance." He made a fist of his
right hand and rubbed it gently against the palm of his left. "He's on
my side now. I 'm sure of it. He can't help but be. I can recognize
intellectual curiosity when I see it in a man's eyes and face and
attitude, and it's a fatal disease for a tame scientist. Even today it
takes time to beat it out of a man and the young ones are vulnera ble. .
. . Oh, why stop at anything? Why not build our own chronoscope and tefl
the government to go to" He stopped abruptly, shook his head and turned
away. "I hope everything will be all right," said Mrs. Potterley,
feeling helplessly certain that everything would not be, and frightened,
in advance, for her husband's professorial status and the security of
their old age. It was she alone, of them all, who had a violent
presentiment of trouble. Quite the wrong trouble, of course. Jonas
Foster was nearly ha lf an hour late in arriving at the Potterleys'
off-campus house. Up to that very evening, he had not quite decided he
would go. Then, at the last moment, he found he could not bring himself
to commit the social enormity of breaking a dinner appointment an hour
be-fore the appointed time. That, and the nagging of curiosity. The
dinner itself passed interminably. Foster ate without appetite. Mrs.
Potterley sat in distant absent-mindedness, emerging out of it only once
to ask if he were married and to make a deprecating sound at the news
that he was not. Dr. Potterley himself asked neutrally after his
professional history and nodded his head primly. It was as staid,
stodgyboring, actuallyas anything could be. Foster thought: He seems so
harmless. Foster had s pent the last two days reading up on Dr.
Potterley. Very casually, of course, almost sneakily. He wasn't
particularly anxious to be seen in the Social Science Library. To be
sure, history was one of those borderline affairs and historical works
were frequ ently read for amusement or edifica-tion by the general
public. Still, a physicist wasn't quite the "general public." Let Foster
take to reading histories and he would be considered queer, sure as
relativity, and after a while the Head of the Department would wonder if
his new instruc- tor were really "the man for the job." So he had been
cautious. He sat in the more secluded alcoves and kept his head bent
when he slipped in and out at odd hours. Dr. Potterley, it turned out,
had written three books and some dozen articles on the ancient
Mediterranean worlds, and the later articles (all in "Historical
Reviews") had all dealt with pre-Roman Carthage from a sympa-thetic
viewpoint. That, at least, checked with Potterley's story and had
soothed Foster's suspicions somewhat. . . . And yet Foster felt that it
would have been much wiser, much safer, to have scotched the matter at
the beginning. A scientist shouldn't be too curious, he thought in
bitter dissatisfaction with himself. It's a dangerous trait. After
dinner, he was ushered into Potterley's study and he was brought up 1
sharply at the threshold. The walls were simply lined with books. Not
merely films. There were films, of course, but these were far
outnum-bered by the booksprint on paper. He wouldn't have thought so
many books would exist in usable condition. That bothered Foster. Why
should anyone want to keep so many books at home? Surely all were
available in the university library, or, at the very worst, at the
Library of Congress, if one wished to take the minor trouble of checking
out a microfilm. There was an element of secrecy involved in a home
library. It breathed of intellectual anarchy. That last thought, oddly,
calmed Foster. He would rather Potterley be an authentic anarchist than
a play-acting agent provoca-teur. And now the hours began to pass
quickly and astonishingly. "You see," Potterley said, in a clear,
unflurried voice, "it was a matter of finding, if possible, anyone who
had ever used chronoscopy in his work. Naturally, 1 couldn't ask baldly,
since that would be unauthorized research." "Yes," said Foster dryly. He
was a little surprised such a small consider-ation would stop the man.
"I used indirect methods" He had. Foster was amazed at the volume of
correspondence dealing with small disputed points of ancient
Mediterranean culture which somehow managed to elicit the casual remark
over and over again: "Of course, having never made use of chronoscopy "
or, "Pending approval of my request for chronoscopic data, which appear
unlikely at the moment" "Now these aren't blind questionings," said
Potterley. "There's a monthly booklet put out by the Institute for
Chronoscopy in which items concerning the past as determined by time
viewing are printed. Just one or two items. "What impressed me fir st
was the triviality of most of the items, their insipidity. Why should
such researches get priority over my work? So I wrote to people who
would be most likely to do research in the directions described in the
booklet. Uniformly, as I have shown you, th ey did not make use of the
chronoscope. Now let's go over it point by point." At last Foster, his
head swimming with Potterley's meticulously gathered details, asked,
"But why?" "I don't know why," said Potterley, "but I have a theory. The
original invention of the chronoscope was by Sterbinskiyou see, I know
that much and it was well publicized. But then the government took over
the instru- ment and decided to suppress further research in the matter
or any use of the machine. But then, people might be curious as to why
it wasn't being used. Curiosity is such a vice, Dr. Foster." Yes, agreed
the physicist to himself. "Imagine the effectiveness, then," Potterley
went on, "of pretending that the chronoscope was being used. It would
then be not a mystery, but a commonplace. It would no longer be a
fitting object for legitimate curiosity or an attractive one for illicit
curiosity." "You were curious," pointed out Foster. Potterley looked a
trifle restless. "It was different in my case," he said angrily. "I have
something that must be done, and I wouldn't submit to the ridiculous way
in which they kept putting me off." A bit paranoid, too, thought Foster
gloomily. Yet he had ended up with something, paranoid or not. Foster
could no longer deny that something peculiar was going on in the matter
of neutrin-ics. But what was Potterley after? That still bothered
Foster. If Potterley didn't intend this as a test of Foster's ethics,
what did he want? Foster put it to himself logically. If an intellectual
anarchist with a touch of paranoia wanted to use a chronoscope and was
convinced that the pow-ers-that-be were deliberately standing in his
way, what would he do? Supposing it were I, he thought. What would I do?
He said slowly, "Maybe the chronoscope doesn't exist at all?" Potterley
started. There was almost a crack in his general calmness. For an
instant, Foster found himself catching a glimpse of something not at all
calm. But the historian kept his balance and said, "Oh, no, there must
be a chronoscope." "Why? Have you seen it? Have I? Maybe that's the
explanation of every-thing. Maybe they're not deliberately holding out
on a chronoscope they've got. Maybe they haven't got it in the first
place." "But Sterbinski lived. He built a chronoscope. That much is a
fact." "The books say so," said Foster coldly. "Now listen." Potterley
actually reached over and snatched at Foster's jacket sleeve. "1 need
the chronoscope. I must have it. Don't tell me it doesn't exist. What
we're going to do is find out enough about neutrinics to be able to"
Potterley drew himself up short. Foster drew his sleeve away. He needed
no ending to that sentence. He supplied it himself. He said, "Build one
of our own?" Potterley looked sour as though he would rather not have
said it point-blank. Nevertheless, he said, "Why not?" "Because that's
out of the question," said Foster. "If what I've read is correct, then
it took Sterbinski twenty years to build his machine and several
millions in composite grants. Do you think you and I can duplicate that
illegally? Suppose we had the time, which we haven't, and suppose I
could learn enough out of books, which I doubt, where would we get the
money ' and equipment? The chronoscope is supposed to fill a five-story
building, for : Heaven's sake." "Then you won't help me?" "Well, I'll
tell you what. I have one way in which I may be able to find out
something" "What is that?" asked Potterley at once. "Never mind. That's
not important. But I may be able to find out enough to tell you whether
the government is deliberat ely suppressing research by chronoscope. I
may confirm the evidence you already have or I may be able to prove that
your evidence is misleading. I don't know what good it will do you in
either case, but it's as far as I can go. It's my limit." Potterley
watched the young man go finally. He was angry with himself. Why had he
allowed himself to grow so careless as to permit the fellow to guess
that he was thinking in terms of a chronoscope of his own. That was
premature. But then why did the young fool have to suppose that a
chronoscope might not exist at all? It had to exist. It had to. What was
the use of saying it didn't? And why couldn't a second one be built?
Science had advanced in the fifty years since Sterbinski. All that was
needed was knowledge. Let the youngster gather knowledge. Let him think
a small gathering would be his limit. Having taken the path to anarchy,
there would be no limit. If the boy were not driven onward by something
in himself, the first steps would be error enough to force the re st.
Potterley was quite certain he would not hesitate to use blackmail.
Potterley waved a last good-by and looked up. It was beginning to rain.
Certainly! Blackmail if necessary, but he would not be stopped. Foster
steered his car across the bleak outskirts of town and scarcely noticed
the rain. He was a fool, he told himself, but he couldn't leave things
as they were. He had to know. He damned his streak of undisciplined
curiosity, but he had to know. But he would go no further than Uncle
Ralph. He swore mightily to himself that it would stop there. In that
way, there would be no evidence against him, no real evidence. Uncle
Ralph would be discreet. In a way, he was secretly ashamed of Uncle
Ralph. He hadn't mentioned him to Potterley partly out of caution a nd
partly because he did not wish to witness the lifted eyebrow, the
inevitable half-smile. Professional science writers, however useful,
were a little outside the pale, fit only for patronizing contempt. The
fact that, as a class, they made more money th an did re-search
scientists only made matters worse, of course. Still, there were times
when a science writer in the family could be a convenience. Not being
really educated, they did not have to specialize. Consequently, a good
science writer knew practically everything. . . . And Uncle Ralph was
one of the best.

Ralph Nimmo had no college degree and was rather proud of it. "A
degree," he once said to Jonas Foster, when both were considerably
younger, "is a first step down a ruinous highway. You don't want to
waste it so you go on to graduate work and doctoral research. You end up
a thoroughgoing ignoramus on everything in the world except for one
subdivisional sliver of nothing. "On the other hand, if you guard your
mind carefully and keep it blank of any clutter of information till
maturity is reached, filling it only with intelli- gence and training it
only in clear thinking, you then have a powerful instrument at your
disposal and you can become a science writer." Nimmo received his first
assignment at the age of twenty-five, after he had completed his
apprenticeship and been out in the field for less than three months. It
came in the shape of a clotted manuscript whose language would impart no
glimmering of understanding to any reader, however quali- fied, without
careful study and some inspired guesswork. Nimmo took it apart and put
it together again (after five long and exasperating interviews with the
authors, who were biophysicists), making the language taut and
meaningful and smoothing the style to a pleasant gloss. "Why not?" he
would say tolerantly to his nephew, who countered his strictures on
degrees by berating him with his readiness to hang on the fringes of
science. "The fringe is important. Your scientists can't write. Why
should they be expected to? They aren't expected to be grand masters at
chess or virtuosos at the violin, so why expect them to know how to put
words together? Why not leave that for specialists, too?" "Good Lord,
Jonas, read your literature of a hundred years ago. Discount the fact
that the science is out of date and that some of the expressions are out
of date. Just try to read it and make sense out of it. It's just
jaw-cracking, amateurish. Pages are published uselessly; whole articles
which are either noncomprehensible or bo th." "But you don't get
recognition, Uncle Ralph," protested young Foster, who was getting ready
to start his college career and was rather starry-eyed about it. "You
could be a terrific researcher." "I get recognition," said Nimmo. "Don't
think for a minute I don't. Sure, a biochemist or a strato-meteorologist
won't give me the time of day, but they pay me well enough. Just find
out what happens when some first-class ; chemist finds the Commission
has cut his year's allowance for science writ-ing. He'll fight harder
for enough funds to afford me, or someone like me, , than to get a
recording ionograph." He grinned broadly and Foster grinned back.
Actually, he was proud of his paunchy, round-faced, stub-fingered uncle,
whose vanity made him brush his frin ge of hair futilery over the desert
on his pate and made him dress like an unmade haystack because such
negligence was his trademark. Ashamed, but proud, too. And now Foster
entered his uncle's cluttered apartment in no mood at all for grinning.
He was nin e years older now and so was Uncle Ralph. For nine more
years, papers in every branch of science had come to him for polishing
and a little of each had crept into his capacious mind. Nimmo was eating
seedless grapes, popping them into his mouth one at a time. He tossed a
bunch to Foster who caught them by a hair, then bent to retrieve
individual grapes that had torn loose and fallen to the floor. "Let them
be. Don't bother," said Nimmo carelessly. "Someone comes in here to
clean once a week. What's up? Having trouble with your grant application
write-up?" "I haven't really got into that yet." "You haven't? Get a
move on, boy. Are you waiting for me to offer to do the final
arrangement?" "I couldn't afford you, Uncle." "Aw, come on. It's all in
the family. Grant me all popular publication rights and no cash need
change hands." Foster nodded. "If you're serious, it's a deal." "It's a
deal." It was a gamble, of course, but Foster knew enough of Nimmo's
science writing to realize it could pay off. Some dramatic d iscovery of
public interest on primitive man or on a new surgical technique, or on
any branch of spationautics could mean a very cash-attracting article in
any of the mass media of communication. It was Nimmo, for instance, who
had written up, for scientific consump-tion, the series of papers by
Bryce and co-workers that elucidated the fine structure of two cancer
viruses, for which job he asked the picayune pay- ment of fifteen
hundred dollars, provided popular publication rights were included. He
then wrot e up, exclusively, the same work in semidramatic form for use
in trimensional video for a twenty-thousand-dollar advance plus rental
royalties that were still coming in after five years. Foster said
bluntly, "What do you know about neutrinics, Uncle?" "Neutrinics?"
Nimmo's small eyes looked surprised. "Are you working in that? I thought
it was pseudo-gravitic optics." "It is p.g.o. I just happen to be asking
about neutrinics." "That's a devil of a thing to be doing. You're
stepping out of line. You know that, don't you?" "I don't expect you to
call the Commission because I'm a little curious about things." "Maybe I
should before you get into trouble. Curiosity is an occupational danger
with scientists. I've watched it work. One of them will be moving
quietly along on a problem, then curiosity leads him up a strange creek.
Next thing you know they've done so little on their proper problem, they
can't justify for a project renewal. I've seen more" "All I want to
know," said Foster patiently, "is what's been passing through your hands
lately on neutrinics." Nimmo leaned back, chewing at a grape
thoughtfully. "Nothing. Nothing ever. I don't recall ever getting a
paper on neutrinics." "What!" Foster was openly astonished. "Then who
does get the work?" "Now that you ask," said Nimmo, "I don't know. Don't
recall anyone talking about it at the annual conventions. I don't think
much work is being done there." "Why not?" "Hey, there, don't bark. I'm
not doing anything. My guess would be" Foster was exasperated. "Don't
you know?" "Hmp. I'll tell you what I know about neutrinics. It concerns
the applica-tions of neutrino movements and the forces involved" "Sure.
Sure. Just as electronics deals with the applications of electron
movements and the forces involved, and pseudo-gravities deals with the
applications of artificial gravitational fields. I didn't come to you
for that. Is that all you know?" "And," said Nimmo with equanimity,
"neutrinics is the basis of time viewing and that is all I know." Foster
slouched back in h is chair and massaged one lean cheek with great
intensity. He felt angrily dissatisfied. Without formulating it
explicitly in his own mind, he had felt sure, somehow, that Nimmo would
come up with some late reports, bring up interesting facets of modern n
eutrinics, send him back to Potterley able to say that the elderly
historian was mistaken, that his data was misleading, his deductions
mistaken. Then he could have returned to his proper work. But now . . .
He told himself angrily: So they're not doing muc h work in the field.
Does that make it deliberate suppression? What if neutrinics is a
sterile discipline? Maybe it is. I don't know. Potterley doesn't. Why
waste the intellectual resources of humanity on nothing? Or the work
might be secret for some legi timate reason. It might be ... The trouble
was, he had to know. He couldn't leave things as they were now. He
couldn 't! He said, "Is there a text on neutrinics, Uncle Ralph? I mean
a clear and simple one. An elementary one." Nimmo thought, his plump
cheeks puffing out with a series of sighs. "You ask the damnedest
questions. The only one I ever heard of was Sterbinski and somebody.
I've never seen it, but I viewed something about it once. . . .
Sterbinski and LaMarr, that's it." "Is that the Sterbinski who invented
the chronoscope?" i "I think so. Proves the book ought to be good." "Is
there a recent edition? Sterbinski died thirty years ago." Nimmo
shrugged and said nothing. "Can you find out?" They sat in silence for a
moment, while Nimmo shifted his bulk to the creaking tune of the chair
he sat on. Then the science writer said, "Are you going to tell me what
this is all about?" "I can't. Will you help me anyway, Uncle Ralph? Will
you get me a copy of the text?" "Well, you've taught me all I know on
pseudo-gravities. I should be grate-ful. Tell you whatI'll help you on
one condition." "Which is?" The older man was suddenly very grave. "That
you be careful, Jonas. You're obviously way out of line whatever you're
doing. Don't blow up your career just because you're curious about
something you haven't been as- signed to and which is none of your
business. Understand?" Foster nodded, but he hardly heard. He was
thinking furiously. A full week later, Ralph Nimmo eased his rotund
figure into Jonas Fos-ter's on-campus two-room combination and said, in
a hoarse whisper, "I've got something." "What?" Foster was immediately
eager. "A copy of Sterbinski and LaMarr." He produced it, or rather a
corner of it, from his ample topcoat. Foster almost automatically eyed
door and windows to make sure they were closed and shaded respectively,
then held out his hand. The film case was flaking with age, and when he
cracked it the film was faded and growing brittle. He said sharply, "Is
this all?" "Gratitude, my boy, gratitude!" Nimmo sat down with a grunt,
and reached into a pocket for an apple. "Oh, I'm grateful, but it's so
old." "And lucky to get it at that. 1 tried to get a film run from the
Congres-sional Library. No go. The book was restricted." "Then how did
you get this?" "Stole it." He was biting crunchingly around the core.
"New York Pub-lic." "What?" "Simple enough. I had access to the stacks,
naturally. So I stepped over a chained railing when no one was around,
dug this up, and walked out with it. They're very trust ing out there.
Meanwhile, they won't miss it in years. . . . Only you'd better not let
anyone see it on you, nephew." Foster stared at the film as though it
were literally hot. Nimmo discarded the core and reached for a second
apple. "Funny thing, now. There's nothing more recent in the whole field
of neutrinics. Not a monograph, not a paper, not a progress note.
Nothing since the chrono-scope." "Uh-huh," said Foster absently. Foster
worked evenings in the Potterley home. He could not trust his own
on-campus rooms for the purpose. The evening work grew more real to him
than his own grant applications. Sometimes he worried about it but then
that stopped, too. His work consisted, at first, simply in viewing and
reviewing the text film. Later it consisted in thinking (sometimes while
a section of the book ran itself off through the pocket projector,
disregarded). Sometimes Potterley would come down to watch, to sit with
prim, eager eyes, as though he expected thought processes to solidify
and become visible in a ll their convolutions. He interfered in only two
ways. He did not allow Foster to smoke and sometimes he talked. It
wasn't conversation talk, never that. Rather it was a low-voiced
mono-logue with which, it seemed, he scarcely expected to command
attention. It was much more as though he were relieving a pressure
within himself. Carthage! Always Carthage! Carthage, the New York of the
ancient Mediterranean. Carthage, com-mercial empire and queen of the
seas. Carthage, all that Syracuse and Alex-andria pretended to be.
Carthage, maligned by her enemies and inarticulate in her own defense.
She had been defeated once by Rome and then driven out of Sicily and
Sardinia, but came back to more than recoup her losses by new dominions
in Spain, and raised up Hannibal to give the Romans sixteen years of
terror. In the end, she lost again a second time, reconciled herself to
fate and built again with broken tools a limping life in shrunken
territory, succeeding so well that jealous Rome deliberately forced a
third war. And then Car- thage, with nothing but bare hands and
tenacity, built weapons and forced Rome into a two-year war that ended
only with complete destruction of the city, the inhabitants throwing
themselves into their flaming houses rather than surrender. "Coul d
people fight so for a city and a way of life as bad as the ancient
writers painted it? Hannibal was a better general than any Roman and his
soldiers were absolutely faithful to him. Even his bitterest enemies
praised him. There was a Carthaginian. It is fashionable to say that he
was an atypical Carthaginian, better than the others, a diamond placed
in garbage. But then why was he so faithful to Carthage, even to his
death after years of exile? They talk of Moloch" Foster didn't always
listen but sometimes he couldn't help himself and he shuddered and
turned sick at the bloody tale of child sacrifice. But Potterley went on
earnestly, "Just the same, it isn't true. It's a
twenty-five-hundred-year-old canard started by the Greeks and Romans.
They had their own slaves, their crucifixions and torture, their
gladiatorial contests. They weren't holy. The Moloch story is what later
ages would have called war propaganda, the big lie. I can prove it was a
lie. I can prove it and, by Heaven, I willI will " He would mumble that
promise over and over again in his earnestness. Mrs. Potterley visited
him also, but less frequently, usually on Tuesdays and Thursdays when
Dr. Potterley himself had an evening course to take care of and was not
present. She would sit quietly, scarcely talking, face slack and doughy,
eyes blank, her whole attitude distant and withdrawn. The first time,
Foster tried, uneasily, to suggest that she leave. She said tonelessly,
"Do I disturb you?" "No, of course not," lied Foster restlessly. "It's
just thatthat" He couldn't complete the sentence. She nodded, as though
accepting an invitation to stay. Then she opened a cloth bag she had
brought with her and took out a quire of vitron sheets which she
proceeded to weave together by rapid, delicate movements of a pair of
slender, tetra-faceted depolarizers, whose battery-fed wires made her
look as though she were holding a large spider. One evening, she said
softly, "My daughter, Laurel, is your age." Foster started, as much at
the sudden unexpected sound of speech as at the words. He said, "1
didn't know you had a daughter, Mrs. Potterley." "She died. Years ago."
The vitron grew under the deft manipulations into the uneven shape of
some garment Foster could not yet identify. There was nothing left for
him to do but mutter inanely, "I'm sorry." Mrs. Potterley sighed. "1
dream about her often." She raised her blue, distant eyes to him. Foster
winced and looked away. Another evening she asked, pulling at one of the
vitron sheets to loosen its gentle clinging to her dress, "What is time
viewing anyway?" That remark broke into a particularly involved chain of
thought, and Foster said snappishly, "Dr. Potterley can explain." "He's
tried to. Oh, my, yes. But I think he's a little impatient with me. He
calls it chronoscopy most of the time. Do you actually see things in the
past, like the trimensionals? Or does it just make little dot patterns
like the computer you use?" Foster stared at his hand computer with
distaste. It worked well enough, but every operation had to be manually
controlled and the answers were obtained in code. Now if he could use
the school computer . . . Well, why dream, he felt conspicuous enough,
as it was, carrying a hand computer under his arm every evening as he
left his office. He said, "I've never seen the chronoscope myself, but
I'm under the impression that you actually see pictures and hear sound."
"You can hear people talk, too?" "I think so." Then, half in
desperation, "Look here, Mrs. Potterley, this must be awfully dull for
you. I realize you don't like to leave a guest all to himself, but
really, Mrs. Potterley, you mustn't feel compelled" "I don't feel
compelled," she said. "I'm sitting here, waiting." "Waiting? For what?"
She said composedly, "I listened to you that first evening. The time you
first spoke to Arnold. I listened at the door." He said, "You did?" "I
know I shouldn't have, but I was awfully worried about Arnold. I had a
notion he was going to do something he oughtn't and I wanted to hear
what. And then when I heard" She paused, bending close over the vitron
and peering at it. "Heard what, Mrs. Potterley?" "That you wouldn't
build a chronoscope." "Well, of course not." "I thought maybe you might
change your mind." f Foster glared at her. "Do you mean you're coming
down here hoping I'll build a chronoscope, waiting for me to build one?"
I "I hope you do, Dr. Foster. Oh, I hope you do." It was as though, all
at once, a fuzzy veil had fallen off her face, leaving all her features
clear and sharp, putting color into her cheeks, life into her eyes, the
vibrations of something approaching excitement into her voice. "Wouldn't
it be wonderful," she whispered, "to have one? People of the past could
live again. Pharaohs and kings andjust people. I hope you build one, Dr.
Foster. I reallyhope" She choked, it seemed, on the intensity of her own
words and let the vitron sheets slip off her lap. She rose and ran up
the basement stairs, while Foster's eyes followed her awkwardly fleeing
body with astonishment and distress. It cut deeper into Foster's nights
and left him sleepless and painfully stiff with thought. It was almost a
mental indigestion. His grant requests went limping in, finally, to
Ralph Nimmo. He scarcely had any hope for them. He thought numbly: They
won't be approved. If they weren't, of course, it would create a scandal
in the department and probably mean his appointment at the university
would not be renewed, come the end of the academic year. He scarcely
worried. It was the neutrino, the neutrino, only the neutrino. Its trail
curved and veered sharply and led him breathlessly along uncharted
pathways that even Sterbinski and LaMarr did not follow. He called
Nimmo. "Uncle Ralph, I need a few things. I'm calling from off the
campus." Nimmo's face in the video plate was jovial, but his voice was
sharp. He said, "What you need is a course in communication. I'm having
a hell of a time pulling your application into one intelligible piece.
If that's what you're calling about"

Foster shook his head impatiently. "That's not what I'm calling about. I
need these." He scribbled quickly on a piece of paper and held it up
before the receiver. Nimmo yiped. "Hey, how many tricks do you think I
can wangle?" "You can get them, Uncle. You know you can." Nimmo reread
the list of items with silent motions of his plump lips and looked
grave. "What happens when you put those things together?" he asked.
Foster shook his head. "You'll have exclusive popular publication rights
to whatever turns up, the way it's always been. But please don't ask any
questions now." "I can't do miracles, you know." "Do this one. You've
got to. You're a science writer, not a research man. You don't have to
account for anything. You've got friends and connections. They can look
the other way, can't they, to get a break from you next publication
time?" "Your faith, nephew, is touching. I'll try." Nimmo succeeded. The
material and equipment were brought over late one evening in a private
touring car. Nimmo and Foster lugged it in with the grunting of men
unused to manual labor. Potterley stood at the entrance of the basement
after Nimmo had left. He asked softly, "What's this for?" Foster brushed
the hair off his forehead and gently massaged a sprained wrist. He said,
"1 want to conduct a few simple experiments." "Really?" The historian's
eyes glittered with excitement. Foster felt exploited. He felt as though
he were being led along a danger-ous highway by the pull of pinching
fingers on his nose; as though he could see the ruin clearly that lay in
wait at the end of the path, yet walked eagerly and determinedly. Worst
of all, he felt the compelling grip on his nose to be his own. It was
Potterley who began it, Potterley who stood there now, gloating; but the
compulsion was his own. Foster said sourly, "I'll be wanting privacy
now, Potterley. I can't have you and your wife running down here and
annoying me." He thought: If that offends him, let him kick me out. Let
him put an end to this. In his heart, though, he did not think being
evicted would stop anything. But it did not come to that. Potterley was
showing no signs of offense. His mild gaze was unchanged. He said, "Of
course, Dr. Foster, of course. All the privacy you wish." Foster watched
him go. He was left still marching along the highway, perversely glad of
it and hating himself for being glad. He took to sleeping over on a cot
in Potterley's basement and spending his weekends there entirely. During
that period, preliminary word came through that his grants (as doctored
by Nimmo) had been approved. The Department Head brought the word and
congratulated him. Foster stared back distantly and mumbled, "Good. I'm
glad," with so little conviction that the other frowned and turned away
without another word. Foster gave the matter no further thought. It was
a minor point, worth no notice. He was planning something that really
counted, a climactic test for that evening. One evening, a second and
third and then, haggard and half beside him-self with excitement, he
called in Potterley. Potterley came down the stairs and looked about at
the homemade gad- getry. He said, in his soft voice, "The electric bills
are quite high. I don't mind the expense, but the City may ask
questions. Can anything be done?" It was a warm evening, but Potterley
wore a tight collar and a semijacket . Foster, who was in his
undershirt, lifted bleary eyes and said shakily, "It won't be for much
longer, Dr. Potterley. I've called you down to tell you something. A
chronoscope can be built. A small one, of course, but it can be built."
Potterley seized the railing. His body sagged. He managed a whisper.
"Can it be built here?" "Here in the basement," said Foster wearily.
"Good Lord. You said" "I know what I said," cried Foster impatiently. "I
said it couldn't be done. I didn't know anything then. Even Sterbinski
didn't know anything." Potterley shook his head. "Are you sure? You're
not mistaken, Dr. Foster? I couldn't endure it if" Foster said, "I'm not
mistaken. Damn it, sir, if just theory had been enough, we could have
had a time viewer over a hundred years ago, when the neutrino was first
postulated. The trouble was, the original investigators considered it
only a mysterious particle without mass or charge that could not be
detected. It was just something to even up the bookkeeping and save the
law of conservation of mass energy." He wasn't sure Potterley knew what
he was talking about. He didn't care. He needed a breather. He had to
get some of this out of his clotting thoughts. . . . And he needed
background for what he would have to tell Potterley next. He went on.
"It was Sterbinski who first discovered that the neutrino broke through
the space-time cross-sectional barrier, that it traveled through time as
well as through space. It was Sterbinski who first devised a method for
stopping neutrinos. He invented a neutrino recorder and learned how to
interpret the pattern of the neutrino stream. Naturally, the stream had
been affected and deflected by all the matter it had passed through in
its passage through time, and the deflections could be analyzed and
converted into the images of the matter that had done the deflecting.
Time viewing was possi-ble. Even air vibrations could be detected in
this way and converted into sound." Potterley was definitely not
listening. He said, "Yes. Yes. But when can you build a chronoscope?"
Foster said urgently, "Let me finish. Everything depends on the method
used to detect and analyze the neutrino stream. Sterbinski's method was
difficult and roundabout. It required mountains of energy. But I've
studied pseudo-gravities , Dr. Potterley, the science of artificial
gravitational fields. I've specialized in the behavior of light in such
fields. It's a new science. Sterbinski knew nothing of it. If he had, he
would have seenanyone would have a much better and more efficient method
of detecting neutrinos using a pseudo-gravitic field. If I had known
more neutrinics to begin with, I would have seen it at once." Potterley
brightened a bit. "I knew it," he said. "Even if they stop re-search in
neutrinics there is no way the government can be sure that discov- eries
in other segments of science won't reflect knowledge on neutrinics. So
much for the value of centralized direction of science. 1 thought this
long ago, Dr. Foster, before you ever came to work here." "1
congratulate you on that," said Foster, "but there's one thing" "Oh,
never mind all this. Answer me. Please. When can you build a
chronoscope?" "I'm trying to tell you something, Dr. Potterley. A
chronoscope won't do you any good." (This is it, Foster thought.)
Slowly, Potterley descended the stairs. He stood facing Foster. "What do
you mean? Why won't it help me?" "You won't see Carthage. It's what I've
got to tell you. It's what I've been leading up to. You can never see
Carthage." Potterley shook his head slightly. "Oh, no, you're wrong. If
you have the chronoscope, just focus it properly" "No, Dr. Potterley.
It's not a question of focus. There are random factors affecting the
neutrino stream, as they affect all subatomic particles. What we call
the uncertainty principle. When the stream is recorded and inter-
preted, the random factor comes out as fuzziness, or 'noise' as the
communi-cations boys speak of it. The further back in time you
penetrate, the more pronounced the fuzziness, the greater the noise.
After a while, t he noise drowns out the picture. Do you understand?"
"More power," said Potterley in a dead kind of voice. "That won't help.
When the noise blurs out detail, magnifying detail magnifies the noise,
too. You can't see anything in a sun-bumed film by enlargin g it, can
you? Get this through your head, now. The physical nature of the
universe sets limits. The random thermal motions of air molecules set
limits to how weak a sound can be detected by any instrument. The length
of a light wave or of an electron wav e sets limits to the size of
objects that can be seen by any instrument. It works that way in
chronoscopy, too. You can only time view so far." "How far? How far?"
Foster took a deep breath. "A century and a quarter. That's the most."
"But the monthly bulletin the Commission puts out deals with ancient
history almost entirely." The historian laughed shakily. "You must be
wrong. The government has data as far back as 3000 b.c." "When did you
switch to believing them?" demanded Foster, scornfully. "You began t his
business by proving they were lying; that no historian had made use of
the chronoscope. Don't you see why now? No historian, except one
interested in contemporary history, could. No chronoscope can possibly
see back in time further than 1920 under any conditions." 1 "You're
wrong. You don't know everything," said Potterley. "The truth won't bend
itself to your convenience either. Face it. The IJ&vernment's part in
this is to perpetuate a hoax." f'Why?" "I don't know why." Potterley's
snubby nose was twitching. His eyes were bulging. He pleaded, "It's only
theory, Dr. Foster. Build a chronoscope. Build one and try." Foster
caught Potterley's shoulders in a sudden, fierce grip. "Do you think I
haven't? Do you think I would tell you this before I had checked it
every way I knew? I have built one. It's all around you. Look!" He ran
to the switches at the power leads. He flicked them on, one by one. He
turned a resistor, adjusted other knobs, put out the cellar lights.
"Wait. Let it warm up." There was a small glow near the center of one
wall. Potterley was gibber-ing incoherently, but Foster only cried
again, "Look!" The light sharpened and brightened, broke up into a
light-and-dark pat-tern. Men and women! Fuzzy. Features blurred. Arms
and legs mere streaks. An old-fashioned ground car, unclear but
recognizable as one of the kind that had once used gasoline-powered
internal-combustion engines, sped by. Foster said, "Mid-twentieth
century, somewhere. I can't hook up an au-dio yet so this is soundless.
Eventually, we can add sound. Anyway, mid-twentieth is almost as far
back as you can go. Believe me, that's the best focusing that can be
done." Potterley said, "Build a larger machine, a stronger one. Improve
your circuits." "You can't lick the Uncertainty Principle, man, any more
than you can live on the sun. There are physical limits to what can be
done." "You're lying. I won't believe you. I" A new voice sounded,
raised shrilly to make itself heard. "Arnold! Dr. Foster!" , The young
physicist turned at once. Dr. Potterley froze for a long mo-ment, then
said, without turning, "What is it, Caroline? Leave us." "No!" Mrs.
Potterley descended the stairs. "I heard. I couldn't help hear-ing. Do
you have a time viewer here, Dr. Foster? Here in the basement?" "Yes, I
do, Mrs. Potterley. A kind of time viewer. Not a good one. I can't get
sound yet and the picture is darned blurry, but it works." Mrs.
Potterley clasped her hands and held them tightly against her breast.
"How wonderful. How wonderful." "It's not at all wonderful," snapped
Potterley. "The young fool can't reach further back than" "Now, look,"
began Foster in exasperation. . . . "Please!" cried Mrs. Potterley.
"Listen to me. Arnold, don't you see that as long as we can use it for
twenty years back, we can see Laurel once again? What do we care about
Carthage and ancient times? It's Laurel we can see. She'll be alive for
us again. Leave the machine here, Dr. Foster. Show us how to work it."
Foster stared at her then at her husband. Dr. Potterley's face had gone
white. Though his voice stayed low and even, its calmness was somehow
gone. He said, "You're a fool!" Caroline said weakly, "Arnold!" "You're
a fool, I say. What will you see? The past. The dead past. Will Laurel
do one thing she did not do? Will you see one thing you haven't seen?
Will you live three years over and over again, watching a baby who'll
never grow up no matter how you watch?" His voice came near to cracking,
but held. He stopped closer to her, seized her shoulder and shook her
roughly. "Do y ou know what will happen to you if you do that? They'll
come to take you away because you'll go mad. Yes, mad. Do you want
mental treatment? Do you want to be shut up, to undergo the psychic
probe?" Mrs. Potterley tore away. There was no trace of softness or
vagueness about her. She had twisted into a virago. "I want to see my
child, Arnold. She's in that machine and I want her." "She's not in the
machine. An image is. Can't you understand? An image! Something that's
not real!" "1 want my child. Do you hear me?" She flew at him,
screaming, fists beating. "/ want my child." The historian retreated at
the fury of the assault, crying out. Foster moved to step between, when
Mrs. Potterley dropped, sobbing wildly, to the floor. Potterley turned,
eyes desperately seeking. With a sudden heave, he snatched at a
Lando-rod, tearing it from its support, and whirling away before Foster,
numbed by all that was taking place, could move to stop him. "Stand
back!" gasped Potterley, "or I'll kill you. I swear it." He swung with
force, and Foster jumped back. Potterley turned with fury on every part
of the structure in the cellar, and Foster, after the first crash of
glass, watched dazedly. Potterley spent his rage and then he was
standing quietly amid shards and splinters, wit h a broken Lando-rod in
his hand. He said to Foster in a whisper, "Now get out of here! Never
come back! If any of this cost you anything, send me a bill and I'll pay
for it. I'll pay double." Foster shrugged, picked up his shirt and moved
up the basement stairs. He could hear Mrs. Potterley sobbing loudly,
and, as he turned at the head of the stairs for a last look, he saw Dr.
Potterley bending over her, his face convulsed with sorrow. Two days
later, with the school day drawing to a close, and Foster looking
wearily about to see if there were any data on his newly approved
projects that he wished to take home, Dr. Potterley appeared once more.
He was standing at the open door of Foster's office. The historian was
neatly dressed as ever. He lifted his hand in a gesture that was too
vague to be a greeting, too abortive to be a plea. Foster stared
stonily. Potterley said, "I waited till five, till you were . . . May I
come in?" Foster nodded. Potterley said, "I suppose I ought to apologize
for my behavior. I was dreadfully disappointed; not quite master of
myself. Still, it was inexcus-able." "I accept your apology," said
Foster. "Is that all?" 'a3: "My wife called you, I think." .,, "Yes, she
has." + "She has been quite hysterical. She told me she had but I
couldn't be quite sure" "Could you tell mewould you be so kind as to
tell me what she wanted?" "She wanted a chronoscope. She said she had
some money of her own. She was willing to pay." ... "Did youmake any
commitments?" "I said I wasn't in the manufacturing business." "Good,"
breathed Potterley, his chest expanding with a sigh of relief. ''Please
don't take any calls from her. She's notquite" ;!. "Look, Dr.
Potterfey," said Foster, "I'm not getting into any domestic quarrels,
but you'd better be prepared for something. Chronoscopes can be built by
anybody Given a few simple parts that can be bought through some
etherics sales center, it can be built in the home workshop. The video
part, anyway." ! "But no one else will think of it beside you, will
they? No one has." "I don't intend to keep it secret." '; "But you can't
publish. It's illegal research." "That doesn't matter any more, Dr.
Potterley. If I lose my grants, I lose them. If the university is
displeased, I'll resign. It just doesn't matter." ; "But you can't do
that!" "Till now," said Foster, "you didn't mind my risking loss of
grants and position. Why do you turn so tender about it now? Now let me
explain something to you. When you first came to me, I believed in
organized and direct ed research; the situation as it existed, in other
words. I considered you an intellectual anarchist, Dr. Potterley, and
dangerous. But, for one reason or another, I've been an anarchist myself
for months now and I have achieved great things. "Those things have been
achieved not because I am a brilliant scientist. Not at all. It was just
that scientific research had been directed from above and holes were
left that could be filled in by anyone who looked in the right
direction. And anyone might have if the government hadn't actively tried
to prevent it. "Now understand me. I still believe directed research can
be useful. I'm not in favor of a retreat to total anarchy. But there
must be a middle ground. Directed research can retain flexibility. A
scientist mu st be allowed to follow his curiosity, at least in his
spare time." Potterley sat down. He said ingratiatingly, "Let's discuss
this, Foster. I appreciate your idealism. You're young. You want the
moon. But you can't destroy yourself through fancy notions o f what
research must consist of. I got you into this. I am responsible and I
blame myself bitterly. I was acting emotionally. My interest in Carthage
blinded me and I was a damned fool." Foster broke in. "You mean you've
changed completely in two days? Carthage is nothing? Government
suppression of research is nothing?" "Even a damned fool like myself can
leam, Foster. My wife taught me something. I understand the reason for
government suppression of neutrin-ics now. I didn't two days ago. And,
understandin g, I approve. You saw the way my wife reacted to the news
of a chronoscope in the basement. I had envisioned a chronoscope used
for research purposes. All she could see was the personal pleasure of
returning neurotically to a personal past, a dead past. T he pure
researcher, Foster, is in the minority. People like my wife would
outweigh us. "For the government to encourage chronoscopy would have
meant that everyone's past would be visible. The government officers
would be sub-jected to blackmail and improper pressure, since who on
Earth has a past that is absolutely clean? Organized government might
become impossible." Foster licked his lips. "Maybe. Maybe the government
has some justifica-tion in its own eyes. Still, there's an important
principle involved h ere. Who knows what other scientific advances are
being stymied because scientists are being stifled into walking a narrow
path? If the chronoscope becomes the terror of a few politicians, it's a
price that must be paid. The public must realize that scien ce must be
free and there is no more dramatic way of doing it than to publish my
discovery, one way or another, legally or illegally." Potterley's brow
was damp with perspiration, but his voice remained even. "Oh, not just a
few politicians, Dr. Foster. Don 't think that. It would be my terror,
too. My wife would spend her time living with our dead daughter. She
would retreat further from reality. She would go mad living the same
scenes over and over. And not just my terror. There would be others like
her. C hildren searching for their dead parents or their own youth.
We'll have a whole world living in the past. Midsummer madness." Foster
said, "Moral judgments can't stand in the way. There isn't one advance
at any time in history that mankind hasn't had the ingenuity to pervert.
Mankind must also have the ingenuity to prevent. As for the chron-
oscope, your delvers into the dead past will get tired soon enough.
They'll catch their loved parents in some of the things their loved
parents did and they'll lose their enthusiasm for it all. But all this
is trivial. With me, it's a matter of important principle." Potterley
said, "Hang your principle. Can't you understand men and women as well
as principle? Don't you understand that my wife will live through the
fire tha t killed our baby? She won't be able to help herself. I know
her. She'll follow through each step, trying to prevent it. She'll live
it over and over again, hoping each time that it won't happen. How many
times do you want to kill Laurel?" A huskiness had crept into his voice.
A thought crossed Foster's mind. "What are you really afraid she'll find
out, Dr. Potterley? What happened the night of the fire?" The
historian's hands went up quickly to cover his face and they shook with
his dry sobs. Foster turned away and stared uncomfortably out the
window. Potterley said after a while, "It's a long time since I've had
to think of it. Caroline was away. I was baby-sitting. I went into the
baby's bedroom midevening to see if she had kicked off the bedclothes. I
ha d my cigarette with me ... I smoked in those days. I must have
stubbed it out before putting it in the ashtray on the chest of drawers.
I was always careful. The baby was all right. I returned to the living
room and fell asleep before the video. I awoke, choking, surrounded by
fire. I don't know how it started." "But you think it may have been the
cigarette, is that it?" said Foster. "A cigarette which, for once, you
forgot to stub out?" "I don't know. I tried to save her, but she was
dead in my arms when I got out." "You never told your wife about the
cigarette, I suppose." Potterley shook his head. "But I've lived with
it." "Only now, with a chronoscope, she'll find out. Maybe it wasn't the
cigarette. Maybe you did stub it out. Isn't that possible?" The scant
tears had dried on Potterley's face. The redness had subsided. He said,
"I can't take the chance. . . . But it's not just myself, Foster. The
past has its terrors for most people. Don't loose those terrors on the
human race." Foster paced the floor. So mehow, this explained the reason
for Potterley's rabid, irrational desire to boost the Carthaginians,
deify them, most of all disprove the story of their fiery sacrifices to
Moloch. By freeing them of the guilt of infanticide by fire, he
symbolically free d himself of the same guilt. So the same fire that had
driven him on to causing the construction of a chronoscope was now
driving him on to the destruction. Foster looked sadly at the older man.
"I see your position, Dr. Potterley, but this goes above personal
feelings. I've got to smash this throttling hold on the throat of
science." Potterley said, savagely, "You mean you want the fame and
wealth that goes with such a discovery." "I don't know about the wealth,
but that, too, I suppose. I'm no more than human." "You won't suppress
your knowledge?" "Not under any circumstances." "Well, then" and the
historian got to his feet and stood for a moment, glaring. Foster had an
odd moment of terror. The man was older than he, smaller, feebler, and
he didn't look armed. Still . . . Foster said, "If you're thinking of
killing me or anything insane like that, I've got the information in a
safety-deposit vault where the proper people will find it in case of my
disappearance or death." Potterley said, "Don't be a fool," and stalked
out. Foster closed the door, locked it and sat down to think. He felt
silly. He had no information in any safety-deposit vault, of course.
Such a melodra-matic action would not have occurred to him ordinarily.
But now it had. Feeling even sillier, he spent an hour writing out the
equations of the application of pseudo-gravitic optics to neutrinic
recording, and some dia-grams for the engineering details of
construction. He sealed it in an enve- lope and scrawled Ralph Nimmo's
name over the outside. He spent a rather restless night and the next
morning, on the way to school, dropped the envelope off at the bank,
with appropriate instructions to an official, who made him sign a paper
permitting the box to be opened after his death. He called Nimmo to tell
him of the existence of the envelope, refusing querulously to say
anything about its contents. He had never felt so ridiculously
self-conscious as at that moment. That night and the next, Foster spent
in only fitful sleep, finding himself face to face with the highly
practical problem of the publication of data unethically obtained. The
Proceedings of the Society for Pseudo-Gravities, which was the jour-nal
with which he was best acquainted, would certainly not touch any paper
that did not include t he magic footnote: "The work described in this
paper was made possible by Grant No. so-and-so from the Commission of
Re-search of the United Nations." Nor, doubly so, would the Journal of
Physics. There were always the minor journals who might overlook the
nature of the article for the sake of the sensation, but that would
require a little financial negotiation on which he hesitated to embark.
It might, on the whole, be better to pay the cost of publishing a small
pamphlet for general distribution among sc holars. In that case, he
would even be able to dispense with the services of a science writer,
sacrificing polish for speed. He would have to find a reliable printer.
Uncle Ralph might know one. He walked down the corridor to his office
and wondered anxiously if perhaps he ought to waste no further time,
give himself no further chance to lapse into indecision and take the
risk of calling Ralph from his office phone. He was so absorbed in his
own heavy thoughts that he did not notice that his room was occupie d
until he turned from the clothes closet and ap-proached his desk. Dr.
Potterley was there and a man whom Foster did not recognize. Foster
stared at them. "What's this?" Potterley said, "I'm sorry, but I had to
stop you." ' Foster continued staring. "What are you talking about?" The
stranger said, "Let me introduce myself." He had large teeth, a little
uneven, and they showed prominently when he smiled. "I am Thaddeus
Araman, Department Head of the Division of Chronoscopy. I am here to see
you concernin g information brought to me by Professor Arnold Pot-terley
and confirmed by our own sources" Potterley said breathlessly, "I took
all the blame, Dr. Foster. I explained that it was I who persuaded you
against your will into unethical practices. I have off ered to accept
full responsibility and punishment. I don't wish you harmed in any way.
It's just that chronoscopy must not be permitted!" Araman nodded. "He
has taken the blame as he says, Dr. Foster, but this thing is out of his
hands now." Foster said, "So? What are you going to do? Blackball me
from all consid-eration for research grants?" "That is in my power,"
said Araman. "Order the university to discharge rne?" "That, too, is in
my power." "All right, go ahead. Consider it done. I'll leave my office
now, with you. I can send for my books later. If you insist, I'll leave
my books. Is that all?" "Not quite," said Araman. "You must engage to do
no further research in chronoscopy, to publish none of your findings in
chronoscopy and, of course, to bui ld no chronoscope. You will remain
under surveillance indefinitely to make sure you keep that promise."
"Supposing I refuse to promise? What can you do? Doing research out of
my field may be unethical, but it isn't a criminal offense." "In the
case of chronoscopy, my young friend," said Araman patiently, ;"it is a
criminal offense. If necessary, you will be put in jail and kept there."
"Why?" shouted Foster. "What's magic about chronoscopy?" Araman said,
"That's the way it is. We cannot allow further develop- ments in the
field. My own job is, primarily, to make sure of that, and I intend to
do my job. Unfortunately, I had no knowledge, nor did anyone in the
department, that the optics of pseudo-gravity fields had such immediate
application to chronoscopy. Sc ore one for general ignorance, but
hencefor-ward research will be steered properly in that respect, too."
Foster said, "That won't help. Something else may apply that neither you
nor I dream of. All science hangs together. It's one piece. If you want
to stop one part, you've got to stop it all." "No doubt that is true,"
said Araman, "in theory. On the practical side, however, we have managed
quite well to hold chronoscopy down to the original Sterbinski level for
fifty years. Having caught you in time, Dr. Foster, we hope to continue
doing so indefinitely. And we wouldn't have come this close to disaster,
either, if I had accepted Dr. Potterley at some-thing more than face
value." He turned toward the historian and lifted his eyebrows in a kind
of humorous s elf-deprecation. "I'm afraid, sir, that I dismissed you as
a history professor and no more on the occasion of our first interview.
Had I done my job properly and checked on you, this would not have
happened." Foster said abruptly, "Is anyone allowed to use the
government chrono-scope?" "No one outside our division under any
pretext. I say that since it is obvious to me that you have already
guessed as much. I warn you, though, that any repetition of that fact
will be a criminal, not an ethical, offense." "And your chronoscope
doesn't go back more than a hundred twenty-five years or so, does it?"
"It doesn't." "Then your bulletin with its stories of time viewing
ancient times is a hoax?" Araman said coolly, "With the knowledge you
now have, it is obvious you know that for a certainty. However, I
confirm your remark. The monthly bulletin is a hoax." "In that case,"
said Foster, "I will not promise to suppress my knowledge of
chronoscopy. If you wish to arrest me, go ahead. My defense at the trial
will be enough to destroy the vicious card house of directed research
and bring it tumbling down. Directing research is one thing; suppressing
it and depriving mankind of its benefits is quite another." Araman said,
"Oh, let's get something straight, Dr. Foster. If you do not co-operate,
you will go to jail directly. You will not see a lawyer, you will not be
charged, you will not have a trial. You will simply stay in jail." "Oh,
no," said Foster, "you're bluffing. This is not the twentieth century,
you know." There was a stir outside the office, the clatter of feet, a
high-pitched shout that Foster was sure he recognized. The door crashed
open, the lock splintering, and three intertwined figures stumbled in.
As they did so, one of the men raised a blaster and brought its butt
down hard on the skull of another. There was a whoosh of expiring air,
and the one whose head was struck went limp. "Uncle Ralph!" cried
Foster. Araman frowned. "Put him down in that chair," he ordered, "and
get some water." Ralph Nimmo, rubbing his head with a gingerly sort of
disgust, said, "There was no need to get rough, Araman." Araman said,
"The guard should have been rough sooner and kept you out of here,
Nimrno. You'd have been better off." "You know each other?" asked
Foster. "I've had dealings with the man," said Nimmo, still rubbing. "If
he's here in your office, nephew, you're in trouble." "And you, too,"
said Araman angrily. "I know Dr. Foster consulted you on neutrinics
literature." Nimmo corrugated his forehead, then straightened it with a
wince as though the action had brought pain. "So?" he said. "What else
do you know about me?" "We will know everything about you soon enough.
Meanwhile, that one item is enough to implicate you. What are you doing
here?" "My dear Dr. Araman," said Nimmo, some of his jauntiness
restored, "day before yesterday, my jackass of a nephew called me. He
had placed some mysterious information" "Don't tell him! Don't say
anything!" cried Foster. Araman gknced at him coldly. "We know all about
it, Dr. Foster. The safety-deposit box has been opened and its contents
removed." "But how can you know" Foster's voice died away in a kind of
furious frustration. "Anyway," said Nimmo, "I decided the net must be
closing around him and, after I took care of a few items, I came down to
tell him to get off this thing he's doing. It's not worth his career."
"Does that mean you know what he's doing?" asked Araman. "He never told
me," said Nimmo, "but I'm a science writer with a hell of a lot of
experience. I know which side of an atom is electronified. The boy,
Foster, specializes in pseudo-gravitic optics and coached me on the
stuff himself. He got me to get him a textbook on neutrinics and I kind
of ship-viewed it myself before handing it over. I can put the two
together. He as ked me to get him certain pieces of physical equipment,
and that was evidence, too. Stop me if I'm wrong, but my nephew has
built a semipor-table, low-power chronoscope. Yes, oryes?" "Yes." Araman
reached thoughtfully for a cigarette and paid no attention to Dr.
Potterley (watching silently, as though all were a dream) who shied
away, gasping, from the white cylinder. "Another mistake for me. I ought
to resign. I should have put tabs on you, too, Nimmo, instead of
concentrating too hard on Potterley and Fo ster. I didn't have much time
of course and you've ended up safely here, but that doesn't excuse me.
You're under arrest, Nimmo." '>"What for?" demanded the science writer.
"Unauthorized research." "I wasn't doing any. I can't, not being a
registered scientist. And even if I did, it's not a criminal offense."
Foster said savagely, "No use, Uncle Ralph. This bureaucrat is making
his own laws." "Like what?" demanded Nimmo. "Like life imprisonment
without trial." "Nuts," said Nimmo. "This isn't the twentieth cen" "I
tried that," said Foster. "It doesn't bother him." "Well, nuts," shouted
Nimmo. "Look here, Araman. My nephew and I have relatives who haven't
lost touch with us, you know. The professor has some also, I imagine.
You can't just make us disappear. There'll be questions and a scandal.
This isn 't the twentieth century. So if you're trying to scare us, it
isn't working." The cigarette snapped between Araman's fingers and he
tossed it away violently. He said, "Damn it, I don't know what to do.
It's ne ver been like this before. . . . Look! You three fools know
nothing of what you're trying to do. You understand nothing. Will you
listen to me?" "Oh, we'll listen," said Nimmo grimly. (Foster sat
silently, eyes angry, lips compressed. Potterley's hands writhed like
two intertwined snakes.) Araman said, "The past to you is the dead past.
If any of you have discussed the matter, it's dollars to nickels you've
used that phrase. The dead past. If you knew how many times I've heard
those three words, you'd choke on them, too. "When people think of the
past, they think of it as dead, far away and gone, long ago. We
encourage them to think so. When we report time viewing, we always talk
of views centuries in the past, even though you gentlemen know seeing
more than a century or so is impossible. People accept it. The past
means Greece, Rome, Carthage, Egypt, the Stone Age. The deader the
better. "Now you three know a century or a little more is the limit, so
what does the past mean to you? Your youth. Your first gir l. Your dead
mother. Twenty years ago. Thirty years ago. Fifty years ago. The deader
the better. . . . But when does the past really begin?" He paused in
anger. The others stared at him and Nimmo stirred uneas- ily. "Well,"
said Araman, "when did it begin? A year ago? Five minutes ago? One
second ago? Isn't it obvious that the past begins an instant ago? The
dead past is just another name for the living present. What if you focus
the chronoscope in the past of one-hundredth of a second ago? Aren't you
watc hing the present? Does it begin to sink in?" Nimmo said,
"Damnation." "Damnation," mimicked Araman. "After Potterley came to me
with his story night before last, how do you suppose I checked up on
both of you? I did it with the chronoscope, spotting key moments to the
very instant of the present." "And that's how you knew about the
safety-deposit box?" said Foster. "And every other important fact. Now
what do you suppose would hap-pen if we let news of a home chronoscope
get out? People might start out by wa tching their youth, their parents
and so on, but it wouldn't be long before they'd catch on to the
possibilities. The housewife will forget her poor, dead mother and take
to watching her neighbor at home and her husband at the office. The
businessman will watch his competitor; the employer his em-ployee.
"There will be no such thing as privacy. The party line, the prying eye
behind the curtain will be nothing compared to it. The video stars will
be closely watched at all times by everyone. Every man his own peeping
Tom and there'll be no getting away from the watcher. Even darkness will
be no escape because chronoscopy can be adjusted to the infrared and
human figures can be seen by their own body heat. The figures will be
fuzzy, of course, and the surround ings will be dark, but that will make
the titillation of it all the greater, perhaps. . . . Hmp, the men in
charge of the machine now experiment sometimes in spite of the
regulations against it." Nimmo seemed sick. "You can always forbid
private manufacture" Araman turned on him fiercely. "You can, but do you
expect it to do good? Can you legislate successfully against drinking,
smoking, adultery or gossiping over the back fence? And this mixture of
nosiness and prurience will have a worse grip on humanity than any of
those. Good Lord, in a thousand years of trying we haven't even been
able to wipe out the heroin traffic and you talk about legislating
against a device for watching anyone you please at any time you please
that can be built in a home workshop ." Foster said suddenly, "I won't
publish." Potterley burst out, half in sobs, "None of us will talk. I
regret" Nimmo broke in. "You said you didn't tab me on the chronoscope,
Araman." "No time," said Araman wearily. "Things don't move any faster
on the ch ronoscope than in real life. You can't speed it up like the
film in a book viewer. We spent a full twenty-four hours trying to catch
the important moments during the last six months of Potterley and
Foster. There was no time for anything else and it was e nough." "It
wasn't," said Nimmo. "What are you talking about?" There was a sudden
infinite alarm on Araman's face. "I told you my nephew, Jonas, had
called me to say he had put important information in a safety-deposit
box. He acted as though he were in trouble. He's my nephew. I had to try
to get him off the spot. It took a while, then I came here to tell him
what I had done. I told you when I got here, just after your man conked
me that I had taken care of a few items." "What? For Heaven's sake"
"Just this: I sent the details of the portable chronoscope off to half a
dozen of my regular publicity outlets." Not a word. Not a sound. Not a
breath. They were all past any demon-stration. "Don't stare like that,"
cried Nimmo. "Don't you see my point? I had popul ar publication rights.
Jonas will admit that. I knew he couldn't publish scientifically in any
legal way. I was sure he was planning to publish illegally and was
preparing the safety-deposit box for that reason, i thought if I put
through the details prem a turely, all the responsibility would be mine.
His career would be saved. And if 1 were deprived of my science-writing
license as a result, my exclusive possession of the chronometric data
would set me up for life. Jonas would be angry, I expected that, bu t I
could explain the motive and we would split the take fifty-fifty. . .
Don't stare at me like that. How did I know" "Nobody knew anything,"
said Araman bitterly, "but you all just took it for granted that the
government was stupidly bureaucratic, vicious, tyranni- cal, given to
suppressing research for the hell of it. It never occurred to any of you
that we were trying to protect mankind as best we could." "Don't sit
there talking," wailed Potterley. "Get the names of the people who were
told" "Too late, " said Nimmo, shrugging. "They've had better than a
day. There's been time for the word to spread. My outfits will have
called any number of physicists to check my data before going on with it
and they'll call one another to pass on the news. Once scienti s ts put
neutrinics and pseudo-gravities together, home chronoscopy becomes
obvious. Before the week is out, five hundred people will know how to
build a small chronoscope and how will you catch them all?" His plum
cheeks sagged. "I suppose there's no way o f putting the mushroom cloud
back into that nice, shiny uranium sphere." Araman stood up. "We'll try,
Potterley, but I agree with Nimmo. It's too late. What kind of a world
we'll have from now on, I don't know, I can't tell, but the world we
know has been d estroyed completely. Until now, every custom, every
habit, every tiniest way of life has always taken a certain amount of
privacy for granted, but that's all gone now." He saluted each of the
three with elaborate formality. "You have created a new world among the
three of you. I congratulate you. Happy goldfish bowl to you, to me, to
everyone, and may each of you fry in hell forever. Arrest rescinded." }}
