{1125201033{} 41450-1800100100050 THE BACKWARD LOOK0Isaac Asimov003024
"The Backward Look" was purchased by George Scithers, and appeared in
the September 1979 issue of0 Asimov's, with an interior illustration by
Jack Gaughan0 .A good case could be made for the proposition that the
late Isaac Asimov was the most famous SF writer of the last half of the
twentieth century. He was the author of almost five hundred books,
including some of the best-known novels in the genre0 (I, Robot and the0
Foundation trilogy, for example); his last several novels kept him
solidly on the nationwide bestseller lists throughout the 80s; he won
two Nebulas and two Hugos, plus the prestigious Grandmaster Neb-ula; he
wrote an enormous number of nonfiction books on a bewilderingly large
range of topics, everything from the Bible to Shakespeare, and his many
books on scientific matters made him perhaps the best-known scientific
popularizer of our time; his nonfiction articles appeared everywhere
from0 Omni to0 TV Guide; he was one of the most sought-after speakers in
the country, and appeared on most of the late-night and afternoon talk
shows of his day, and even did television commercials0 -and he was also
the only SF writer famous enough to have had an SF0 magazine named after
him0 , Asimov's Science Fiction magazine. A mere sampling ofAsimov's
other books, even restricting ourselves to science fiction alone, would
include0 The Stars Like Dust, The Currents of Space, The Gods
Themselves, Foundation's Edge, The Robots of Dawn, Robots and Empire,
Founda-tion's Earth, and two expansions of famous Asimov short stories
into novel form0 , The Ugly Little Boy and0 Nightfall, written in
collaboration with Robert Silverberg. His most recent fiction titles
include the novel0 Forward the Foundation, and the posthumous
collections0 Gold and0 Fantasy.Asimov was almost as well-known in the
mystery field as he was in SF, for novels such as0 Murder at the ABA as
well as for the long-running series of stories about that club of suave
amateur investiga-tors, The Black Widowers. He was also one of the most
successful practitioners of the art of blending SF and mystery, with his
series of stories about SF armchair detective Wendell Urth, as well as
what are perhaps still the two most successful hybrid SF/mys-tery novels
ever written0 , The Caves of Steel and0 The Naked Sun, featuring the
robot detective R. Daneel Olivaw0 .Here he shows us once again the truth
of that old saying, Don't look back0 -you don't know what may be gaining
on you0 ...30 If Emmanuel Rubin knew how not to be didactic, he never
exercised that knowledge."When you write a short story," he said, "you
had better know the ending first. The end of a story is only the end to
a reader. To a writer, it's the beginning. If you don't know exactly
where you're going every minute that you're writing, you'll never get
there-or anywhere."Thomas Trumbull's young guest at this particular
monthly banquet of the Black Widowers seemed all eyes as he watched
Rubin's straggly gray beard quiver and his thick-lensed glasses glint;
and all ears as he listened to Rubin's firm, de-cibelic voice.The guest
himself was clearly in the early twenties, quite thin, with a somewhat
bulging forehead and a rather dimin-utive chin. His clothing almost
glistened in its freshness, as though he had broken out a brand-new
costume for the great occasion. His name was Milton Peterborough.He
said, a small quiver in his voice, "Does that mean you have to write an
outline, Mr. Rubin?""No," said Rubin, emphatically. "You can if you want
to, but I never do. You don't have to know the exact road you're going
to take. You have to know your destination, that's all. Once that's the
case, any road will take you there. As you write you are continually
looking backward from that known destination, and it's that backward
look that guides you."Mario Gonzalo, who was quickly and carefully
drawing a caricature of the guest, making his eyes incredibly large and
filling them with a childlike innocence, said, "Come on, Manny, that
sort of tight plotting might fit your cockamamie mysteries, but a real
writer deals with character, doesn't he? He creates people;0 and they
behave in accordance with their characters; and that guides the story,
probably to the surprise of the author."Rubin turned slowly and said,
"If you're talking about long, invertebrate novels, Mario-assuming
you're talking about anything at all-it's possible for an experienced or
gifted writer to meander along and produce something pass-able. But you
can always tell the I-don't-know-where-I'm-going-but-I'm-going book.
Even if you forgive it its amorphous character for the sake of its
virtues, you have to forgive0 it, and that's a strain and a drawback. A
tightly-plotted story with everything fitting together neatly is, on the
other hand, the noblest work of literature. It may be bad, but it never
need ask forgiveness. The backward look-"At the other end of the room,
Geoffrey Avalon glanced with resignation at Rubin and said, "I think it
was a mistake, Tom, to tell Manny at the start that the young man was an
aspiring writer. It brings out the worst in him, or-at any rate-the
longest winded." He stirred the ice in his drink with his fore-finger
and brought his dark eyebrows together forbiddingly."Actually," said
Thomas Trumbull, his lined face unchar-acteristically placid, ' 'the kid
wanted to meet Manny. He ad-mired his stories, God knows why. Well, he's
the son of a friend of mine and a nice youngster and I thought I'd
expose him to the seamy side of life by bringing him here."Avalon said,
"It won't hurt us to be exposed to youth now and then, either. But I
hate being exposed to Rubin's theories of literature.-Henry."The quiet
and smoothly efficient waiter, who served at all the Black Widowers'
banquets, was at his side at once without seeming to have moved in order
to have achieved that. ' 'Yes, sir?""Henry," said Avalon, "what are
these strange manifes-tations?' 'Henry said, "Tonight we will have a
buffet dinner. The chef has prepared a variety of Indian and Pakistani
dishes.""With curry?""Rather heavy on the curry, sir. It was Mr.
Trumbull's special request."Trumbull flared under Avalon's accusing eye.
"I wanted curry and I'm the host.""And Manny won't eat it and will be
unbearable."Trumbull shrugged.Rubin was not entirely unbearable but he
was loud, and only Roger Halsted seemed unaffected by the Rubinian
tirade against all things Indian. He said, "A buffet is a good idea,"
patted his lips with his napkin and went back for a third help-ing of
everything, with a beatific smile on his face.Trumbull said, "Roger, if
you don't stop eating, we'll start the grilling session over your
chewing.""Go ahead," said Halsted, cheerfully. "I don't mind.""You will
later tonight," said Rubin, "when your stomach-wall burns
through."Trumbull said, "And you're going to start the grilling.""If you
don't mind my talking with my mouth full," said Halsted."Get started,
then."Halsted said thickly, "How do you justify your existence,
Milton?""I can't," said Peterborough, a little breathlessly. "Maybe
after I get my degrees.""What's your school and major?""Columbia and
chemistry.""Chemistry?" said Halsted. "I would have thought it was
English. Didn't I gather during the cocktail hour that you were an
aspiring writer?""Anyone is allowed to be an aspiring writer," said
Peter-borough."Aspiring," said Rubin, darkly."And what do you want to
write?" said Halsted.Peterborough hesitated and said, with a trace of
defensive-ness in his voice, "Well, I've always been a science fiction
fan. Since I was nine, anyway.""Oh, God," muttered Rubin, his eyes
rolling upward in mute appeal.Gonzalo said instantly, "Science fiction?
That's what your friend Isaac Asimov writes, isn't it, Manny?""He's not
my friend," said Rubin. "He clings to me out of helpless
admiration."Trumbull raised his voice. "Will you two stop having a
private conversation? Go on, Roger.""Have you written any science
fiction?""I've tried, but I haven't submitted anything. I'm going to,
though. I have to.""Why do you have to?""I made a bet.""What
kind?""Well," said Peterborough, helplessly. "It's rather
com-plicated-and embarrassing.""We don't mind the complications," said
Halsted, "and we'll try not to be embarrassed.""Well," said
Peterborough, and there appeared on his face something that had not been
seen at the Black Widowers ban-quets for years, a richly tinted blush,
"there's this girl. I'm sort of era-I like her, but I don't think she
likes me, but I like her anyway. The trouble is she goes for a
basketball player; a real idiot-six foot five to his eyebrows and
nothing above."Peterborough shook his head and continued, "I don't have
much going for me. I can't impress her with chemistry; but she's an
English Lit major, so I showed her some of my sto-ries. She asked me if
I had ever sold anything, and I said no. But then I said I intended to
write something and sell it, and she laughed."That bothered me, and I
thought of something. It seems that Lester del Rey-''Rubin interposed.
"Who?""Lester del Rey. He's a science fiction writer.""Another one of
those?" said Rubin. "Never heard of him.""Well, he's no Asimov,"
admitted Peterborough, "but he's all right. Anyway, the way he got
started was once when he read a science fiction story and thought it was
terrible. He said to his girl, 'Hell, I can write something better than
that,' and she said, 'I dare you,' and he did and sold it."So when this
girl laughed, I said, 'I'll bet I write one and sell it,' and she said,
'I'll bet you don't,' and I said, 'I'll bet you a date against five
dollars. If I sell the story, you go with me to a dinner and dance on a
night of my choosing.' And she agreed."So I've just got0 to write the
story now, because she said she'd go out with me if I wrote the story
and she liked it, even if it didn't sell-which may mean she likes me
more than I think."James Drake, who had been listening thoughtfully,
brushed his gray stub of a mustache with one finger and said, "Or that
she's quite confident that you won't even write the story.""I will0 ,"
said Peterborough."Then go ahead," said Rubin."There's a catch. I can
write the story, I know. I've got some good stuff. I even know the
ending so I can give it that backward look you mentioned, Mr. Rubin.
What I don't have is a motive.""A motive?" said Rubin. "I thought you
were writing a science fiction story.""Yes, Mr. Rubin, but it's a
science fiction mystery, and I need a motive. I have the modus operandi
of the killing, and the way of killing but I don't know the why0 of the
killing. I thought, though, if I came here, I could discuss it with
you.""You could what0 ?" said Rubin, lifting his head."Especially you,
Mr. Rubin. I've read your mystery sto-ries-I don't read science fiction
exclusively-and I think they're great. You're always so good with
motivation. I thought you could help me out."Rubin was breathing hard
and gave every appearance of believing that that breath was flame. He
had made his dinner very much out of rice and salad, plus, out of sheer
famishing, two helpings of coupe aux marrons;0 and he was in no mood for
even such sweet reason as he was, on occasion, observed to possess.He
said, "Let me get it straight, Joe College. You've made a bet. You're
going to get a chance at a girl, or such chance as you can make of it,
by writing a story she likes and maybe selling it-and now you want to
win the bet and cheat the girl by having me write the story for you. Is
that the way it is?""No, sir," said Peterborough, urgently, "that's not0
the way it is. I'll write it. I just want help with the motive.""And
except for that, you'll write it," said Rubin. "How about having me
dictate the story to you. You can still write0 it. You can copy it out
in your own handwriting.""That's not the same at all."' 'Yes, it is,
young man; and you can stop right there. Either write the story yourself
or tell the girl you can't."Milton Peterborough looked about
helplessly.Trumbull said, ' 'Damn it, Manny, why so much on the high
horse? I've heard you say a million times that ideas are a dime a dozen;
that it's the writing0 that's hard. Give him an idea, then; he'll still
have the hard part to do.""I won't," said Rubin, pushing himself away
from the ta-ble and crossing his arms. "If the rest of you have an
atro-phied sense of ethics, go ahead and give him ideas-if you know
how."Trumbull said, "All right, I can settle this by fiat since I'm the
host, but I'll throw it open to a vote. How many favor helping the kid
if we can?"He held up his hand, and so did Gonzalo and Drake.Avalon
cleared his throat a little uncertainly. "I'm afraid I've got to side
with Manny. It would be cheating the girl," he said.Halsted said, "As a
teacher, I've got to disapprove of out-side help on a test.""Tie vote,"
said Rubin. "What are you going to do, Tom?"Trumbull said, "We haven't
all voted. Henry is a Black Widower and his vote will break the
tie.-Henry?"Henry paused a brief moment. "My honorary position, sir,
scarcely gives me the right to-""You are not an honorary Black Widower,
Henry. You are a Black Widower. Decide!"Rubin said, "Remember, Henry,
you are the epitome of honest men. Where do you stand on cheating a
girl?""No electioneering," said Trumbull. "Go ahead, Henry."Henry's face
wrinkled into a rare frown. "I have never laid claim to extraordinary
honesty, but if I did, I might treat this as a special case. Juliet told
Romeo, 'At lovers' perjuries/They say Jove laughs.' Might we stretch a
point?""I'm surprised, Henry," said Rubin.Henry said, ' 'I am perhaps
swayed by the fact that I do not view this matter as lying between the
young man and the young woman. Rather it lies between a bookish young
man and an athlete. We are all bookish men; and, in our time, we may
each have lost a young woman to an athlete. I am em-barrassed to say
that I have. Surely, then-"Rubin said, "Well, I haven't. I've never lost
a girl to-" He paused a moment in sudden thought, then said in an
al-tered tone, "Well, it's irrelevant. All right, if I'm outvoted, I'm
outvoted.-So what's the story, Peterborough?"Peterborough's face was
flushed and there was a trickle of perspiration at one temple. He said,
"I won't tell you any of the story I've been planning except the barest
essentials of the point I need help on. I don't want anything more than
the minimum. I wouldn't want that0 , even, if this didn't mean- so
much-" He ran down.Rubin said, with surprising quietness, "Go on. Don't
worry about it. We understand."Peterborough said, "Thanks. I appreciate
it. I've got two men, call them Murderer and Victim. I've worked out the
way Murderer does it and how he gets caught and I won't say a word about
that. Murderer and Victim are both eclipse buffs."Avalon interrupted.
"Are you an eclipse buff, Mr. Peter-borough?""Yes, sir, I am. I have
friends who go to every eclipse anywhere in the world even if it's only
a five-percenter, but I can't afford that and don't have the time. I go
to those I can reach. I've got a telescope and photographic
equipment."Avalon said, "Good! It helps, when one is going to talk about
eclipses, if one knows something about them. Trying to write on a
subject concerning which one is ignorant is a sure prescription for
failure."Gonzalo said, "Is the woman you're interested in an eclipse
buff.""No," said Peterborough. "I wish she were.""You know," said
Gonzalo, "if she doesn't share your interests, you might try finding
someone who does."Peterborough shook his head. "I don't think it works
that way, Mr. Gonzalo.""It sure doesn't," said Trumbull. "Shut up,
Mario, and let him talk."Peterborough said, "Murderer and Victim are
both taking eclipse photographs; and, against all expectations, Victim,
who is the underdog, the born loser, takes the better photo-graph; and
Murderer, unable to endure this, decides to kill Victim. From there on,
I have no trouble."Rubin said, "Then you have your motive. What's your
problem?''"The trouble is-what kind0 of a better photograph? An eclipse
photograph is an eclipse photograph. Some are better than others; but,
assuming that both photographers are com-petent, not that0 much better.
Not a murder's-worth better."Rubin shrugged. "You can build the story in
such a way as to make even a small difference murder-worthy-but I ad-mit
that would take an experienced hand. Drop the eclipse. Try something
else.""I can't. The whole business of the murder, the weapon and the
detection depends on photography and eclipses. So it has to stay."Drake
said softly, "What makes it a science fiction story, young man?""I
haven't explained that, have I?-I'm trying to tell as little as possible
about the story. For what I'm doing, I need advanced computers and
science fictional photographic gim-mickry. One of the two characters-I'm
not sure which- takes a photograph of the eclipse from a stratospheric
jet.""In that case, why not go whole hog?" said Gonzalo. "If it's going
to go science-fictional... Look, let me tell you how I see it. Murderer
and Victim are eclipse buffs and Murderer is the better man-so make it
Murderer who's on that plane, and taking the best eclipse photograph
ever seen, using some new photographic gimmick he's invented. Then have
Victim, against all expectation, beat him out. Victim goes to the Moon
and takes the eclipse photograph there. Murderer is furious at being
beaten, goes blind with rage and there you are."Rubin said
energetically, "An eclipse photo on the Moon0 ?""Why not?" said Gonzalo,
offended. "We can get to the Moon right now so we can certainly do it in
a science fiction story. And there's a vacuum on the Moon, right?
There's no air. You don't have to be a scientist to know that. And you
get a better picture without air. You get a sharper picture. Isn't that
right, Milton?"Peterborough said, "Yes, but-"Rubin overrode him.
"Mario," he said, "listen carefully. An eclipse of the Sun takes place
when the Moon gets exactly between the Sun and the Earth. Observers on
Earth then see the Sun blacked out because the opaque body of the Moon
is squarely in front of it. We on Earth are in the Moon's shadow. Now if
you're on0 the Moon," his voice grew harsh, "how the Hell can you be in
the Moon's shadow?"Avalon said, "Not so fast, Manny; an eclipse is an
eclipse is an eclipse. There is such a thing as a Lunar eclipse, when
the Earth gets between the Sun and the Moon. The Moon is in the Earth's
shadow in that case and the whole Moon gets dark."The way I see it,
then, is that Murderer takes a beautiful photograph of an eclipse on
Earth, with the Moon moving in front of the Sun. He has advanced
equipment that he has in-vented himself so that no one can possibly take
a better photo of the moon in front of the Sun. Victim, however, goes
him one better by taking an even more impressive photograph of an
eclipse on the Moon, where, as Mario says, there is no air, with the
Earth0 moving in front of the Sun."Peterborough mumbled, "Not the same
thing.""It sure isn't," said Halsted, who had pushed his coffee cup to
one side and was doing some quick figuring. "As seen from Earth, the
Moon and the Sun have the same apparent width, almost exactly. Pure
coincidence, of course; no astro-nomical necessity at all. In fact, eons
past, the Moon was closer and appeared larger, and eons future, the Moon
will be-Well, never mind. The fact is that the Earth is larger than the
Moon, and from the Moon you see the Earth at the same distance that you
see the Moon when you're standing on Earth. The Earth in the Moon's sky
is therefore as much larger than the Moon in appearance as it is in
actuality. Do you get that?""No," said Gonzalo, flatly.Halsted looked
annoyed. "Well, then, don't get it. Take my word for it. The Earth in
the Moon's sky is about 3% as wide in appearance as the Moon is in
Earth's sky. That means the Earth in the Moon's sky is also that much
bigger than the Sun, because the Sun looks just the same from the Moon
as from the Earth.""So what's the difference?" said Gonzalo. "If the
Earth is bigger, it gets in the way of the Sun that much better.""No,"
said Halsted. "The whole point about the eclipse is that the Moon just
fits over the Sun. It hides the bright circle of the gleaming Sun and
allows its corona-that is, its upper atmosphere-to shine all about the
hidden Sun. The corona gleams out in every direction with the light of
the full Moon and does so in beautifully delicate curves and
streamers."On the other hand, if you get a large body like the Earth in
front of the Sun, it covers up the shining sphere and the corona as
well. You don't see anything."Avalon said, "That's assuming the Earth
goes squarely in front of the Sun. When you see the eclipse before or
after midpoint, at least part of the corona will stick beyond the
Earth's sphere."Peterborough said, "Part isn't the whole. It wouldn't be
the same thing."There was a short silence; and then Drake said, "I hope
you don't mind if a fellow-chemist tries his hand at this, young man.
I'm trying to picture the Earth in the sky, getting in the way of the
Sun. And if we do that, then there's this to consider: the Earth has an
atmosphere and the Moon has not."When the Moon moves in front of the
Sun, as viewed from the Earth, the Moon's surface is sharp against the
Sun. When the Earth moves in front of the Sun, as viewed from the Moon,
the Earth's boundary is fuzzy and the Sun shines through Earth's
atmosphere. Does that make a difference that you can use in the
story?""Well," said Peterborough, "I've thought of that, actually. Even
when the Sun is completely behind the Earth, its light is refracted
through the Earth's atmosphere on every side, and a red-orange light
penetrates it and reaches the Moon. It's as though the Moon can see a
sunset all around the Earth. And that's not just theory. When there's a
total eclipse of the Moon, you can usually see the Moon as a dull
brick-red circle of light. It gleams in Earth's sunset atmosphere.' 'As
the eclipse, as viewed from the Moon, progresses, that side of the
atmosphere that has just passed over the Sun is brighter, but grows
gradually dimmer while the other side grows brighter. At eclipse
mid-point, if you are viewing it from a part of the Moon which sees both
Earth and Sun cen-tered with respect to each other, the red-orange ring
is evenly bright all the way around-assuming there isn't too much in the
way of clouds in Earth's atmosphere at the time."Drake said, "Well, for
God's sake, isn't that a sufficiently spectacular sight for Victim to
photograph? The Earth would be a black hole in the sky, with a thin
orange rim all around. It would be-''"No, sir," said Peterborough. "It
isn't the same thing. It's too dull. It would be just a red-orange ring.
Once the photo-graph is taken the first time, that would be it. It
wouldn't be like the infinitely varying corona."Trumbull said, "Let me0
try! You want the corona visible all around, is that it, Milton?''"Yes,
sir.""Stop me if I'm wrong, but in my reading, I've been given to
understand that the sky is blue because light is scattered by the
atmosphere. On the Moon, where there is no atmo-sphere, the sky is
black. The stars, which on Earth are washed out by the scattered light
of our blue sky, would not be washed out in the Moon's airless sky. They
would be visi-ble.""Yes, though I suspect the Sun's glare would make
them hard to see."Trumbull said, "That's not important. All you would
have to do is cut an opaque circle of metal and hold it up in the air at
the proper distance from your photographic equipment in order to just
block out the Sun's blazing disc. You can't do that on Earth, because
even if you blocked out the Sun, the scattered light of the sky obscures
the corona. On the Moon, there's no scattered light in the sky and the
corona would shine out."Peterborough said, "In theory, that's possible.
In fact, it can even be done on Earth on mountain tops, making use of a
coronagraph. It still wouldn't be the real thing, though, for it's not
just a matter of light scattered by the atmosphere. There's light
scattered and reflected by the ground.' 'The Lunar surface would be very
brightly lit up and light would be coming in from every angle. The
photographs you would take would not be good ones. You see, the reason
the Moon does the good job it does here on Earth is that its shadow
doesn't just fall on the telescope and camera. It falls on all the
surrounding landscape. The shadow of the Moon can, under ideal
conditions, be 160 miles wide and cover 21,000 square miles of the
Earth's surface. Usually, it's con-siderably smaller than that; but
generally it's enough to cover the immediate landscape-that is, if it
happens to be a total eclipse."Trumbull said, "A bigger opaque object,
then-""It would have to be quite big and quite far away," said
Peterborough, "to achieve the effect. That would be too
cum-bersome."Halsted said, "Wait, I think I have it. You would need
something big for the purpose, all right. Suppose there were spherical
space settlements in the Moon's orbit. If Victim is in a spaceship and
gets the space settlement between himself and the Sun, that would be
exactly what he wants. He could arrange to be close enough to have the
shadow-which, of course, is conical and narrows to a point if you get
far enough away-to be just thick enough to enclose his entire ship.
There would be no world-surface to reflect light, and there you
are."Peterborough said, uneasily, "I hadn't thought of that. It's
possible."Halsted grinned, and a flush of pleasure mounted to the
hairline he had once had. "That's it, then."Peterborough said, "I don't
want to be troublesome, but- but if we introduce the space motif, it's
going to create some problems in the rest of the story. It's sort of
important that everything stay on or near the Earth and yet that there
be something so startling and unexpected that it would-"He paused and
Rubin completed the sentence for him, "So startling and unexpected that
it would drive Murderer to rage and vengeance.""Yes.""Well," said Rubin,
"since I'm the master of mystery here, I think I can work it out for you
without leaving Earth very far behind, just as soon as I get some points
straightened out.-You said that Murderer is taking the photographs from
a plane. Why?""Oh. That's because the Moon's shadow, when it falls on
Earth, moves quickly-up to 1440 miles an hour or about 0.4 miles a
second. If you're standing in one place on Earth, the longest possible
duration of a total eclipse is seven minutes and then the shadow has
moved beyond you. That's when the Earth is as deep into the Moon's
shadow as it ever gets. When the Earth isn't as deep in and is nearer
the final point of the shadow, the total eclipse may last only a couple
of minutes, or even only a few seconds. In fact, more than half the
time, the Moon's shadow during an eclipse doesn't reach theEarth's
surface at all; and when the Moon is squarely in front of the Sun, the
Sun overlaps it on all sides. That's an 'annular eclipse' and enough
sunlight then slips past the Moon to wash out everything. An annular
eclipse is no good at all.""But in the airplane?" prompted Rubin."In an
airplane, you can race along with the shadow and make the total eclipse
last for an hour or more even if it would only endure a very short time
on one position on Earth. You have a great deal more time to take
photographs and make scientific observations. That's not
science-fictional; it's done right now.""Can you take very good pictures
from the plane?" asked Rubin. "Does it allow a steady enough basis for
photogra-phy?""In my story," said Peterborough, "I've got a computer
guiding the plane, allowing for wind movements, and keeping it perfectly
steady. That's one of the places where the science fiction comes
in.""Still, the Moon's shadow eventually leaves the Earth's surface
altogether, doesn't it?""Yes, the eclipse track covers a fixed portion
of the Earth's surface, and it has an overall starting point and an
overall ending point.""Exactly," said Rubin. "Now Murderer is confident
that his photographs taken from the stratosphere are going to in-clude
the best views of an eclipse ever seen, but he doesn't count on Victim's
having a spaceship. Don't worry, there's no need to leave Earth very
far. It's just that the spaceship follows the Moon's shadow after0 it
leaves the Earth. Victim has a still longer chance to take photographs,
a steadier base, and no atmospheric interference whatever. Murderer is
hoist on his own petard for he sees that poor simp, Victim, do exactly
what he does but go him one better. He snaps and becomes a
killer."Gonzalo waved both arms in the air in excitement. "Wait! Wait!
We can do even better than that. Listen, what about that annular eclipse
you mentioned a while ago? You said the shadow doesn't reach the
Earth.""It doesn't reach the surface. That's right.""How high off the
surface is it?""That depends. Under extreme conditions, the end point of
the shadow could miss the Earth by hundreds of miles.""Yes," said
Gonzalo, "but could that end point miss Earth by, say, ten0 miles?""Oh,
sure.""Would it still be annular, and no good?""That's right," said
Peterborough. "The Moon would come just barely short of covering the
Sun. There would be just the thinnest sliver of Sun around the Moon, and
that would give enough light to spoil things. If you took photo-graphs,
you'd miss the prominences, the flares, and the co-rona.""But what if
you went ten miles up into the atmosphere?" said Gonzalo. "Then you'd
see it total, wouldn't you?""If you were in the right spot, yes.""There
it is, then. One of those annular eclipses comes along, and Murderer
thinks he'll pull a fast one. He gets into his stratoplane, goes ten
miles up to get into the point of the shadow or just over it, and
follows it along. He's going to make a total eclipse out of an annular
one-and Victim, the usual loser, does the same thing, except he uses a
spaceship and follows it out into space and gets better pictures. What
can get old Murderer more torn up than having him play his ace-and
getting trumped."Avalon nodded his head. "Good, Mario. That is0 an
im-provement."Rubin looked as if he had unexpectedly bitten into a
lemon. "I hate to say it, Mario-""You don't have to say it, Manny," said
Gonzalo. "I see it all over you.-There you are, kid. Write the
story."Peterborough said, with a sigh, "Yes, I suppose that is the best
that can be done.""You don't sound overjoyed," said Gonzalo."I was
hoping for something more-uh-outrageous, but I don't think it exists. If
none of you could think up any-thing-""May I interrupt, sir?" said
Henry."Huh? Oh-no, I don't want any more coffee, waiter," said
Peterborough, absently."No, sir. I mean, concerning the
eclipse."Trumbull said, "Henry's a member of the club, Martin. He broke
the tie on the matter of the discussion. Remember?''Peterborough put a
hand to his forehead. "Oh, sure. Ask away-uh-Henry.''"Actually, sir,
would the photographs be that much better in a vacuum than in the thin
air of the stratosphere? Would the difference in quality be enough to
result in murder, unless Murderer was a close approach to a homicidal
maniac?""That's the thing," said Peterborough, nodding. "That's what
bothers me. That's why I keep saying I need a motive. These differences
in quality of photos aren't big enough.""Let us consider, then," said
Henry, "Mr. Rubin's dictum that in telling a story one should look
backward.""I know the ending," said Peterborough. "I have the back-ward
look.""I mean it in another sense-that of deliberately looking in the
other direction, the unaccustomed direction. In an eclipse, we always
look at the Moon-just the Moon in a Lunar eclipse, and the Moon covering
the Sun in a Solar eclipse-and that's what we take photographs of. What
if we take a backward look at the Earth?""What's to see on Earth,
Henry?" asked Gonzalo."When the Moon moves into the Earth's shadow, it
is al-ways in the full phase and it is usually completely darkened. What
happens to the Earth when it moves into the Moon's shadow? It certainly
doesn't darken completely.""No," said Peterborough emphatically. "The
Moon's shadow is thinner and shorter than the Earth's, and the Earth
itself is larger than the Moon. Even when Earth passes as deeply as it
can into the Moon's shadow, only a tiny bit of the Earth is darkened, a
little dot of darkness that makes up, at most, about 1/600 of the
Earth's circle of light."' 'Could you see it from the Moon?'' asked
Henry."If you knew where to look and especially if you had a good pair
of binoculars. You would see it start small, move west to east across
the face of the Earth, getting bigger, then smaller, and then vanish.
Interesting, but certainly not spec-tacular.""Not from the Moon, sir,"
said Henry. "Now suppose we reverse the positions of the characters. It
is Victim who has the airplane and who can get a photograph from the
strato-sphere. It is Murderer who intends to trump his opponent's ace by
taking a better photograph from space-a marginally better photograph.
Suppose, though, that Victim, against all expectations, from his
airplane over-trumps Murderer in his spaceship."Avalon said, "How can he
do that, Henry?""Victim, in his plane, suddenly realizes he needn't look
at the Moon. He looks backward at the ground and sees the Moon's shadow,
racing toward him. The Moon's shadow is just a dark dot when seen from
the Moon; it's just the coming of temporary night as seen from the
Earth's surface-but from a plane in the stratosphere, it is a racing
circle of darkness moving at 1440 miles an hour, swallowing up the land
and sea-and clouds, for that matter-as it goes. The plane can move ahead
of it, and it is no longer necessary to take single snapshots. A movie
camera can produce the most dramatic film. In this way, Murderer, having
fully expected to outdo Victim, finds that Victim has captured world
attention even though he had only an airplane to Murderer's
spaceship."Gonzalo broke into loud applause, and Trumbull said, "Right
on!" Even Rubin smiled and nodded.As for Peterborough, he fired up at
once saying, "Sure! And the approaching shadow would have a thin red
rim, for at the moment the shadow overtakes you, the red prominences
cast their light unmasked by the Sun's white light. That's it, Henry!
The backward look does it!-If I write this one prop-erly, I don't care
even if it doesn't sell.-I won't care even" (his voice shook)
"if-uh-she0 doesn't like it and doesn't go out with me. The story is
more important!"Henry smiled gently and said, "I'm glad to hear that,
sir. A writer should always have a proper sense of priorities."120}  
