{1125201033{} 41032 Potential24 by Isaac Asimov0 Copyright (C)1983 by
Isaac AsimovNadine Triomph checked the long list of symbols for-what was
it?-the tenth time. She did not think she could get anything out of it
that Multivac had not, but it was only human to try.She passed it over
to Basil Seversky. It's completely different, Basil,she said.You can see
that at a glance,said Basil, gloomily.Well, don't drag. That's good. So
far the only gene combinations that Multivac has dredged up seem to have
been minor variations on a theme. Now this one is different.Basil put
his hands into the pockets of his lab jacket and leaned his chair back
against the wall. He felt the line of his hips absently and noted it was
gaining a certain softness. He was getting pudgy all over, he thought,
and didn't like it.He said, Multivac doesn't tell us anything we don't
tell it first. We don't really know that the basic requirements for
telepathy are valid, do we?Nadine felt defensive. It was Basil who had
worked out the neurological requirements, but it was she who had
prepared the program by which Multivac scanned the potential gene
structures to see which might produce those requirements.She said, If we
have two rather different sets of genetic patterns, as we now have, we
can work out-or try to work out-the common factors, and this could give
us a lead as to the validity.In theory-but we'll be working in theory
forever. If Multivac works at its present speed for the remaining
lifetime of the sun as a main-sequence star, it will not have gone
through a duodecillionth of all the possible structural variations of
the genes that might exist, let alone the possible modifications
introduced by their order on the chromosomes.We might get lucky.They had
held the same conversation-upbeat versus downbeat-a dozen times, with
minor variations in detail.Lucky? The word hasn't been invented to
describe the kind of impossible luck we would need. And if we do pick
out a million different genetic patterns with potential for telepathy,
we then have to ask what the odds are that someone now alive will have
such a gene pattern, or anything near it.We can modify,said Nadine.Oh?
Have you come across an existing human genetic pattern which can be
modified by known procedures into something Multivac says will produce
telepathy?The procedures will improve in the future and if we keep
Multivac working and keep on registering all human genetic patterns at
birth--And0 ,Basil continued sing-song, if the Planetary Genetic Council
continues to support the program adequately, and0 if we continue to get
the time-sharing we need on Multivac, and0 if-It was at that point that
Multivac interrupted with one more item and all a dazed Basil could say
afterward was, I don't believe it.0 * * * _0It seemed that Multivac's
routine scanning of registered genetic patterns of living human beings
had turned up one that matched the new pattern it had worked out as
possessing telepathic potential-and the match was virtually exact.Basil
said, I don't believe it.Nadine, who had always been forced into
unreasoning faith by Basil's consistent pessimism, said, sunnily. Here
he is, just the same. Male. Aged 15. Name Roland Washman. Only child.
Plainview, Iowa. American Region, actually.Basil studied Roland's
genetic pattern, as delivered by Multivac, and compared it with the
pattern worked out by Multivac from theoretical considerations. He
muttered, again, I don't believe it.It's there before you.Do you know
the odds against this?It's there before you. The Universe is billions of
years old and there's been time for a great many unbelievable
coincidences to happen.Not this unbelievable.Basil pulled himself
together. Iowa was included in one of the areas we scanned for
telepathic presence and nothing ever showed up. Of course, the pattern
only shows the potential0 for telepathy-0 _ * * _0It was Basil's plan to
approach indirectly. However much the Planetary Genetic Council might
post the possibility of telepathy as one of the goal-patterns to be
searched for, along with musical genius, variable-gravitational
endurance, cancer resistance, mathematical intuition, and several
hundred other items, it remained that telepathy had an ingrained
unpopularity.However exciting the thought of reading mindsmight seem in
the abstract, there was always an uneasy resistance to the thought of
having one's mind read. Thought was the unassailable bastion of privacy,
and it would not be surrendered without a struggle. Any controvertible
claim to have discovered telepathy would, therefore, be surely
controverted.Basil, therefore, overrode Nadine's willingness to move
straight to the point and to interview the young man directly, by making
that very point.Oh, yes,he grumbled, and we will let our eagerness lure
us into announcing we have found a telepath so that the PGC will put
half a dozen authorities on his track in order to disprove the claim and
ruin our scientific careers. Let's find out all we can about him first0
.The disappointed Nadine consoled herself with the obvious fact that in
a computerized society, every human being left tracks of all kinds from
the moment of conception, and that it could all be recovered without
much trouble, and even quickly.Umm,said Basil, not very bright in
school.It could be a good sign,said Nadine. Telepathic ability would
surely take up a sizable fraction of the higher functioning of the brain
and leave little over for abstract thought. That might explain why
telepathy had not evolved more noticeably in the human species. The
disadvantages of low intelligence would be contra-survival.He's not
exactly an idiot savante0 . Dull-normal.Which might be exactly
right.Rather withdrawn. Doesn't make friends easily. Rather a
loner.Nadine said, excitedly. Exactly0 right. Any early evidence of
telepathic ability would frighten, upset, and antagonize people. A
youngster lacking judgement would innocently expose the motives of
others in his group and be beaten up for his pains. Naturally, he would
withdraw into himself.Data was gathered for a long time, thereafter, and
Basil said, finally. Nothing! There's nothing known about him; no
reports, not one, that indicates anything that can be twisted into a
sign of telepathy. There's not even any comment to the effect that he's
peculiar.He's almost disregarded.Absolutely0 right. The reaction of
others forced him, early on, to hide all telepathic ability, and that
same telepathic ability guided his behavior so as to avoid all
unfavorable notice. It's remarkable how it fits.Basil stared at her with
disfavor. You can twist anything into supporting your romantic view of
this. Look! He's fifteen and that's too old. Let's suppose he was born
with a certain amount of telepathic ability and that he learned early
not to display it. Surely the talent would have atrophied and be
entirely gone by now. That has to be so for if he remained a full
telepath, he couldn't possibly have avoided displaying it now and then,
and that would have attracted attention.No, Basil. At school, he's by
himself and does as little work as possible-He's not scapegoated, as he
would be if he were a telepathic little wise-guy.I told you! He knows
when he would be and avoids it. Summers he works as a gardener's
assistant and, again, doesn't encounter the public.He encounters the
gardener, and yet he keeps the job. It's his third summer there right
now, and if he were a telepath, the gardener would get rid of him. No,
it's close-but no cigar. It's too late. What we need is a new-born child
with that same genetic pattern. Then we might have something-maybe0
.Nadine rumpled her fading blonde hair and looked exasperated. You're
deliberately trying to avoid tackling the problem by denying it exists.
Why don't we interview the gardener? If you're willing to go to Iowa-I
tell you what, I'll pay for the plane fare, and you won't have to charge
it to the project, if that's what's bothering you.Basil held up his
hand. No, no, the project will bear it, but I tell you what. If we find
no signs of telepathic ability, and we won't, you'll owe me one fancy
dinner at a restaurant of my choice.Done,said Nadine, eagerly, and you
can even bring your wife.You'll lose.I don't care. Just so we don't
abandon the matter too soon.0 _ * * _0The gardener was by no means
enthusiastically cooperative. He viewed the two as government officials
and did not approve of them for that reason. When they identified
themselves as scientists, that was no better ground for approval. And
when they asked after Roland, he neared the point of outright
hostility.What do you want to know about Roland for? Done anything?No,
no,said Nadine, as winningly as she might. He might qualify for special
schooling, that's all.What kind of schooling? Gardening?We're not
sure.Gardening's all he's good for, but he's good at that. Best I've
ever had. He doesn't need no schooling in gardening.Nadine looked about
appreciatively at the greenhouse and at the neat rows of plants outside
as well. He does all that?Have to admit it,said the gardener. Never this
good without him. But it's all he's good for.Basil said, Why is that all
he's good for, sir?He's not very bright. But he's got this talent. He'll
make anything grow.Is he odd in any way?What do you mean, odd?Funny?
Peculiar? Strange?Being that good a gardener is strange, but I don't
complain.Nothing else?No. What are you looking for, mister?Basil said, I
really don't know.0 _ * * _0That evening, Nadine said, We've got to
study the boy.Why? What have you heard that gives you any hope?Suppose
you're right. Suppose it's all atrophied. Still, we might find a trace0
of the ability.What would we do with a trace? Small effects would not be
convincing. We have had a full century of experience with that, from
Rhine onward.Even if we don't get anything that would prove anything to
the world, so what? What about ourselves0 ? The important thing is that
we'd satisfy ourselves that when Multivac says a particular genetic
pattern has the potential for telepathy, it's right. And if it's right,
that would mean your theoretical analysis-and my programming, too-was
right. Don't you want to put your theories to the test and find
confirmatory evidence? Or are you afraid you won't.I'm not afraid of
that. I am0 afraid of wasting time.One test is all I ask. Look, we ought
to see his parents anyway, for whatever they can tell us. After all,
they knew him when he was a baby and had, in full, whatever telepathic
powers he might have had to begin with-and then we'll get permission to
have him match random numbers. If he fails that, we go no further. We
waste no more time.0 _ * * _0Roland's parents were stolid and totally
non-informative. They seemed as slow as Roland was reported to be, and
as self-contained.There had been nothing odd about their son as a baby,
they said. They repeated that without guilty over-emphasis. Strong and
healthy, they said, and a hard-working boy who earned good money over
the summer and went to high-school the rest of the year. Never in any
trouble with the law or in any other way.Might we test him?asked Nadine.
A simple test?What for?asked Washman. I don't want him
bothered.Government survey. We're choosing fifteen-year-old boys here
and there so we can study ways to improve methods of schooling.Washman
shook his head. I don't want my boy bothered.Well,said Nadine, you must
understand there's two hundred fifty dollars to the family for each boy
tested.(She carefully avoided looking at Basil, certain that his lips
would have tightened in anger.)Two hundred fifty dollars?Yes,said
Nadine, trying hard. After all, the test takes time and it's only fair
the government pay for the time and trouble.Washman cast a slow glance
at his wife and she nodded. He said, if the boy is willing, I guess it
would be okay.0 _ * * 0Roland Washman was tall for his age and
well-built, but there seemed no danger in his muscles. He had a gentle
way about him, and dark, quiet eyes looked out of his well-browned
face.He said, What am I supposed to do, mister?It's very easy,said
Basil. You have a little joy-stick with the numbers 0 to 9 on it. Every
time, that little red light goes on, you push one of the numbers.Which
one, mister?Whichever one you want. Just one number and the light will
go out. Then when it goes on, another number, and so on, until the light
stops shining. This lady will do the same thing. You and I will sit
opposite each other at this table, and she will sit at this other little
table with her back to us. I don't want you to think about what number
you're going to push.How can I do it without thinking, mister? You got
to think.You may just have a feeling. The light goes on, and it might
seem as though you have a feeling to push an 8, or a 6, or whatever.
Just do it, then. One time you might push a 2, next time a 3, next time
a 9 or maybe another 2. Whatever you want.Roland thought about it a bit,
then nodded. I'll try, mister, but I hope it don't take too long,
because I don't see the sense of it.0 * * * _0Basil adjusted the sensor
in his left ear-canal unobtrusively and then gazed at Roland as benignly
as he could.The tiny voice in his left ear breathed, Seven,and Basil
thought: Seven.And the light flashed on Roland's joystick, and on
Nadine's similar joystick and both pushed a number.It went on and on: 6,
2, 2, 0, 4, 3, 6, 8....And finally Basil said, That's enough,
Roland.They gave Roland's father five fifty-dollar bills, and they
left.0 _ * * _0In their motel room, Basil leaned back, disappointment
fighting with the satisfaction of I-told-you-so.Absolutely nothing,he
said. Zero correlation. The computer generated a series of random
numbers and so did Roland, and the two did not match. He picked up
absolutely nothing from my thought processes.Suppose,said Nadine, with a
dying hope, he could read your mind but was deliberately masking that
fact.Basil said, You know better than that. If he were trying to be
wrong on purpose, he would almost certainly be too0 wrong. He would
match me less often than chance would dictate. Besides, you were
generating a series of numbers too, and you couldn't read my thoughts
either, and he couldn't read yours. He had two sets of different numbers
assailing him each time, and there was zero correlation-neither positive
nor0 negative with either. That can't be faked. We have to accept it, he
doesn't have it, now, and we're out of luck. We'll have to keep looking,
and the odds of coming across anything like this again-He looked
hopeless.0 _ * * *0Roland was in the front yard, watching after Basil
and Nadine, as their car drove off in the bright sunlight.He had been
frightened. First they had talked to his boss, then to his parents, and
he thought that they must have found out.How could they have found out?
It was impossible to find out, but why else were they so curious?He had
worried about all that business of picking numbers, even though he
didn't see how it could do any harm. Then it came to him that they
thought he could hear human voices in his mind. They were trying to
think the right numbers at him.They couldn't do that. How could he know
what they0 were thinking? He couldn't ever tell what people were
thinking. He knew that for certain. Couldn't ever!He laughed a little to
himself, very quietly. People always thought it was only people that
counted.And then came the little voice in his mind, very thin and very
shrill.When-When-When-?Roland turned his head. He knew it was a bee
winging toward him. He wasn't hearing the bee, but the whole mind of the
whole hive.All his life he had heard the bees thinking, and they could
hear him. It was wonderful. They pollinated his plants and they avoided
eating them, so that everything he touched grew beautifully.The only
thing was they wanted more. They wanted a leader; someone to tell them
how to beat back the push of humanity. Roland wondered how that could be
done. The bees weren't enough but suppose he had all the animals.
Suppose he learned how to blend minds with all of them. Could he?The
bees were easy, and the ants. Their minds built up in large crowds. And
he could hear the crows now. He didn't used to. And he was beginning to
make out something with the cattle, though they weren't worth listening
to, hardly.Cats? Dogs? All the bugs and birds?What could be done? How
far could he go?A teacher had once said to him that he didn't live up to
his potential.When-When-When-?thought the bee.Not yet-Not yet-Not
yet-thought Roland.First, he had to reach his potential.28}  
