{10{} 412491 Georges face was thin and had grown a trifle thinner in the
nearly year and a half that he had been at the House. His figure was
slight but the look in his blue eyes was as intense as it had ever been,
and right now there was a trapped look in the way his fingers curled
against the bedspread.01 Georges roommate looked up briefly from his
book and took the op0-poffimity to adjust the light-level of the stretch
of wall near his chair. His name was Hali Omani and he was a Nigerian by
birth. His dark brown skin and massive features seemed made for
calmness, and mention of the Olympics did not move him.1 He said, I
know, George.01 George owed much to Halls patience and kindness when it
was needed, but even patience and kindness could be overdone. Was this a
time to sit there like a statue built of some dark, warm wood?0George
wondered if he himself would grow like that after ten years here and
rejected the thought violently. No!1 He said defiantly, I think youve
forgotten what May means.01 The other said, I remember very well what it
means. It means nothing! Youre the one whos forgotten that. May means
nothing to you, George Platen, and,he added softly, it means nothing to
me, Hali Omani.01 George said, The ships are coming in for recruits. By
June, thousands and thousands will leave with millions of men and women
heading for any world you can name, and all that means nothing?01Less
than nothing. What do you want me to do about it, anyway?Omani ran his
finger along a difficult passage in the book he was reading and his lips
moved soundlessly.020249It was only that he wanted not to beso alone in
his anger. He wanted not to be the only one so filled with resentment,
not to be the only one dying a slow death.1 It was better those first
weeks when the Universe was a small shell of vague light and sound
pressing down upon him. It was better before Omarn had wavered into view
and dragged him back to a life that wasnt worth living.0Omani! He was
old! He was at least thirty. George thought: Will I be like that at
thirty? Will I be like that in twelve years?1 And because he was afraid
he might be, he yelled at Omani, Will you stop reading that fool book?01
Omani turned a page and read on a few words, then lifted his head with
its skullcap of crisply curled hair and said, What?01What good does it
do you to read the book?He stepped forward, snorted More electronics,and
slapped it out of Omanis hands.01 Omani got up slowly and picked up the
book. He smoothed a crumpled page without visible rancor. Call it the
satisfaction of curiosity,he said. I understand a little of it today,
perhaps a little more tomorrow. Thats a victory in a way.01A victory.
What kind of a victory? Is that what satisfies you in life? To get to
know enough to be a quarter of a Registered Electronician by the time
youre sixty-five?01Perhaps by the time Imthirty-five.01And then wholl
want you? Wholl use you? Where will you go?01No one. No one. Nowhere.
Ill stay here and read other books.01And that satisfies you? Tell me!
Youve dragged me to class. Youve got me to reading and memorizing, too.
For what! Theres nothing in it that satisfies me.01What good will it do
you to deny yourself satisfaction?01It means Ill quit the whole farce.
Ill do as I planned to do in the beginning before you dovey-lovied me
out of it. Im going to force them toto---01 Omani put down his book. He
let the other run down and then said, To what, George?01To correct a
miscarriage of justice. A frame-up. Ill get that Antoneffi and force him
to admit hehe-01 Omani shook his head. Everyone who comes here insists
its a mistake. I thought youd passed that stage.01Dont call it a
stage,said George violently. In my case, its a fact. Ive told you01Youve
told me, but in your heart you know no one made any mistake as far as
you were concerned.01Because no one will admit it? You think any of them
would admit a mistake unless they were forced to?Well, Ill force
them.0202491 He said, I was going tobe aComputerProgrammerandlcanbeone.
I could be one today, regardless of what they say analysis shows.He
pounded his mattress. Theyre wrong. They 0 must 01 be.01The analysts are
never wrong.01They 0 must 01 be. Do you doubt my
intelligence?01Inteffigence hasnt one thing to do with it. Havent you
been told that often enough? Cant you understand that?0George rolled
away, lay on his back and stared somberly at the ceiling.1What did you
want to be, Hali?01I had no fixed plans. Hydropomcist would have suited
me, I suppose.01Did you think you could make it?01I wasnt sure.0George
had never asked personal questions of Omani before. It struck him as
queer, almost unnatural, that other people had had ambitions and ended
here. Hydroponicist!1 He said, Did you think youd make this?001No, but
here I am just the same.01And youre satisfied. Really, really satisfied.
Youre happy. You love it. You wouldnt be anywhere else.01 Slowly, Omani
got to his feet. Carefully, he began to unmake his bed. He said, George,
youre a hard case. Youre knocking yourself out because you wont accept
the facts about yourself. George, youre here in what you call the House,
but Ive never heard you give it its full title. Say it, George, say it.
Then go to bed and sleep this off.01 George gritted his teeth and showed
them. He choked out, No!01Then I will,said Omani, and he did. He shaped
each syllable carefully.0George was bitterly ashamed at the sound of it.
He turned his head away.2491 He argued relative merits as vigorously as
any of them, and why not? Education Day loomed ahead of them and was the
great fact of their existence. It approached steadily, as fixed and
certain as the calendarthe first day of November of the year following
ones eighteenth birthday.01 After that day, there were other topics of
conversation. One could discuss with others some detail of the
profession, or the virtues of ones wife and children, or the fate of
ones space-polo team, or ones experience in the Olympics. Before
Education Day, however, there was only one topic that020249249249The
thought of that never bothered George. Sure it would; all the eyeteeth
it could scare up. But George had also heard what had happened before in
a newly developed technique. Rationalization and simplification followed
in a flood. New models each year; new types of gravitic engines; new
principles. Then all those eyeteeth gentlemen would find themselves Out
of date and superseded by later models with later educations. The first
group would then have to settle down to unskilled labor or ship out to
som1 e backwoods world that wasnt quite caught up yet.0Now Computer
Programmers were in steady demand year after year, century after
century. The demand never reached wild peaks; there was never a howling
bull market for Programmers; but the demand climbed steadily as new
worlds opened up and as older worlds grew more complex.He had argued
with Stubby Trevelyan about that constantly. As best friends, their
arguments had to be constant and vitriolic and, of course, neither ever
persuaded or was persuaded.But then Trevelyan had had a father who was a
Registered Metallurgist and had actually served on one of the Outworlds,
and a grandfather who had also been a Registered Metallurgist. He
himself was intent on becom-ing a Registered Metallurgist almost as a
matter of family right and was firmly convinced that any other
profession was a shadeless than respectable.1Therell always be metal,he
said, and theres an accomplishment in molding alloys to specification
and watching structures grow. Now whats a Programmer going to be doing.
Sitting at a coder all day long, feeding some fool mile-long machine.01
Even at sixteen, George had learned to be practical. He said simply,
Therell be a million Metallurgists put out along with you.01Because its
good. A good profession. The best.01But you get crowded out, Stubby. You
can be way back in line. Any world can tape out its own Metallurgists,
and the market for advanced Earth models isnt so big. And its mostly the
small worlds that want them. You know what percent of the turnout of
Registered Metallurgists get tabbed for worlds with a Grade A rating. I
looked it up. Its just 13.3 percent. That means youll have seven chances
in eight of being stuck in some world that0202491 George knew about
Trevelyans grandfather and, considering the Earth0-1 bound position of
his own ancestry, was in no mood to sneer. He said diplomatically, No
intellectual disgrace. Of course not. But its nice to get into a Grade A
world, isnt it?01Now you take Programmers. Only the Grade A worlds have
the kind of computers that really need first-class Programmers so theyre
the only ones in the market. And Programmer tapes are complicated and
hardly any one fits. They need more Programmers than their own
population can supply. Its just a matter of statistics. Theres one
first-class Programmer per million, say. A world needs twenty and has a
population often million, they have to come to Earth for five to fifteen
Programmers. Right?01And you know how many Registered Computer
Programmers went to Grade A planets last year? Ill tell you. Every last
one. If youre a Programmer, youre a picked man. Yes, sir.01 Trevelyan
frowned. If only one in a million makes it, what makes you think youll 0
make it?01 George said guardedly, Ill make it.01 He never dared tell
anyone; not Trevelyan; not his parents; of exactly what he was doing
that made him so confident. But he wasnt worried. He was simply
confident (that was the worst of the memories he had in the hopeless
days afterward). He was as blandly confident as the average
eight-year-old kid approaching Reading Daythat childhood preview of
Education Day.02491 And then not so much depended upon it. There were no
recruiters just ahead, waiting and jostling for the lists and scores on
the coming Olympics. A boy or girl who goes through the Reading Day is
just someone who has ten more years of undifferentiated living upon
Earths crawling surface; just someone who returns to his family with one
new ability.01 By the time Education Day caine, ten years later, George
wasnt even sure of most of the details of his own Reading Day.02492022
dressed by the wall lights, with his parents far more excited than he
himself was. His father was a Registered Pipe Fitter and had found his
occupation on earth. This fact had always been a humiliation to him,
although, of course, as anyone could see plainly, most of each
generation must stay on Earth in the nature of things.2491 But every man
and woman could hope that at least one of his children could be one, and
Platen, Senior, was certainly no exception. It was obvious to him (and,
to be sure, to others as well) that George was notably intelligent and
quick-minded. He would be bound to do well and he would have to, as he
was an only child. If George didnt end on an Outworld, they would have
to wait for grandchildren before a next chance would come along, and
that was too far in the future to be much consolation.01 Reading Day
would not prove much, of course, but it would be the only indication
they would have before the big day itself. Every parent on Earth would
be listening to the quality of reading when his child came home with it;
listening for any particularly easy flow of words and building that into
certain omens of the future. There were few families that didnt have at
least one hopeful who, from Reading Day on, was the great hope because
of the way he handled his trisyllabics.01 Dimly, George was aware of the
cause of his parentstension, and if there was any anxiety in his young
heart that drizzly morning, it was only the fear that his fathers
hopeful expression might fade out when he returned home with his
reading.01 The children met in the large assembly room of the towns
Education hall. All over Earth, in millions of local halls, throughout
that month, similar groups of children would be meeting. George felt
depressed by the grayness of the room and by the other children,
strained and stiff in unaccustomed finery.0Automatically, George did as
all the rest of the children did. He found the small clique that
represented the children on his floor of the apartment house and joined
them.Trevelyan, who lived immediately next door, still wore his hair
childish-ly long and was years removed from the sideburns and thin,
reddish mustache that he was to grow as soon as he was physiologically
capable of2491I am not,said George. Then, confidentially, My folks got a
hunk of printing up on the dresser in my room, and when! come home, Im
going to read it for them.(Georges main suffering at the moment lay in
the fact020249Trevelyan, Senior, had been a Metallurgist on Diporia for
nearly seven years, which gave him a superior social status in his
neighborhood even though he had retired and returned to Earth.Earth
discouraged these re-immigrants because of population problems, but a
small trickle did return. For one thing the cost of living was lower on
Earth, and what was a trifling annuity on Diporia, say, was a
comfortable income on Earth. Besides, there were always men who found
more satisfac-tion in displaying their success before the friends and
scenes of their childhood than before all the rest of the Universe
besides.Trevelyan, Senior, further explained that if he stayed on
Diporia, so would his children, and Diporia was a one-spaceship world.
Back on Earth, his kids could end anywhere, even Novia.Stubby Trevelyan
had picked up that item early. Even before Reading Day, his conversation
was based on the carelessly assumed fact that his ultimate home would be
in Novia.1 George, oppressed by thoughts of the others future greatness
and his own small-time contrast, was driven to beffigerent defense at
once.01My father isnt worried either. He just wants to hear me read
because he knows Ill be good. I suppose your father would just as soon
not hear you because he knows youll be all wrong.01I wifi not be all
wrong. Reading is 0 nothing. 01 On Novia, Ill 0 hire 01 people to read
to me.01Because 0 you 01 wont be able to read yourself, on account of
youre dumb!001Then how come Ill be on Novia?01 And George, driven, made
the great denial. Who says youll be on Novia? Bet you dont go
anywhere.01 Stubby Trevelyan reddened. I wont be a Pipe Fitterlike
yonrold man.01Take that back, you dumbhead.01You take 0 that 01
back.0They stood nose to nose, not wanting to fight but relieved at
having something familiar to do in this strange place. Furthermore, now
that George had curled his hands into fists and lifted them before his
face, the problem of what to do with his hands was, at least
temporarily, solved. Other children gathered round excitedly.1 But then
it all ended when a womans voice sounded loudly over the public address
system. There was instant silence everywhere. George dropped his fists
and forgot Trevelyan.024920249The crowd of children thinned; little
rivulets made their way to each of the red-clad guides.1 When the name
George Platenwas finally called, his sense of relief was exceeded only
by the feeling of pure gladness at the fact that Stubby Trevelyan still
stood in his place, uncalled.01 George shouted back over his shoulder as
he left, Yay, Stubby, maybe they dont want you.01 That moment of gaiety
quickly left. He was herded into a line and directed down corridors in
the company of strange children. They all looked at one another,
large-eyed and concerned, but beyond a snuffling, Quitcher pushingand
Hey, watch outthere was no conversation.01 They were handed little slips
of paper which they were told must remain with them. George stared at
his curiously. Little black marks of different shapes. He knew it to be
printing but how could anyone make words out of it? He couldnt
imagine.0He was told to strip; he and four other boys who were all that
now remained together. All the new clothes came shucking off and four
eight-year-olds stood naked and small, shivering more out of
embarrassment than cold. Medical technicians came past, probing them,
testing them with odd instruments, pricking them for blood. Each took
the little cards and made additional marks on them with little black
rods that produced the marks, all neatly lined up, with great speed.
George stared at the new marks, but they were no more comprehensible
than the old. The children were ordered back into their clothes.1 They
sat on separate little chairs then and waited again. Names were called
again and George Platencame third.0He moved into a large room, filled
with frightening instruments with knobs and glassy panels in front.
There was a desk in the very center, and behind it a man sat, his eyes
on the papers piled before him.1 He said, George Platen?01Yes, sir,said
George in a shaky whisper. All this waiting and all this going here and
there was making him nervous. He wished it were over.01 The man behind
the desk said, I am Dr. Lloyed, George. How are you?01 The doctor didnt
look up as he spoke. It was as though he had said those words over and
over again and didnt have to look up any more.01Im all right.01Are you
afraid, George?0202492491Yyes, sir.01And your birthday is February 13,
and you had an ear infection about a year ago. Right?01Yes, sir.01Do you
know how I know all these things?01Its on the card, Ithink, sir.01Thats
right.The doctor looked up at George for the first time and smiled. He
showed even teeth and looked much younger than Georges father. Some of
Georges nervousness vanished.01 The doctor passed the card to George. Do
you know what all those things there mean, George?01 Although George
knew he did not he was startled by the sudden request into looking at
the card as though he might understand now through some sudden stroke of
fate. But they were just marks as before and he passed the card back.
No, sir.01Why not?01 George felt a sudden pang of suspicion concerning
the sanity of this doctor. Didnt he know why not?01 George said, I cant
read, sir.01Would you like to read?01Yes, sir.01Why, George?01 George
stared, appalled. No one had ever asked him that. He had no answer. He
said falteringly, I dont know, sir.01Printed information will direct you
all through your life. There is so much youll have to know even after
Education Day. Cards like this one will tell you. Books will tell you.
Television screens will tell you. Printing will tell you such useful
things and such interesting things that not being able to read would be
as bad as not being able to see. Do you understand?01Yes, sir.01Are you
afraid, George?0249Good. Now I ll tell you exactly what we ll do first.
I m gomg to put24924920249George had never believed them but he had had
nightmares, and now closed his eyes and felt pure terror.1 He didnt feel
the wires at his temple. The buzz was a distant thing, and there was the
sound of his own blood in his ears, ringing hollowly as though it and he
were in a large cave. Slowly he chanced opening his eyes.0The doctor had
his back to him. From one of the instruments a strip of paper unwound
and was covered with a thin, wavy purple line. The doctor tore off
pieces and put them into a slot in another machine. He did it over and
over again. Each time a little piece of film came out, which the doctor
looked at. Finally, he turned toward George with a queer frown between
his eyes.The buzzing stopped.1 George said breathlessly, Is it over?01
The doctor said, Yes,but he was still frowning.01Can I read now?asked
George. He felt no different.01 The doctor said, What?then smiled very
suddenly and briefly. He said, It works fine, Geoge. Youll be reading in
fifteen minutes. Now were going to use another machine this time and it
wifi take longer. Im going to cover your whole head, and when I turn it
on you wont be able to see or hear anything for a while, but it wont
hurt. Just to make sure Im going to give you a little switch to hold in
your hand. If anything hurts, you press the little button and everything
shuts off. All right?0In later years, George was told that the little
switch was strictly a dummy; that it was introduced solely for
confidence. He never did know for sure, however, since he never pushed
the button.A large smoothly curved helmet with a rubbery inner lining
was placed over his head and left there. Three or four little knobs
seemed to grab at him and bite into his skull, but there was only a
little pressure that faded. No pain.1 The doctors voice sounded dimly.
Everything all right, George?024924924920122 George looked at his card
again and gave out a strangled shout. The marks werent just marks at
all. They made up words. They were words just as clearly as though
something were whispering them in his ears. He could 0 hear 0 them being
whispered as he looked at them.1What does it say, George?01It saysit
saysPlaten, George. Born 13 February 6492 of Peter and Amy Platen in. 28
. .122He broke off.01You can read, George,said the doctor. Its all
over.01For good? I wont forget how?01Of course not.The doctor leaned
over to shake hands gravely. You will be taken home now.0It was days
before George got over this new and great talent of his. He read for his
father with such facility that Platen, Senior, wept and called relatives
to tell the good news.George walked about town, reading every scrap of
printing he could find and wondering how it was that none of it had ever
made sense to him before.1 He tried to remember how it was not to be
able to read and he couldnt. As far as his feeling about it was
concerned, he had always been able to read. Always.02491 He was sweating
and nervous now, and George, who had himself grown out of Jaw-jeeand
into the curt monosyllabic gutterality of George,was rather amused by
that.0They were in the same large hall they had been in ten years before
(and not since). It was as if a vague dream of the past had come to
sudden reality. In the first few minutes George had been distinctly
surprised at finding everything seem smaller and more cramped than his
memory told him; then he made allowance for his own growth.The crowd was
smaller than it had been in childhood. It was exclusively male this
time. The girls had another day assigned them.1 Trevelyan leaned over to
say, Beats me the way they make you wait.01Red tape,said George. You
cant avoid it.01 Trevelyan said, What makes 0 you 01 so damned tolerant
about it?01Ive got nothing to worry about.01Oh, brother, you make me
sick. I hope you end up Registered Manure Spreader just so I can see
your face when you do.His somber eyes swept the crowd anxiously.01
George looked about, too. It wasnt quite the system they used on
the0202491 Each, as he came out, would be surrounded by a clot of the
thinning crowd. How was it?Howd it feel?Whacha think ya made?Ya feel any
different?0Answers were vague and noncommittal.George forced himself to
remain out of those clots. You only raised your own blood pressure.
Everyone said you stood the best chance if you remained calm. Even so,
you could feel the palms of your hands grow cold. Funny that new
tensions came with the years.For instance, high-specialty professionals
heading out for an Outworld were accompanied by a wife (or husband). It
was important to keep the sex ratio in good balance on all worlds. And
if you were going out to a Grade A world, what girl would refuse you?
George had no specific girl in mind yet; he wanted none. Not now! Once
he made Programmer; once he could add to his name, Registered Computer
Programmer, he could take his pick, like a sultan in a harem. The
thought excited him and he tried to put it away. Must stay calm.1
Trevelyan muttered, Whats it all about anyway? First they say it works
best if youre relaxed and at ease. Then they put you through this and
make it impossible for you to be relaxed and at ease.01Maybe thats the
idea. Theyre separating the boys from the men to begin with. Take it
easy, Trev.01Shut up.01 Georges turn came. His name was not called. It
appeared in glowing letters on the notice board.01 He waved at
Trevelyan. Take it easy, Trev. Dont let it get you.0He was happy as he
entered the testing chamber. Actually happy.2491 For a fleeting instant
there was a razor-sharp picture in Georges mind of another man, ten
years earlier, who had asked the same question, and it was almost as
though this were the same man and he, George, had turned eight again as
he stepped across the threshold.0But the man looked up and, of course,
the face matched that of the sudden memory not at all. The nose was
bulbous, the hair thin and stringy, and the chin wattled as though its
owner had once been grossly overweight and had reduced.1 The man behind
the desk looked annoyed. Well?01 George came to Earth. Im George Platen,
sir.020249He stared at small strips of film, holding them up to the
light owlishly. George winced inwardly. Very hazily, he remembered that
other doctor (he had forgotten the name) staring at such film. Could
these be the same? The other doctor had frowned and this one was looking
at him now as though he were angry.His happiness was already just about
gone.1 Dr. Antonelli spread the pages of a thickish file out before him
now and put the films carefully to one side. It says here you want to be
a Computer Programmer.01Yes, doctor.01Still do?01Yes, sir.01Its a
responsible and exacting position. Do you feel up to it?01Yes,
sir.01Most pre-Educates dont put down any specific profession. I believe
they are afraid of queering it.01I think thats tight, sir.01Arent you
afraid of that?01I might as well be honest, sir.01 Dr. Antonelli nodded,
but without any noticeable lightening of his expression. Why do you want
to be a Programmer?01Its a responsible and exacting position as you
said, sir. Its an im0-1 portant job and an exciting one. I like it and!
think I can do it.01 Dr. Antonelli put the papers away, and looked at
George sourly. He said, How do you know you like it? Because you think
youll be snapped up by some Grade A planet?01 George thought uneasily:
Hes trying to rattle you. Stay calm and stay frank.01 He said, I think a
Programmer has a good chance, sir, but even if I were left on Earth, I
know Id like it.(That was true enough. Im not lying, thought
George.)01All right, how do you know?0He asked it as though he knew
there was no decent answer and George almost smiled. He had one.1 He
said, Ive been reading about Programming, sir.01Youve been what?00 Now
the doctor looked genuinely astonished and George took pleasure in
that.1Reading about it, sir. I bought a book on the subject and Ive been
studying it.01A book for Registered Programmers?01Yes, sir.01But you
couldnt understand it.0202491 The doctor pulled at the loose skin under
his chin. What was your idea in doing that, son?01I wanted to make sure
I would be interested, sir.01Surely you know that being interested means
nothing. You could be devoured by a subject and if the physical makeup
of your brain makes it more efficient for you to be something else,
something else you will be. You know that, dont you?01Ive been told
that,said George cautiously.01Well, believe it. Its true.0George said
nothing.1 Dr. Antonelli said, Or do you believe that studying some
subject will bend the brain cells in that direction, like that other
theory that a pregnant woman need only listen to great music
persistently to make a composer of her child. Do you believe
that?0George flushed. That had certainly been in his mind. By forcing
his intellect constantly in the desired direction, he had felt sure that
he would be getting a head start. Most of his confidence had rested on
exactly that point.1I neverhe began, and found no way of
finishing.01Well, it isnt true. Good Lord, youngster, your brain pattern
is fixed at birth. It can be altered by a blow hard enough to damage the
cells or by a burst blood vessel or by a tumor or by a major
infectioneach time, of course, for the worse. But it certainly cant be
affected by your thinking special thoughts.He stared at George
thoughtfully, then said, Who told you to do this?01 George, now
thoroughly disturbed, swallowed and said, No one, doctor. My own
idea.01Who knew you were doing it after you started?01No one. Doctor, I
meant to do no wrong.01Who said anything about wrong? Useless is what I
would say. Why did you keep it to yourself?01II thought theyd laugh at
me.(He thought abruptly of a recent exchange with Trevelyan. George had
very cautiously broached the thought, as of something merely circulating
distantly in the very outermost reaches of his mind, concerning the
possibility of learning something by ladling it into the mind by hand,
so to speak, in bits and pieces. Trevelyan had hooted, George, youll be
tanning your own shoes next and weaving your own shirts.He had been
thankful for his policy of secrecy.)01 Dr. Antonelli shoved the bits of
film he had first looked at from position to position in morose thought.
Then he said, Lets get you analyzed. This is getting me nowhere.020122
The wires went to Georges temples. There was the buzzing. Again there
came a sharp memory of ten years ago.01 Georges hands were clammy; his
heart pounded. He should never have told the doctor about his secret
reading.0It was his damned vanity, he told himself. He had wanted to
show how enterprising he was, how full of initiative. Instead, he had
showed himself superstitious and ignorant and aroused the hostility of
the doctor. (He could tell the doctor hated him for a wise guy on the
make.)And now he had brought himself to such a state of nervousness, he
was sure the analyzer would show nothing that made sense.1 He wasnt
aware of the moment when the wires were removed from his temples. The
sight of the doctor, staring at him thoughtfully, blinked into his
consciousness and that was that; the wires were gone. George dragged
himself together with a tearing effort. He had quite given up his
ambition to be a Programmer. In the space of ten minutes, it had all
gone.01 He said dismally, I suppose no?01No what?01No Programmer?01 The
doctor rubbed his nose and said, You get your clothes and whatever
belongs to you and go to room 0 15-C. 01 Your files will be waiting for
you there. So will my report.01 George said in complete surprise, Have I
been Educated already? I thought this was just to01 Dr. Antonelli stared
down at his desk. It will all be explained to you. You do as I say.01
George felt something like panic. What was it they couldnt tell him? He
wasnt fit for anything but Registered Laborer. They were going to
prepare him for that; adjust him to it.0He was suddenly certain of it
and he had to keep from screaming by main force.He stumbled back to his
place of waiting. Trevelyan was not there, a fact for which he would
have been thankful if he had had enough self-possession to be
meaningfully aware of his surroundings. Hardly anyone was left, in fact,
and the few who were looked as though they might ask him questions were
it not that they were too worn out by their tail-of-the-alphabet waiting
to buck the fierce, hot look of anger and hate he cast at them.What
right had they 0 to be technicians and he, himself, a Laborer? Laborer!
He was certain!249He hated them all just then: the Statisticians, the
Accountants, the lesser20249A door sucked into its recess on the other
side of a waist-high partition and an elderly, white-haired man stepped
out. He smiled and showed even teeth that were obviously false, but his
face was still ruddy and unlined and his voice had vigor.1 He said, Good
evening, George. Our own sector has only one of you this time, I
see.01Only one?said George blanidy.01Thousands over the Earth, of
course. Thousands. Youre not alone.01 George felt exasperated. He said,
I dont understand, sir. Whats my classification? Whats happening?01Easy,
son. Youre all right. It could happen to anyone.He held out his hand and
George took it mechanically. It was warm and it pressed Georges hand
firmly. Sit down, son. Im Sam Ellenford.01 George nodded impatiently. I
want to know whats going on, sir.01Of course. To begin with, you cant be
a Computer Programmer, George. Youve guessed that, I think.01Yes, I
have,said George bitterly. What will I be, then?01Thats the hard part to
explain, George.He paused, then said with careful distinctness,
Nothing.02722721What!02491But what does that mean? Why cant you assign
me a profession?01We have no choice in the matter, George. Its the
structure of your mind that decides that.01 George went a sallow yellow.
His eyes bulged. Theres something wrong with my mind?01Theres 0
something 01 about it. As far as professional classification is
concerned, I suppose you can call it wrong.01But why?01 Ellenford
shrugged. Im sure you know how Earth runs its Educational program,
George. Practically any human being can absorb practically any body of
knowledge, but each individual brain pattern is better suited to
receiving some types of knowledge than others. We try to match mind to
knowledge as well as we can within the limits of the quota requirements
for each profession.01 George nodded. Yes, Iknow.01Every once in awhile,
George, we come up against a young man whose mind is not suited to
receiving a superimposed knowledge of any sort.01You mean I cant be
Educated?0202491But thats crazy. Im intelligent. I can understandHe
looked helplessly about as though trying to find some way of proving
that he had a functioning brain.02491You mean I cant even be a
Registered Laborer?babbled George. Suddenly even that was better than
the blank that faced him. Whats there to know to be a Laborer?01Dont
underestimate the Laborer, young man. There are dozens of
subclassifications and each variety has its own corpus of fairly
detailed knowledge. Do you think theres no skill in knowing the proper
maimer of lifting a weight? Besides, for the Laborer, we must select not
only minds suited to it, but bodies as well. Youre not the type, George,
to last long as a Laborer.02491There arent many,conceded Ellenford. And
we protect them.01Protect them?George felt confusion and fright grow
higher in-side him.01Youre a ward of the planet, George. From the time
you walked through that door, weve been in charge of you.And he
smiled.0It was a fond smile. To George it seemed the smile of ownership;
the smile of a grown man for a helpless child.1 He said, You mean, Im
going to be in prison?01Of course not. You will simply be with others of
your kind.0Your kind. 01 The words made a kind of thunder in Georges
ear.01 Ellenford said, You need special treatment. Well take care of
you.01 To Georges own horror, he burst into tears. Ellenford walked to
the other end of the room and faced away as though in
thought.02492491Cant you try Educating me? You havent even tried. Im
willing to take the risk.01The law forbids us to do that, George. But
look, it will not be bad. We will explain matters to your family so they
will not be hurt. At the place to0202491Yet I understand youve already
been studying books.01 George froze. He was struck devastatingly by
sudden understanding. Thats 3 it. 48 .522Whats it?35That fellow
Antonelli. Hes knifing me.35No, George. Youre 1 quite wrong.01Dont tell
me that.George was in an ecstasy of fury. That lousy bastard is selling
me out because he thought I was a little too wise for him. I read books
and tried to get a head start toward programming. Well, what do you want
to square things? Money? You wont get it. Im getting out of here and
when I finish broadcasting this0He was screaming.Ellenford shook his
head and touched a contact.Two men entered on catfeet and got on either
side of George. They pinned his arms to his sides. One of them used an
air-spray hypodennic in the hollow of his right elbow and the hypnotic
entered his vein and had an almost immediate effect.His screams cut off
and his head fell forward. His knees buckled and only the men on either
side kept him erect as he slept.249They told him that he should sit up
and take some interest in life; and then told him that most people who
came there had the same attitude of despair at the beginning and that he
would snap out of it.1 He didnt even hear them.0Dr. Ellenford himself
visited him to tell him that his parents had been informed that he was
away on special assignment.1 George muttered, Do they know01 Ellenford
assured him at once, We gave no details.0At first George had refused to
eat. They fed him intravenously. They hid sharp objects and kept him
under guard. Hali Omani came to be his roommate and his stolidity had a
calming effect.One day, out of sheer desperate boredom, George asked for
a book. Omani, who himself read books constantly, looked up, smiling
broadly. George almost withdrew the request then, rather than give any
of them satisfaction, then thought: What do I care?1 He didnt specify
the book and Omani brought one on chemistry. It was in big print, with
small words and many illustrations. It was for teen-agers. He threw the
book violently against the wall.020122 Thats what he would be always. A
teen-ager all his life. A pre-Educate forever and special books would
have to be written for him. He lay smoldering in bed, staring at the
ceiling, and after an hour had passed, he got up sulkily, picked up the
book, and began reading.02491Do you want to take the first one 5 back?0
asked Omani.George frowned. There were things in the book he had not
understood, yet he was not so lost to shame as to say so.1 But Omani
said, Come to think of it, youd better keep it. Books are meant to be
read and reread.01 It was that same day that he finally yielded to
Omanis invitation that he tour the place. He dogged at the Nigerians
feet and took in his surroundings with quick hostile glances.0The place
was no prison certainly. There were no walls, no locked doors, no
guards. But it was a prison in that the inmates had no place to go
outside.1 It was somehow good to see others like himself by the dozen.
It was so easy to believe himself to be the only one in the world
somaimed.01 He mumbled, How many people here anyway?01Two hundred and
five, George, and this isnt the only place of the sort in the world.
There are thousands.0Men looked up as he passed, wherever he went; in
the gymnasium, along the tennis courts; through the library (he had
never in his life imagined books could exist in such numbers; they were
stacked, actually stacked, along long shelves). They stared at him
curiously and he returned the looks savagely. At least they 0 were no
better than he; no call for them 0 to look at him as though he were some
sort of curiosity.1 Most of them were in their twenties. George said
suddenly, What happens to the older ones?01 Omani said, This place
specializes in the younger ones.Then, as though he suddenly recognized
an implication in Georges question that he had missed earlier, he shook
his head gravely and said, Theyre not put out of the way, if thats what
you mean. There are other Houses for older ones.01Who cares?mumbled
George, who felt he was sounding too in0-terested and in danger of
slipping into surrender.1You might. As you grow older, you will find
yourself in a House with Occupants of both sexes.01 That surprised
George somehow. Women, too?01Of course. Do you suppose women are immune
to this sort of thing?01 George thought of that with more interest and
excitement than he had felt for anything since before that day whenHe
forced his thought away from that.0249202491The young men in there are
being educated. Not,he added, quickly, in the usual way.01You mean
theyre cramming it in bit by bit.01Thats right. This is the way everyone
did it in ancient times.0This was what they kept telling him since he
had come to the House but what of it? Suppose there had been a day when
mankind had not known the diatherm-oven. Did that mean he should be
satisfied to eat meat raw in a world where others ate it cooked?1 He
said, Why do they want to go through that bit-by-bit stuff?01To pass the
time, George, and because theyre curious.01What good does it do
them?01It makes them happier.0George carried that thought to bed with
him.1 The next day he said to Omani ungraciously, Can you get me into a
classroom where I can find out something about programming?01 Omarn
replied heartily, Sure.0249Over and over again, he gave up. Once he
refused to attend classes for a week.But always he returned. The
official in charge, who assigned reading, conducted the television
demonstrations, and even explained difficult pas-sages and concepts,
never commented on the matter.1 George was finally given a regular task
in the gardens and took his turn in the various kitchen and cleaning
details. This was represented to him as being an advance, but he wasnt
fooled. The place might have been far more mechanized than it was, but
they deliberately made work for the young men in order to give them the
illusion of worthwhile occupation, of usefulness. George wasnt
fooled.0They were even paid small sums of money out of which they could
buy certain specified luxuries or which they could put aside for a
problematical use in a problematical old age. George kept his money in
an open jar, which he kept on a closet shelf. He had no idea how much he
had accumulated. Nor did he care.He made no real friends though he
reached the stage where a civil good day was in order. He even stopped
brooding (or almost stopped) on the miscarriage of justice that had
placed him there. He would go weeks without dreaming of Antonelli, of
his gross nose and wattled neck, of the leer with which he would push
George into a boiling quicksand and hold him under, till he woke
screaming with Omani bending over him in concern.20122 Omani said to him
on a snowy day in February, Its amazing how youre adjusting.01 But that
was February, the thirteenth to be exact, his nineteenth birthday. March
came, then April, and with the approach of May he realized he hadnt
adjusted at all.0The previous May had passed unregarded while George was
still in his bed, drooping and ambitionless. This May was different.All
over Earth, George knew, Olympics would be taking place and young men
would be competing, matching their skills against one another in the
fight for a place on a new world. There would be the holiday atmosphere,
the excitement, the news reports, the self-contained recruiting agents
from the worlds beyond space, the glory of victory or the consola-tions
of defeat.2492491 Omani gazed fixedly at George and said distinctly, A
House for the Feeble-minded.02491 He rejected it desperately. He said in
a monotone, Im leaving.0He said it on impulse. His conscious mind
learned it first from the statement as he uttered it.1 Omani, who had
returned to his book, looked up. What?01 George knew what he was saying
now. He said it fiercely, Im leaving.01Thats ridiculous. Sit down,
George, calm yourself.01Oh, no. Im here on a frame-up, I tell you. This
doctor, Antonelli, took a dislike to me. Its the sense of power these
petty bureaucrats have. Cross them and they wipe out your life with a
stylus mark on some card file.01Are you back to that?01And staying there
till its all straightened out. Im going to get to Antonelli somehow,
break him, force the truth out of him.George was breathing heavily and
he felt feverish. Olympics month was here and he couldnt let it pass. If
he did, it would be the final surrender and he would be lost for all
time.01 Omani threw his legs over the side of his bed and stood up. He
was nearly six feet tall and the expression on his face gave him the
look of a concerned Saint Bernard. He put his arm about Georges
shoulder, If I hurt your feelings020522 George shrugged him off. You
just said what you thought 0 was 3 the truth, 1 and Im going to prove it
isnt the truth, thats all. Why not? The doors open. There arent any 5
locks. No one ever said I couldnt leave. Ill just 1 walk out.01All
right, but where will you go?01To the nearest air terminal, then to the
nearest Olympics center. Ive got money.He seized the open jar that held
the wages he had put away. Some of the coins jangled to the floor.01That
will last you a week maybe. Then what?01By then Ill have things
settled.01By then youll come crawling back here,said Omani earnestly,
with all the progress youve made to do over again. Youre mad,
George.01Feeble-minded is the word you used before.01Well, Im sorry I
did. Stay here, will you?01Are you going to try to stop me?01 Omani
compressed his full lips. No, I guess I wont. This is your business. If
the only way you can learn is to buck the world and come back with blood
on your face, go ahead.Well, go ahead.01 George was in the doorway now,
looking back over his shoulder. Im going,he came back to pick up his
pocket grooming set slowlyI hope you dont object to my taking a few
personal belongings.0Omani shrugged. He was in bed again reading,
indifferent.1 George lingered at the door again, but Omani didnt look
up. George gritted his teeth, turned and walked rapidly down the empty
corridor and out into the night-shrouded grounds.01 He had expected to
be stopped before leaving the grounds. He wasnt. He 3 had stopped at an
all-night diner to 0 ask directions to an air terminal 3 and expected
the 1 proprietor to call the police. That didnt happen. He sum0-moned a
skimmer to take him to the airport and the driver asked no questions.Yet
he felt no lift at that. He arrived at the airport sick at heart. 3 He
had not 0 realized how the outer world would be. He was surrounded by
profession-1 als. The diners proprietor had had his name inscribed on
the plastic shell 3 over the cash register. So 0 and 3 so, Registered
Cook. The man in the 0 skimmer had his license up, Registered Chauffeur.
George felt the bareness of his 3 name 0 and 3 experienced a 0 kind 3 of
nakedness because of it; worse, he felt 0 skinned. But no one challenged
him. No one studied him suspiciously and demanded proof of professional
rating.George thought bitterly: Who would imagine any human being
with-out one?He bought a ticket to San Francisco on the 3 18 A.M. 22
plane. No other plane for a sizable Olympics center was leaving before
morning and he wanted to wait as little as possible. As it was, he sat
huddled in the waiting room, watching for the police. They did not
come.He was in San Francisco before noon and the noise of the city
struck him20249The Olympics boards were up at the airport for the
benefit of the incoming travelers, and crowds jostled around each one.
Each major profession had its own board. Each listed directions to the
Olympics Hall where the contest for that day for that profession would
be given; the indi-viduals competing and their city of birth; the
Outworld (if any) sponsoring it.It was a completely stylized thing.
George had read descriptions often enough in the newspnnts and films,
watched matches on television, and even witnessed a small Olympics in
the Registered Butcher classification at the county seat. Even that,
which had no conceivable Galactic implication (there was no Outworlder
in attendance, of course) aroused excitement enough.Partly, the
excitement was caused simply by the fact of competition, partly by the
spur of local pride (oh, when there was a home-town boy to cheer for,
though he might be a complete stranger), and, of course, partly by
betting. There was no way of stopping the last.George found it difficult
to approach the board. He found himself looking at the scurrying, avid
onlookers in a new way.There must have been a time when they themselves
were Olympic material. What had they 0 done? Nothing!If they had been
winners, they would be far out in the Galaxy some-where, not stuck here
on Earth. Whatever they were, their professions must have made them
Earth-bait from the beginning; or else they had made themselves
Earth-bait by inefficiency at whatever high-specialized profes-sions
they had had.Now these failures stood about and speculated on the
chances of newer and younger men. Vultures!How he wished they were
speculating on him.1 He moved down the line of boards blanidy, clinging
to the outskirts of the groups about them. He had eaten breakfast on the
strato and he wasnt hungry. He was afraid, though. He was in abig city
during the confusion of the beginning of Olympics competition. That was
protection, sure. The city was full of strangers. No one would question
George. No one would care about George.0No one would care. Not even the
House, thought George bitterly. They cared for him like a sick kitten,
but if a sick kitten up and wanders off, well, too bad, what can you
do?And now that he was in San Francisco, what did he do? His thoughts
struck blankly against a wall. See someone? Whom? How? Where would he
even stay? The money he had left seemed pitiful.The first shamefaced
thought of going back came to him. He could go to202492492491 It was as
though the board had answered his thought. He was thinking Trevelyanso
hard that it had seemed for a moment that of course the board would say
Trevelyanback at him.0But that was 0 Trevelyan, up there. And Armand 01
Trevelyan (Stubbys hated first name; up in lights for everyone to see)
and the right hometown. Whats more, Trev had wanted Novia, aimed for
Novia, insisted on Novia; and this competition was sponsored by
Novia.0This had to be Trev; good old Trev. Almost without thinking, he
noted the directions for getting to the place of competition and took
his place in line for a skimmer.Then he thought somberly: Trev made it.
He wanted to be a Metallurgist, and he made it!George felt colder, more
alone than ever.249249249202493 There was the 0 touch of two 3 fingers
on the elbow of his jacket 0 and 3 he looked about furtively.The 0 man 3
behind him nodded cheerfully. He had iron-gray hair, and under his
jacket he 0 wore an old-fashioned sweater that buttoned down in front.
He said, 5I 1 didnt mean to sound 5 sarcastic.35No offense.31All right,
then.He sounded cozily talkative. I wasnt sure you might not simply be
standing there, entangled with the line, so to speak, only by accident.
I thought you might be a01A what?said George sharply.01Why, a
contestant, of course. You look young.0George turned away. He felt
neither cozy nor talkative, and bitterly impatient with busybodies.A
thought struck him. Had an alarm been sent out for him? Was his
description known, or his picture? Was Gray-hair behind him trying to
get a good look at his face?1 He hadnt seen any news reports. He craned
his neck to see the moving strip of news headlines parading across one
section of the city shield, somewhat lackluster against the gray of the
cloudy afternoon sky. It was no use. He gave up at once. The headlines
would never concern themselves with him. This was Olympics time and the
only news worth headlining was the comparative scores of the winners and
the trophies won by continents, nations, and cities.0It would go on like
that for weeks, with scores calculated on a per capita basis and every
city finding some way of calculating itself into a position of honor.
His own town had once placed third in an Olympics covering Wiring
Technician; third in the whole state. There was still a plaque saying so
in Town Hall.249249Gray-hair, beyond a brief and tentative smile, paid
no attention to him and, besides, the Olympics was about to start.
George rose in his seat to see 18 if 22 he could make out the position
assigned to Trevelyan and at the moment that was all his
concern.24920249Still, that was Trev.George sank back in his seat. He
wondered if Trev would do well. He hoped, as a matter of conscious duty,
that he would, and yet there was something within him that felt
rebelliously resentful. George, profession-less, here, watching.
Trevelyan, Registered Metallurgist, Nonferrous, there, competing.1
George wondered if Trevelyan had competed in his first year. Sometimes
men did, if they felt particularly confidentor hurried. It involved a
certain risk. However efficient the Educative process, a preliminary
year on Earth (oiling the stiff knowledge,as the expression went)
insured a higher score.01 If Trevelyan was repeating, maybe he wasnt
doing so well. George felt ashamed that the thought pleased him just a
bit.01 He looked about. The stands were almost full. This would be a
well-attended Olympics, which meant greater strain on the contestantsor
greater drive, perhaps, depending on the individual.0Why Olympics, he
thought suddenly? He had never known. Why was bread called bread?1 Once
he had asked his father: Why do they call it Olympics, Dad?01 And his
father had said: Olympics means competition.01 George had said: Is when
Stubby and I fight an Olympics, Dad?01 Platen, Senior, had said: No.
Olympics is a special kind of competition and dont ask silly questions.
Youll know all you have to know when you 5 get Educated.30 George, back
in the present, sighed and crowded down into his seat.All you have to
know!1 Funny that the memory should be so clear now. When you get Edu0-1
cated.No one ever said, If 0 you get Educated.0He always had asked silly
questions, it seemed to him now. It was as though his mind had some
instinctive foreknowledge of its inability to be Educated and had gone
about asking questions in order to pick up scraps here and there as best
it could.1 And at the House they encouraged him to do so because they
agreed with his minds instinct. It was the only way.02022 He sat up
suddenly. What the devil was he doing? Falling for that lie? Was it
because Trev was there before him, an Educee, competing in the Olympics
that he himself was surrendering?He 1 wasnt 00 feeble-minded! No!01 And
the shout of denial in his mnd was echoed b5the sudden clamor in the
audience as everyone got to his feet.01 The box seat in the very center
of one long side of the oval was filling with an entourage wearing the
colors of Novia, and the word Noviawent up above them on the main
board.0Novia was a Grade A world with a large population and a
thoroughly developed civilization, perhaps the best in the Galaxy. It
was the kind of world that every Earthman wanted to live in someday; or,
failing that, to see 5 his children live in. (George remembered
Trevelyans insistence on Novia 1 as a goaland there he was competing for
it.)03 The lights went out in that section of the ceiling above the
audience 0 and so did the wall lights. The central trough, in 3 which
the contestants 0 waited, became floodlit.Again George tried to make out
Trevelyan. Too far.1 The clear, polished voice of the announced sounded.
Distinguished Novian sponsors. Ladies. Gentlemen. The Olympics
competition for Met0-1 allurgist, Nonferrous, is about to begin. The
contestants are0Carefully and conscientiously, he read off the list in
the program. 3 Names. Home towns. Educative 1 years. Each name received
its cheers, the San Franciscans among them receiving the loudest. When
Trevelyans name was reached, George surprised himself by shouting and
waving madly. The gray-haired man next to him surprised him even more by
cheering likewise.01 George could not help but stare in astonishment and
his neighbor leaned over to say (speaking loudly in order to be heard
over the hubbub), No one here from my home town; Ill root for yours.
Someone you know?01 George shrank back. No.01I noticed you looking in
that direction. Would you like to borrow my 5 glasses?31No. Thank
you.(Why didnt the old fool mind his own business?)0The announcer went
on with other formal details concerning the serial number of the
competition, the method of timing and scoring and so on. Finally, he
approached the meat of the matter and the audience grew silent as it
listened.1Each contestant will be supplied with a bar of nonferrous
alloy of unspecified composition. He will be required to sample and
assay the bar, reporting all results correctly to four decimals in
percent. All will utilize for this purpose a Beeman Microspectrograph,
Model FX-2, each of which is, at the moment, not in working
order.02491Each contestant will be required to analyze the fault of his
machine and correct it. Tools and spare parts are supplied. The spare
part necessary may0202491Are all contestants ready?0The boards remained
blank.1Any questions?0Still blank.1You may begin.0249George watched as
eagerly as the rest, glancing from one contestant to the next, observing
how this one had removed the cover from his ml-crospectrograph with deft
strokes of a small instrument; how that one was peering into the face of
the thing; how still a third was setting his alloy bar into its holder;
and how a fourth adjusted a vernier with such small touches that he
seemed momentarily frozen.Trevelyan was as absorbed as the rest. George
had no way of telling how he was doing.The notice board over Contestant
Seventeen flashed: Focus plate out of adjustment.The audience cheered
wildly.Contestant Seventeen might be right and he might, of course, be
wrong. If the latter, he would have to correct his diagnosis later and
lose time. Or he might never correct his diagnosis and be unable to
complete his analysis or, worse still, end with a completely wrong
analysis.Never mind. For the moment, the audience cheered.1 Other boards
lit up. George watched for Board Twelve. That came on finally: Sample
holder off-center. New clamp depresser needed.0An attendant went running
to him with a new part. If Trevelyan was wrong, it would mean useless
delay. Nor would the time elapsed in waiting for the part be deducted.
George found himself holding his breath.Results were beginning to go up
on Board Seventeen, in gleaming letters:-249249249George wondered how
the contestants could work in such pandemo-202491 Trevelyan was still
working, the n'eeinor constituents of his alloy bar still unreported.
With nearly all contestants standing, Trevelyan finally rose, also.
Then, tailing off, Five rose, and received an ironic cheer.01 It wasnt
over. Official announcements were naturally delayed. Time elapsed was
something, but accuracy was just as important. And not all diagnoses
were of equal difficulty. A dozen factors had to be weighed.01 Finally,
the announcers voice sounded, Wmner in the time of four minutes and
twelve seconds, diagnosis correct, analysis correct within an average of
zero point seven parts per hundred thousand, Contestant Num0-1
berSeventeen, Henry Anton Schmidt of0What followed was drowned in the
screaming. Number Eight was next and 3 then Four, whose 0 good time was
spoiled by a five part in ten thousand 3 error in the niobium figure.
Twelve was never 0 mentioned. He was an 3 also-ran.5 George made his way
through the crowd to the ContestantsDoor and found a large clot of
humanity ahead of him. There would be weeping relatives (joy or sorrow,
depending) to greet them, newsmen to 0 interview 3 the top-scorers, or
the home-town boys, 0 autograph hounds, publicity seek-ers and the just
plain curious. Girls, too, who might hope to catch the eye of a
top-scorer, almost certainly headed for Novia (or perhaps a low-scorer
who needed cnosolation and had the 3 cash to afford 018 it).22 George
hung back. He saw no one he knew. With San Francisco so far from home,
it seemed pretty safe to assume that there would be no relatives to
condole with Trev on the spot.Contestants emerged, smiling wealdy,
nodding at shouts of approval. Policemen kept the crowds far enough away
to allow a lane for walking. 3 Each high-scorer drew a portion of the
crowd off with him, like a magnet pushing through a mound of iron
filings.When Trevelyan walked out, scarcely anyone 0 was 3 left. (George
felt 0 somehow that he had delayed coming out until just that had come
to pass.) 3 There 0 was a cigarette in his dour mouth and 3 he 0 turned,
3 eyes downcast, to 0 walk off.3 It 0 was 3 the first hint of home
George had had in what 0 was almost 3 a year and a half and seemed
almost a decade 0 and 3 a half. He 0 was 3 almost 0 amazed 5 that
Trevelyan hadnt aged, that he was the same Trev he had last seen.3George
sprang forward. 1Trev!003 Trevelyan spun about, astonished. He stared at
George 0 and 3 then 0 his 5 hand shot out. George Platen, 0 what 0 the 5
devil3And almost as soon as the look of 0 pleasure had crossed his 3
face, it left. His hand dropped before George had quite the chance of
seizing it.5Were you in there?A curt jerk of Trev0 s head indicated the
hail.20122I was.01To see me?01Yes.01Didnt do so well, did I?He dropped
his cigarette and stepped on it, staring off to the street, where the
emerging crowd was slowly eddying and finding its way into skimmers,
while new lines were forming for the next scheduled Olympics.01
Trevelyan said heavily, So what? Its only the second time I missed.
Novia can go shove after the deal I got today. There are planets that
would jump at me fast enoughBut, listen, I 5 havent seen you since
Education 1 Day. Where did you go? Your folks said you were on special
assignment but gave no details and you never wrote. You might have
written.01I should have,said George uneasily. Anyway, I came to say I
was sorry the way things went just now.01Dont be,said Trevelyan. I told
you. Novia can go shoveAt that I should have known. Theyve been saying
for weeks that the Beeman machine would be used. All the wise money was
on Beeman machines. The damned Education tapes they ran through me were
for Henslers and who uses Henslers? The worlds in the Goman Cluster if
you want to call them worlds. Wasnt 0 that 01 a nice deal they gave
me?01Cant you complain to01Dont be a fool. Theyll tell me my brain was
built for Henslers. Go argue. 0 Everything 01 went wrong. I was the only
one who had to send out for a piece of equipment. Notice that?01They
deducted the time for that, though.01Sure, but I lost time wondering if
I could be right in my diagnosis when I noticed there wasnt any clamp
depressor in the parts they had supplied. They dont deduct for that. If
it had been a Hensler, I would have 0 known 0 I was right. How could I
match up then? The top winner was a San Francis-can. So were three of
the next four. And the fifth guy was from Los Angeles. They get big-city
Educational tapes. The best available. Beeman spectrographs and all. How
do I compete with them? I came all the way out 3 here just to get a
chance at a Novian-sponsored 0 Olympics 3 in my classifica-tion 0 and 3
I might just as well have stayed home. I knew 0 it, I tell you, and 3
that 1 settles it. Novia isnt the only chunk of rock in space. Of all
the damned01 He wasnt speaking to George. He wasnt speaking to anyone.
He was just uncorked and frothing. George realized that.01 George said,
If you knew in advance that the Beemans were going to be used, couldnt
you have studied up on them?01They werent in my tapes, I tell you.01You
could have readbooks.01 The last word had trailed off under Trevelyans
suddenly sharp look.01 Trevelyan said, Are you trying to make a big
laugh out of this? You think this is funny? How do you expect me to read
some book and try to memorize enough to match someone else who
knows.0020122I thought05You try it. You 1 tryThen, 5 suddenly, Whats
your profession, by the way?He sounded thoroughly hostile.35Well35Come
on, now. If youre 0 going to 5 be a wise gu~ with me, lets see what
youve done. Youre 0 still on Earth, 3 I notice, so 1 youre not a
Computer 3 Programmer 1 and your special assignment cant be much.01
George said, Listen, Trev. Im late for an appointment.He backed away,
trying to smile.01No, you dont.Trevelyan reached out fiercely, catching
hold of Georges jacket. You answer my question. Why are you afraid to
tell me? What is 020 it 122 with you? Dont come here rubbing a bad
showing in my face, George, unless you can take it, too. Do you hear
me?01 He was shaking George in frenzy and they were struggling and
swaying across the floor, when the Voice of Doom struck Georges ear in
the form of a policemans outraged call.01All right now. All right. Break
it up.01 Georges heart turned to lead and lurched sickeningly. The
policeman would be taking names, asking to see identity cards, and
George lacked 3 one. He would be questioned 0 and 3 his lack of
profession would show at once; 0 and before Trevelyan, too, who ached
with the pain of the drubbing he had taken and would spread the news
back home as a salve for his own hurt feelings.1 George couldnt stand
that. He broke away from Trevelyan and made to run, but the policemans
heavy hand was on his shoulder. Hold on, there. Lets see your identity
card.01 Trevelyan was fumbling for his, saying harshly. Im Annand
Treve0-lyan, Metallurgist, Nonferrous. I was just competing in the
Olympics. You better find out 3 about him, 1 though, officer.0George
faced the two, lips dry and throat thickened past speech.1 Another voice
sounded, quiet, well-mannered. Officer. One moment.01 The policeman
stepped back. Yes, sir?01This young man is my guest. What is the
trouble?0George looked about in wild surprise. It was 20 the 22
gray-haired man who had been sitting next to him. Gray-hair nodded
benignly at George.Guest? Was he mad?1 The policeman was saying, These
two were creating a disturbance, sir.01Any criminal charges? Any
damages?01No, sir.01Well, then, Ill 020 be 122 responsible.He presented
a small card to the policemans view and the latter stepped back at
once.01 Trevelyan began indignantly. Hold on, nowbut the policeman 3
turned on him.5All right now. Got 0 any 5 charges?30202495On your way.
The 1 rest of youmove on.A sizable crowd had gathered, which now,
reluctantly, unknotted itself and raveled away.05 George let himself be
led to a skimmer but balked at entering. He said, Thank you, but Im not
your guest.(Could it be a ridiculous case of mistaken identity?)3But
Gray-hair smiled 0 and 5 said, You werent but you are now. 0 Let 5 me
introduce myself, Im Ladislas Ingenescu, Registered
Historian.35But35Come, you will come to no harm, 0 I 03 assure you.
After all, I only wanted to spare you some trouble with a 1
policeman.05But why?35Do you want 1 a reason? Well, then, say that were
honorary towns-3 mates, you 0 and 3 I. We both shouted for the same man,
remember, 0 and 5 we townspeople must stick together, even if the tie is
only honorary. Eh?3And George, completely unsure of this man, Ingenescu,
0 and 3 of himself as well, found himself inside the skimmer. Before he
could make up his mind that he ought to get off again, they were off the
ground.He thought confusedly: The man has some status. The 0 policeman
de-ferred to him.He was almost forgetting that his real purpose here in
San 20 Francisco was 322 not to find Trevelyan but to find some person
with enough influence to force 0 a reappraisal of his own capacity of
Education.5 It could be that Ingenescu was such a man. And right in
Georges lap. Everything could be working out finefine. Yet 0 it sounded
hollow in 3 his 0 thought. He was uneasy.2493 Would they head for one of
the 0 shield-openings and leave the city 3 altogether?No, they headed
downward, and George sighed his relief softly. He felt safer in the
city.The skimmer landed at 0 the roof-entry of a hotel and, 3 as he
alighted, 1 Ingenescu said, I hope youll eat dinner with me in my
room?05 George said, Yes,0 and grinned 3 unaffectedly. He was just 0
beginning to 3 realize the gap left within 0 him 3 by missing
lunch.Ingenescu let George eat in silence. Night closed in 0 and 3 the
wall lights went on 0 automatically. (George thought: 5 Ive been on my
own almost 0 twenty-four hours.)3 And then over the coffee, Ingenescu
finally spoke again. He said, 1Youve been acting as though 3 you think 1
I intend you harm.03 George reddened, put down his cup 0 and tried 3 to
deny it, but the older 0 man 3 laughed 0 and 3 shook his
head.020249George half rose in horror.5 Ingenescu said, But sit down. I
only want to help you.3George sat down but his thoughts were in a whirl.
If the old 0 man 3 knew who he was, why had he not left him to the
policeman? On the other hand, why should he volunteer help?5 Ingenescu
said, You want to know why I should want to help you? Oh, dont look
alarmed. I cant read minds. Its just that my 0 training 3 enables me to
judge the little 0 reactions that give minds away, you see. Do you
under-1 stand that?03 George shook his head.1 Ingenescu said, Consider
my first sight of you. You were waiting in 3 line to watch an Olympics,
1 and your micro-reactions didnt match what you 3 were doing. The
expression of your face was wrong, the action of your hands was wrong.
It meant that something, in general, was wrong, 0 and 3 the interesting
thing was that, whatever it was, it was nothing common, nothing obvious.
Perhaps, I thought, it 0 was something 3 of which your own conscious
mind 0 was 3 unaware.5I couldnt help but follow you, sit next to you. I
followed you 0 again 3 when you left and 0 eavesdropped 3 on the
conversation between your friend 0 and 5 yourself. After that, well, you
were far too interesting an object of studyIm sorry if that sounds
cold-blooded----for me to allow you to be taken off by a policeman. Now
tell me, what is 0 it that troubles 5 you?30 George was in an agony of
indecision. If 3 this was a trap, why should it be such an indirect,
roundabout one? And he 0 had 03 to 0 turn to someone. He had 3 come to
the city to find help 0 and 3 here was help 0 being offered. Perhaps
what 3 was wrong was that it 0 was 3 being offered. It came 0 too 3
easy.0 Ingenescu 5 said, Of course, what you tell me 0 as a Social 3
Scientist is a 1 privileged communication. Do you know what that
means?05No, sir.31It means, it would be dishonorable 3 for me to repeat
what you say to 0 anyone for any purpose. Moreover no one has the legal
right to compel me 5 to repeat it.35 George said, with sudden suspicion,
I thought you were a Historian.35So lam.35Just now you said you were a
Social Scientist.30 Ingenescu broke into loud laughter and apologized
for 3 it when he could 1 talk. Im sorry, young man, I shouldnt laugh,
and I wasnt really laughing at you. I was laughing at Earth and its
emphasis on physical science, and the practical segments of it at that.
Ill bet you can rattle off every subdivision of construction technology
or mechanical engineering 3 and 1 yet youre a blank on social
science.05Well, then what 0 is 0 social 5 science?35Social science
studies groups of human beings 0 and 3 there are many0202491An
Economistnot an Economic Statistician, 3 now, but an 0 Econo-1
mistspecialized in the study of the way a culture supplies the bodily
needs of its individual members. A Psychologist specializes in the
indi0-vidual member of a society and how he is affected by the society.
A Futurist specializes in planning 3 the 0 future 3 course of a 1
society, and a Historian5 Thats where I come in, now.35Yes, sir.35A
Historian specializes in the past development of our own society and of
societies with other cultures.35 George found himself interested. Was it
different in the past?35I should say it was. Until a thousand years ago,
there was no Education, not what we call Education, at least.35 George
said, I know. People learned in bits 0 and 5 pieces out of books.35Why,
how do you know this?35Ive heard it said,George said cautiously. Then,
Is there any use in worrying about whats happened long ago? I mean, its
all done with, isnt it?31Its never done with, my boy. The past explains
the present. For instance, 5 why is our Educational system what it is?31
George stirred restlessly. The man kept bringing the subject back to
that. He said snappishly, Because its best.01Ah, but why is it best?Now
you listen to me for one moment and Ill explain. Then you can tell me if
there is any 5 use in history. Even before interstellar travel was
developedHe broke off at the look of complete 1 astonishment on Georges
face. Well, did you think we always had it?01I never gave it any
thought, sir.01Im sure you didnt. But there was a time, four or five
thousand years ago, when mankind was confined to the surface of Earth.
Even then, his 3 culture had grown quite technological 0 and his numbers
had increased to the point where any failure in technology would have
meant mass starvation and disease. To maintain the technological level
and advance it in the face of an increasing population, more and more
technicians and 3 scientists had 0 to be trained, and yet, as science
advanced, it took longer and longer to train them.1As first
interplanetary and then interstellar travel was developed, the problem
grew more acute. In fact, actual colonization of extra-Solar planets was
impossible for about fifteen hundred years because of a lack of properly
3 trained men.020122The turning point came when the mechanics of the
storage of knowl0-edge within the brain was worked out. Once that had
been done, it became possible to devise Educational tapes that would
modify the mechanics in such a way as to place within the mind a body of
knowledge ready-made so to speak. But you know about that.01Once that
was done, trained men could be turned out by the thousands and millions,
and we could begin what someone has since called the Filling of the
Universe.There are now fifteen hundred inhabited planets in the Galaxy
and there is no end in sight.01Do you see all 3 that is involved? 1
Earth exports Education tapes for low-specialized professions and that
keeps the Galactic culture unified. For instance, the Reading tapes
insure a single language for all of us. Dont look so surprised, other
languages are possible, and in the past were used. Hundreds of
them.01Earth also exports high-specialized professionals and keeps its
own population at an endurable level. Since they are shipped out in a
balanced sex ratio, they act as self-reproductive units and help
increase the popula0-tions on the Outworlds where an increase is needed.
Furthermore, tapes and men are paid for in material which we much need
and on which our economy depends. Now 01 do you understand why our
Education is the best way?05Yes, sir.31Does it help you to understand,
knowing that without it, interstellar colonization was impossible for
fifteen hundred yea~s?01Yes, sir.01Then you see the uses of history.The
Historian smiled. And now I wonder if you see why Im interested in
you?01 George snapped out of time and space back to reality. Ingenescu,
apparently, didnt talk aimlessly. All 3 this lecture had 0 been a device
to attack him from a new angle.1 He said, once again withdrawn,
hesitating, Why?01Social Scientists work with societies and societies
are made up of people.01All right.01But people arent machines. The
professionals in physical science work with machines. There is only a
limited amount to know about a machine and the professionals know it
all. Furthermore, all machines of a given sort are just about alike so
that there is nothing to interest them in any given individual machine.
But people, ahThey are so complex and so different one from another that
a Social Scientist never knows all there is to know or even a good part
of what there is to know. To understand his own specialty, he must
always be ready to study people; particularly unusual Specimens.01Like
me,said George tonelessly.01I shouldnt call you a specimen, I suppose,
but you are unusual. 5 Youre30202491 He said, Let me think,and clamped
his hands over his ears.01 He took them away and said to the Historian,
Will you do something for me, sir?01If I can,said the Historian
amiably.01And everything I say in this room is a privileged
communication. You said so.05And I meant it.31Then get me an interview
with an Outworld official, withwith a Novian.01 Ingenescu looked
startled. Well, now01You can do it,said George earnestly. Youre an
important official. I saw the policemans look when you put that card in
front of his eyes. If you refuse, II wont let you study me.01 It sounded
a silly threat in Georges own ears, one without force. On Ingenescu,
however, it seemed to have a strong effect.01 He said, Thats an
impossible condition. A Novian in Olympics month01All right, then, get
me a Novian on the phone and Ill make my own arrangements for an
interview.01Do you think you can?01I know I can. Wait and see.0Ingenescu
stared at George thoughtfully and then reached for the visi-phone.1
George waited, half drunk with his new outlook on the whole problem and
the sense of power it brought. It couldnt miss. It couldnt 00 miss. He
would be a Novian yet. He would leave Earth in triumph despite Antonelli
and the whole crew of fools at the House for the (he almost laughed
aloud) Feeble-minded.2491 There was a burst of laughter as the plate
unmisted and sharpened, but for the moment no single head could be seen
but rather the fast passing of the shadows of men and women, this way
and that. A voice was heard, clear-worded over a background of babble.
Ingenescu? He wants me?03 Then there he was, 0 staring out of the plate.
A Novian. A 3 genuine 0 Novian. (George had not an atom of doubt. There
was something completely202491 He was smiling. Ladislas, this goes too
far. We fully expect to be spied on, within reason, during our stay on
Earth, but mind reading is out of bounds.01Mind reading,
Honorable?05Confess! You knew 1 I was going to call this evening. You
knew I was only waiting to finish this drink.His hand moved up into view
and his eye peered through a small glass of a faintly violet liqueur. I
cant offer you one, Im afraid.02492492491 Ingenescu said soothingly,
Only for new models. There is never any certainty that new models will
be needed. To buy the Educational tapes would cost you the same price as
a thousand technicians and how do you know you would need that many?0The
Novian 3 tossed off what 0 remained of his drink and laughed. (It
displeased George, somehow, that a Novian should be this frivolous. He
wondered uneasily if perhaps the Novian ought not to have skipped that
drink and even the one or two before that.)1 The Novian said, Thats
typical pious fraud, Ladislas. You know we can make use of all the late
models we can get. I collected five Metallurgists this afternoon01I
know,said Ingenescu. I was there.020122Watching me! Spying!cried the
Novian. Ill tell you what it is. The new-model Metallurgists I got
differed from the previous model only in knowing the use of Beeman
Spectrographs. The tapes couldnt be modified that much, not that much(he
held up two fingers close together) from last years model. You introduce
the new models only to 0 make 01 us buy and spend and come here hat in
hand.01We dont 0 make 05 you buy.31No, but you sell late-model
technicians to Landonum and so we have to keep pace. Its a
merry-go-round you have us on, you pious Earthmen, but watch out, there
may be an exit somewhere.There was a sharp edge to his laugh, and it
ended sooner than it should have.01 Ingenescu said, In all honesty, I
hope there is. Meanwhile, as to the purpose of my call01Thats right, 0
you 01 called. Oh, well, Ive said my say and 0 1 01 suppose next year
therell be a new model of Metallurgist anyway for us to spend goods on,
probably with a new gimmick for niobium assays and nothing else altered
and the next yearBut go on, what is it you want?01I have a young man
here to whom I wish you to speak.01Oh?The Novian looked not completely
pleased with that. Concern0-1 ing what?01I cant say. He hasnt told me.
For that matter he hasnt even told me his name and profession.01 The
Novian frowned. Then why take up my time?01He seems quite confident that
you will be interested in what he has to say.01I dare say.01And,said
Ingenescu, as a favor to me.01 The Novian shrugged. Put him on and tell
him to make it short.01 Ingenescu stepped aside and whispered to George,
Address him as Honorable.0George swallowed with difficulty. This was
it.2491 George said, Honorable, Ive come to show you the exit from the
meny-go-round.Deliberately, he adopted the Novians own metaphor.01 The
Novian stared at him gravely. What merry-go-round?01You yourself
mentioned it, Honorable. The merry-go-round that Novia is on when you
come to Earth toto get technicians.(He couldnt keep his teeth from
chattering; from excitement, not fear.)01 The Novian said, Youre trying
to say that you know a way by which we can avoid patronizing Earths
mental supermarket. Is that it?020522Yes, sir. You 1 can control your
own Educational system.01Umm. Without 5 tapes?31Yyes, Honorable.01 The
Novian, without taking his eyes from George, called out, In0-1 genescu,
get into view.01 The Historian moved to where he could be seen over
Georges shoulder.01 The Novian said, What is this? I dont seem to
penetrate.01I assure you solenmly,said Ingenescu, that whatever this is
it is being done on the young mans own initiative, Honorable. I have not
inspired this. I have nothing to do with it.01Well, then, what is the
young man to you? Why do you call me on his behalf?01 Ingenescu said, He
is an object of study, Honorable. He has value to me and I humor
him.01What kind of value?01Its difficult to explain; a matter of my
profession.01 The Novian laughed shortly. Well, to each his
profession.He nodded to an invisible person or persons outside plate
range. Theres a young man here, a prot'e9g'e9 of Ingenescu or some such
thing, who will explain to us how to Educate without tapes.He snapped
his fingers, and another glass of pale liqueur appeared in his hand.
Well, young man?0The faces on the plate were multiple now. Men and
women, both, crammed in for a view of George, their faces molded into
various shades of amusement and curiosity.1 George tried to look
disdainful. They were all, in their own ways, Novians as well as the
Earthman, studyinghim as though he were a bug on a pin. Ingenescu was
sitting in a corner, now, watching him owl-eyed.0Fools, he thought
tensely, one and all. But they would have to under-stand. He would make
0 them understand.1 He said, I was at the Metallurgist Olympics this
afternoon.01You, too?said the Novian blandly. It seems all Earth was
there.01No, Honorable, but I was. I had a friend who competed and who
made out very badly because you were using the Beeman machines. His
educa0-1 tion had included only the Henslers, apparently an older model.
You said the modification involved was slight.George held up two fingers
close together in conscious mimicry of the others previous gesture. And
my friend had known some time in advance that knowledge of the Beeman
machines would be required.01And what does that signify?01It was my
friends lifelong ambition to qualify for Novia. He already knew the
Henslers. He had to know the Beemans to qualify and he knew that. To
learn about the Beemans would have taken just a few more facts, a bit
~more data, a small amount of practice perhaps. With a lifes ambition
nding the scale, he might have managed this01And where would he have
obtained a tape for the additional facts and0202491 George said, Thats
why he didnt learn, Honorable. He thought he needed a tape. He wouldnt
even try without one, no matter what the prize. He refused to try
without a tape.01Refused, eh? Probably the type of fellow who would
refuse to fly without a skimmer.More laughter and the Novian thawed into
a smile and said, The fellow is amusing. Go on. Ill give you another few
moments.05 George said tensely, Dont think this is a joke. Tapes 0 are 3
actually bad. 1 They teach too much; theyre too painless. A man who
learns that way doesnt know how to learn any other way. Hes frozen into
whatever position hes been taped. Now if a person werent 0 given tapes
but were forced to learn by hand, so to speak, from the start; why, then
hed get the habit of learning, and continue to learn. Isnt that
reasonable? Once he has the habit 3 well developed he 0 can be given
just a small amount of tape-knowledge, perhaps, to fill in gaps or fix
details. Then he can make further progress on his own. You can make
Beeman 3 Metallurgists out of your own 0 Hensler Metallurgists in that
way and 3 not have to come to 0 Earth for new 5 models.31 The Novian
nodded and sipped at his drink. And where does everyone 5 get knowledge
without tapes? From interstellar vacuum?31From books. By studying the
instruments 3 themselves. By 1 thinking.001Books? How does one
understand books without Education?0Books are in words. Words can be
understood for the most part. Spe-1 cialized words can be explained by
the technicians you already have.01What about reading? Will you allow
reading tapes?01Reading tapes are all right, I suppose, but theres no
reason you cant learn to read the old way, too. At least in part.01 The
Novian said, So that you can develop good habits from the start?01Yes,
yes,George said gleefully. The man was beginning to un0-derstand.1And
what about mathematics?01Thats the easiest of all, sirHonorable.
Mathematics is different from other technical subjects. It starts with
certain 3 simple principles and 1 proceeds by steps. You can start with
nothing and leam. Its practically designed for that. Then, once you know
the proper types of mathematics, other technical books 3 become 1 quite
understandable. Especially if you start with easy ones.01Are there easy
books?01Definitely. Even if there werent, the technicians you now have
can try to write easy books. Some of them might be able to put some of
their knowledge into words and symbols.01Good Lord,said the Novian to
the men clustered about him. The 3 young devil has an answer for 1
everything.01I have. I have,shouted George. Ask me.020249George turned
to look quickly at Ingenescu, but the Historian was passive. 3 There was
no sign of 0 anything but gentle interest in his face.5 George said, I
have.35And do you find it works?35Yes, Honorable,said George eagerly.
Take me with you to Novia. I 1 can set up a program and direct01Wait, I
have a few more questions. How long would it take, do you 3 suppose, for
you to become a Metallurgist capable of handling a Beeman machine,
supposing you started from nothing 0 and 3 did not use Educational 1
tapes?05 George hesitated. Wellyears, perhaps.31Two years? Five? Ten?01I
cant say, Honorable.01Well, theres a vital question to which you have no
answer, have you? Shall we say five years? Does that sound reasonable to
you?01I suppose so.01All right. We have a technician studying metallurgy
according to this method of yours for five years. Hes no good to us
during that time, youll admit, but he must be fed and 3 housed 1 and
paid for all that time.01But01Let me finish. Then when hes done and can
use the Beeman, five years have passed. Dont you suppose well have
modified Beemans then which he wont 0 be able to use?01But by then hell
be expert on learning. He could learn the new details necessary in a
matter of days.05So you say. And suppose 1 this friend of yours, for
instance, had studied up on Beemans on his own and managed to learn it;
would he be as expert in its use as a competitor who had learned it off
the tapes?01Maybe notbegan George.01Ah,said the Novian.01Wait, let 0 me
01 finish. Even if he doesnt know something as well, its the ability to
learn further thats important. He may be able to think up things, 5 new
things that no tape-Educated man would. Youll have a reservoir of
onginal thinkers31In your studying,said the Novian, have you thought up
any new things?01No, but Im just one man and I 5 havent studied
long31Yes. Well, ladies, gentlemen, have we been sufficiently
amused?01Wait,cried George, in sudden panic. I want to arrange a
personal interview. There are things I 5 cant explain over the
visiphone. There 1 are details05 The Novian looked past George.
Ingenescu! I think I have done you 1 your favor. Now, really, I have a
heavy schedule tomorrow. Be well.0The screen went blank.202491 Ingenescu
said, No, George. Did you really think he would?01 George scarcely heard
him. But why not? Its all true. Its all so much to his advantage. No
risk. I and a few men to work withA dozen men training for years would
cost less than one technician. He was drunk. Drunk! He didnt
understand.01 George looked about breathlessly. How do I get to him? Ive
got to. This was wrong. Shouldnt have used the visiphone. I need time.
Face to face. How do I01 Ingenescu said, He wont see you, George. And if
he did, he wouldnt believe you.01He will, I tell you. When he isnt
drinking. He3 George turned 0 squarely toward the Historian and 5 his
eyes widened. Why do you call me George?31Isnt that your name? George
Platen?02491All about you.0George was motionless except for the breath
pumping his chest wall up and down.1 Ingenescu said, I want to help you,
George. I told you that. Ive been studying you and I want to help you.05
George screamed, I dont need help. Im not feeble-minded. The 1 whole
world is, but Im not.He whirled and dashed madly for the door.0He flung
it open and two policemen roused themselves suddenly from 3 their guard
duty 0 and seized him.5 For all Georges 0 straining, he could 3 feel the
hypo-spray at the fleshy point just under the corner of his jaw, 0 and
that was it. 3 The last thing he 0 remembered was the face of Ingenescu,
watching with gentle concern.2491 He didnt know how long he lay there
so, listening to the drift of his own thinking.01 There was a voice in
his ear. Are you awake?00 And George heard his own moaning for the first
time. Had he been moaning? He tried to turn 3 his head.5 The voice said,
Are you in pain, George?3George whispered, 1Funny. I was so anxious to
leave Earth. I 5 didnt 1 understand.01Do you know where you
are?020522Back in thethe House.George managed to turn. The voice be-0
longed to Omani.2491 Omani smiled gently, Sleep again02492490 Omani sat
at 3 the bedside reading, but he put down the 0 book as 5 Georges 0 eyes
opened.5 George struggled to a sitting position. He said, Hello.31Are 5
you hungry?35You bet.He stared at 1 Omani curiously. I was followed when
I left, wasnt I?01 Omani nodded. You were under observation at all
times. We were 3 going to maneuver you to Antonelli 0 and 3 let you
discharge your aggressions. 1 We felt that to be the only way you could
make progress. Your emotions were clogging your advance.05 George said,
with a trace of embarrassment, I was all wrong about 1 him.01It doesnt
matter now. When you stopped to stare at the Metallurgy notice board at
the airport, one of our agents reported back the list of names. You and
I had talked about your past sufficiently so that I caught the
signifi0-5 cance of Trevelyans name there. You asked for directions to
the Olympics; there was the possibility that 1 this might result in the
kind of crisis we were hoping for; we sent Ladislas Ingenescu to the
hall to meet you and take over.05Hes an important 0 man 5 in the
government, isnt he?35Yes, he is.35And you had 0 him take over. It makes
me 3 sound 1 important.01You 0 are 01 important, George.0A thick stew
had arrived, steaming, fragrant. 3 George 0 grinned wolfishly and pushed
his sheets back to free his arms. Omani helped arrange the bed-table.
For a while, George ate silently.1 Then George said, I woke up here once
before just for a short time.01 Omani said, I know. I was here.01Yes, I
remember. You know, everything was changed. It was as 3 though 1 I was
too tired to feel emotion. I wasnt angry any more. I could just think.
It was as though I had been drugged to wipe out emotion.01You
werent,said Omani. Just sedation. You had rested.0249202491Now I see
it,said George, so easily I am amazed at my blindness before. After all,
who invents the new instrument models that require new-model
technicians? Who 3 invented the Beeman spectrographs, for 0 instance? A
man 5 called Beeman, I suppose, but he couldnt have been 1 tape-Educated
or how could he have made the advance?05Exactly.31Or who makes
Educational tapes? Special tape-making technicians? Then who makes the
tapes to train 0 them? 0 More advanced technicians? Then 5 who makes the
tapesYou see what I mean. Somewhere there has to be an end. Somewhere
there must be men and women with capacity for original thought.31Yes,
George.01 George leaned back, stared over Omanis head, and for a moment
there was the return of something like restlessness to his eyes.01Why
wasnt I told all this at the beginning?05Oh, if we could,said Omani, the
trouble it would save us. We can 0 analyze a mind, George, and say this
one will make an adequate architect and that one a good woodworker. We
know of no way of detecting the capacity for original, creative thought.
It is too subtle a thing. We have some rule-of-thumb methods that mark
out individuals who may possibly or 3 potentially have such a talent.1On
Reading Day, such individuals are reported. You were, for 3 in-stance.
Roughly speaking, the number so reported comes to one in ten 0 thousand.
By the time Education Day arrives, 3 these individuals are checked 1
again, and nine out of ten of them turn out to have been false alarms.
Those who remain are sent to places like this.01 George said, Well,
whats wrong with telling people that one out ofof a hundred thousand
will end at places like these? Then it wont be such a shock to those who
do.01And those who dont? The ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and
ninety-nine that dont? We cant have all those people considering
them0-selves failures. They aim at the professions and one way or
another they all make it. Everyone can place after 3 his or her name:
Registered 0 something-or-other. In one fashion or 3 another every
individual has his or her place in 1 society and this is necessary.01But
we?said George. The one in ten thousand exception?01You cant be told.
Thats exactly it. Its the final test. Even after weve thinned out the
possibilities on Education Day, nine out of ten of those who 3 come here
are not quite the material of creative genius, 0 and 5 theres no way 0
we can 3 distinguish those nine from the tenth that we want by 0 any
form of 5 machinery. The tenth one must tell us himself.31How?05We bring
you here to a House for the Feeble-minded and the man who30202491What
about the people here who dontmeasure up?01They are taped eventually and
become our Social Scientists. Ingenescu is one. I am a Registered
Psychologist. We are second echelon, so to speak.01 George finished his
coffee. He said, I still wonder about one thing.01What is that?01 George
threw aside the sheet and stood up. Why do they call them Olympics?0}  
