    Isaac Asimov

     THE FOUNDATION OF S.F. SUCCESS

                   (With apologies to W.S.Gilbert)

      If you ask me how to shine in the science-fiction line as a
               pro of luster bright,
      I say, practice up the lingo of the sciences, by jingo (never
               mind if not quite right).
      You may talk of Space and Galaxies and tesseractic fallacies
               in slick and mystic style,
      Though the fans won't understand it, they will all the same
               demand it with a softly hopeful smile.

          And all the fans will say,
          As you walk your spatial way,
          If that young man indulges in fights through all the Galaxy,
          Why, what a most imaginative type of man that type of man must be.

      So success is not a mystery, just brush up on your history, and
               borrow day by day.
      Take the Empire that was Roman and you'll find it is at
               home in all the starry Milky Way.
      With a drive that's hyperspatial, through the parsecs you will
               race, you'll find that plotting is a breeze,
      With a tiny bit of cribbin' from the works of Edward Gibbon
               and that Greek, Thycydides.

          And all the fans will say,
          As you walk your thoughtful way,
          If that young man involves himself in authentic history,
          Why, what a very learned kind of high IQ, his high IQ must be.

      Then eschew all thoughts of passion of a man-and-woman
               fashion from your hero's thoughtful mind.
      He must spend his time on politics, and thinking up his
               shady tricks, and outside that he's blind.
      It's enough he's had a mother, other females are a bother,
               though they're jeveled and glistery,
      They will just distract his dreaming and his nessesary
               scheming with that psychohistory.

          And all the fans will say
          As you walk your narrow way,
          If all his yarns restrict themselves to masculinity,
          Why, what a most particularly pure young man that pure
               young man must be.

                                                           1954