    Isaac Asimov

  THE AUTHOR'S ORDEAL

                   (With apologies to W.S.Gilbert)

      Plots, helter-skelter, teem within your brain;
          Plots, s.f. plots, devised with joy and gladness;
      Plots crowd your skull and stubbornly remain,
          Until you're driven into hopeless madness.

      When you're with your best girl and your mind's in a whirl
               and you don't hear a thing that she's saying;
      Or at Symphony Hall you are gone past recall and you can't
               tell a note that they're playing;
      Or you're driving a car and have not gone too far when you
               find that you're sped through a red light,
      And on top of that, lord! you have sideswiped a Ford, and
               have broken your one working headlight;
      Or your boss slaps your back (having made some smart crack)
               and you stare at him, stupidly blinking;
      Then you say something dumb so he's sure you're a crumb,
               and are possibly given to drinking.
      When events such as that have been knocking you flat, do not
               blame supernatural forces;
      If you write s.f. tales, you'll be knocked off your rails, just
               as sure as the stars in their courses.
      For your plot-making mind will stay deaf, dumb and blind to
               the dull facts of life that will hound you,
      While the wonders of space have you close in embrace and
               the glory of star beams surround you.

      You begin with a ship that is caught on a skip into hyperspace
               en route for Castor,
      And has found to its cost that it seems to be lost in a Galaxy
               like ours, but vaster.
      You're a little perplexed as to what may come next and you
               make up a series of creatures
      Who are villains and liars with such evil desires and with
               perfectly horrible features.
      Our brave heroes are faced with these hordes and are placed
               in a terribly crucial position,
      For the enemy's bound (once our Galaxy's found) that they'll
               beat mankind into submission.
      Now you must make it rough when developing stuff so's to
               keep the yarn pulsing with tension,
      So the Earthmen are four (only four and no more) while the
               numbers of foes are past mention.
      Our four heroes are caught and accordingly brought to the
               sneering, tyrannical leaders.
      "Where is Earth?" they demand, but the men mutely stand
               with a courage that pleases the readers.

      But, now, wait just a bit; let's see, this isn't it, since you
               haven't provided a maiden,
      Who is both good and pure (yet with sexy allure) and with
               not many clothes overladen.
      She is part of the crew, and so she's captured, too, and is
               ogled by foes who are lustful;
      There's desire in each eye and there's good reason why, for of
               beauty our girl has a bustful.
      Just the same you go fast till this section is passed so the
               reader won't raise any ruction,
      When recalling the foe are all reptiles and so have no interest
               in human seduction.
      Then they truss up the girl and they make the whips swirl
               just in order to break Earthmen's silence,
      And so that's when our men breaks their handcuffs and then
               we are treated to scenes full of violence.
      Every hero from Earth is a fighter from birth and his fists are
               a match for a dozen,
      And they just when this spot has been reached in your plot
               you come to with your mind all a buzzin'.

      You don't know where you are, or the site of your car, and
               your tie is askew and you haven't a clue of the time of
               the day or of what people say or the fact that they stare
               at your socks (not a pair) and decide it's a fad, or else
               that you're mad, which is just a surmise from the gleam
               in your eyes, till at last they conclude from your general
               mood, you'll be mad from right now till you're hoary.
      But the torture is done and it's now for the fun and the paper
               that's white and the words that are right, for you've
               worked up a new s.f. story.

                                                                  1957
