{11252010331033{} {} 412057024 THE WINNOWING0by1Isaac Asimov020 Five
years had passed since the steadily thickening wall of secrecy had been
clamped down about the work of Dr Aaron Rodman.289For your own
protection -they had warned him.In the hands of the wrong people -they
had explained.In the right hands, of course (his own, for instance, Dr
Rodman thought rather despairingly), the discovery was clearly the
greatest boon to human health since Pasteurs working out of the germ
theory, and the greatest key to the understanding of the mechanism of
life, ever.Yet after his talk at the New York Academy of Medicine soon
after his fiftieth birthday, and on the first day of the Twenty-First
Century (there had been a certain fitness to that), the silence had been
imposed, and he could talk no more, except to certain officials. He
certainly could not publish.The government supported him, however. He
had all the money he needed, and the computers were his to do with as he
wished. His work advanced rapidly and government men came to him to be
instructed, to be made to understand.Dr Rodman,they would ask, how can a
virus be spread from cell to cell within an organism and yet not be
infectious from one organism to the next?It wearied Rodman to have to
say over and over that he did not have all the answers. It wearied him
to have to use the term virus.He said, Its not a virus, because it isnt
a nucleic acid molecule. It is something else altogether - a
lipoprotein.It was better when his questioners were not themselves
medical men. He could then try to explain in generalities instead of
forever bogging down on the fine points. He would say, Every living
cell, and every small structure within the cell, is surrounded by a
membrane. The workings of each cell depend on what molecules can pass
through the membrane in either direction and at what rates. A slight
change in the membrane will alter the nature of the flow enormously, and
with that, the nature of the cell chemistry and the nature of its
activity.All disease may rest on alterations in membrane activity. All
mutations may be carried through by way of such alterations. Any
technique that controls the membranes controls life. Hormones control
the body by their effect on membranes and my lipoprotein is an
artificial hormone rather than a virus. The LP incorporates itself into
the membrane and in the process induces the manufacture of more
molecules like itself - and thats the part I dont understand myself.But
the fine structures of the membranes are not quite identical everywhere.
They are, in fact, different in all living things - not quite the same
in any two organisms. An LP will affect no two individual organisms
alike. What will open the cells of one organism to glucose and relieve
the effects of diabetes will close the cells of another organism to
lysine and kill it.That was what seemed to interest them most; that was
a poison.A selective poison,Rodman would say. You couldnt tell, in
advance, without the closest computer-aided studies of the membrane
biochemistry of a particular individual, what a particular LP would do
to him.With time, the noose grew tighter about himself, inhibiting his
freedom, yet leaving him comfortable - in a world in which freedom and
comfort alike were vanishing everywhere and the jaws of hell were
opening before a despairing humanity.It was 2005 and Earths population
was six billion. But for the famines it would have been seven billion. A
billion human beings had starved in the past generation, and more would
yet starve.Peter Affare, chairman of the World Food Organisation, came
frequently to Rodmans laboratories for chess and conversation. It was
he, he said, who had first grasped the significance of Rodmans talk at
the Academy, and that had helped make him chairman. Rodman thought the
significance was easy to grasp, but said nothing about that.Affare was
ten years younger than Rodman, and the red was darkening out of his
hair. He smiled frequently although the subject of the conversation
rarely gave cause for smiling, since any chairman of an organisation
dealing with world food was bound to talk about world famine.Affare
said, If the food supply were evenly distributed among all the worlds
inhabitants, all would starve to death.If it were evenly
distributed,said Rodman, the example of justice in the world might lead
at last to a sane world policy. As it is, there is world despair and
fury over the selfish fortune of a few, and all behave irrationally in
revenge.You do not volunteer to give up your own oversupply of food,said
Affare.I am human and selfish, and my own action would mean little. I
should not be asked to volunteer. I should be given no choice in the
matter.You are a romantic,said Affare. Do you fail to see that the Earth
is a lifeboat? If the food store is divided equally among all, then all
will die. If some are cast out of the lifeboat, the remainder will
survive. The question is not whether some will die, for some must0 die;
the question is whether some will live.Are you advocating triage - the
sacrifice of some for the rest - officially?We cant. The people in the
lifeboat are armed. Several regions threaten openly to use nuclear
weapons if more food is not forthcoming.Rodman said sardonically, You
mean the answer to You die that I may liveis If I die, you die.'85 An
impasse.Not quite,said Affare. There are places on Earth where the
people cannot be saved. They have overweighted their land hopelessly
with hordes of starving humanity. Suppose they are sent food, and
suppose the food kills them so that the land requires no further
shipments.Rodman felt the first twinge of realisation. Kills them how?he
asked.The average structural properties of the cellular membranes of a
particular population can be worked out. An LP, particularly designed to
take advantage of those properties, could be incorporated into the food
supply, which would then be fatal,said Affare.Unthinkable,said Rodman,
astounded.Think again. There would be no pain. The membranes would
slowly close off and the affected person would fall asleep and not wake
up - an infinitely better death than that of starvation which is
otherwise inevitable - or nuclear annihilation. Nor would it be for
everyone, for any population varies in its membranal properties. At
worst, seventy percent will die. The winnowing out will be done
precisely where overpopulation and hopelessness are worst and enough
will be left to preserve each nation, each ethnic group, each culture.To
deliberately kill billions -We would not be killing. We would merely
supply the opportunity for people to die. Which particular individuals
would die would depend on the particular biochemistry of those
individuals. It would be the finger of God.And when the world discovers
what has been done?That will be after our time,said Affare, and by then,
a flourishing world with limited population will thank us for our heroic
action in choosing the death of some to avoid the death of all.Dr Rodman
felt himself flushing, and found he had difficulty speaking. The
Earth,he said, is a large and very complex lifeboat. We still do not
know what can or cant be done with a proper distribution of resources
and it is notorious that to this very day we have not really made an
effort to distribute them. In many places on Earth, food is wasted
daily, and it is that knowledge that drives hungry men mad.I agree with
you,said Affare coolly, but we cannot have the world as we want it to
be. We must deal with it as it is.Then deal with me as I am. You will
want me to supply the necessary LP molecules - and I will not do so. I
will not lift a finger in that direction.Then,said Affare, you will be a
greater mass murderer than you are accusing me of being. And I think you
will change your mind when you have thought it through.He was visited
nearly daily, by one official or another, all of them well fed. Rodman
was becoming very sensitive to the way in which all those who discussed
the need for killing the hungry were themselves well fed.The National
Secretary of Agriculture said to him, insinuatingly, on one of these
occasions, Would you not favour killing a herd of cattle infected with
hoof-and-mouth disease or with anthrax in order to avoid the spread of
infection to healthy herds?Human beings are not cattle,said Rodman, and
famine is not contagious.But it is,said the Secretary. That is precisely
the point. If we dont winnow the overcrowded masses of humanity, their
famine will spread to as-yet unaffected areas. You must not refuse to
help us.How can you make me? Torture?We wouldnt harm a hair on your
body. Your skill in this matter is too precious to us. Food stamps can
be withdrawn, however.Starvation would harm me, surely.Not you. But if
we are prepared to kill several billion people for the sake of the human
race, then surely we are ready for the much less difficult task of
withdrawing food stamps from your daughter, her husband and her
baby.Rodman was silent, and the Secretary said, Well give you time to
think. We dont want to take action against your family, but we will if
we have to. Take a week to think about it. Next Thursday the entire
committee will be on hand. You will then be committed to our project and
there must be no further delay.Security was redoubled and Rodman was
openly and completely a prisoner. A week later, all fifteen members of
the World Food Council, together with the National Secretary of
Agriculture and a few members of the National Legislature, arrived at
his laboratory. They sat about the long table in the conference room of
the lavish research building that had been built out of public funds.For
hours they talked and planned, incorporating those answers which Rodman
gave to specific questions. No one asked Rodman if he would cooperate;
there seemed no thought that he could do anything else.Finally Rodman
said, Your project cannot, in any case, work. Shortly after a shipment
of grain arrives in some particular region of the world, people will die
by the hundreds of millions. Do you suppose those who survive will not
make the connection and that you will not risk the desperate retaliation
of nuclear bombs?Affare, who sat directly opposite Rodman, across the
short axis of the table, said, We are aware of that possibility. Do you
think we have spent years determining a course of action and have not
considered the possible reaction of those regions chosen for
winnowing?Do you expect them to be thankful?asked Rodman bitterly.They
will not know they are being singled out. Not all shipments of grain
will be LP-infected. No one place will be concentrated on. We will see
to it that locally grown grain supplies are infected here and there. In
addition, not everyone will die and only a few will die at once. Some
who eat much of the grain will not die at all, and some who eat only a
small amount will die quickly - depending on their membranes. It will
seem like a plague, like the Black Death returned.Rodman said, Have you
thought of the effect of the Black Death returned? Have you thought of
the panic?It will do them good,growled the Secretary from one end of the
table. It might teach them a lesson.We will announce the discovery of an
antitoxin,said Affare, shrugging. There will be wholesale inoculations
in regions we know will not be affected. Dr Rodman, the world is
desperately ill, and must have a desperate remedy. Mankind is on the
brink of a horrible death, so please do not quarrel with the only course
that can save it.Thats the point. Is0 it the only course or are you just
taking an easy way out that will not ask any sacrifices of you - merely
of billions of others?Rodman broke off as a food trolley was brought in.
He muttered, I have arranged for some refreshments. May we have a few
moments of truce while we eat?He reached for a sandwich and then, after
a while, said between sips of coffee, We eat well, at least, as we
discuss the greatest mass murder in history.Affare looked critically at
his own half-eaten sandwich. This is not eating well0 . Egg salad on
white bread of indifferent freshness is not eating well, and I would
change whatever coffee shop supplied this, if I were you.He sighed.
Well, in a world of famine, one should not waste food,and he finished
the sandwich.Rodman watched the others and then reached for the last
remaining sandwich on the tray. I thought,he said, that perhaps some of
you might suffer a loss of appetite in view of the subject matter of
discussion, but I see none of you did. Each one of you has eaten.As did
you,said Affare impatiently. You are still eating.Yes, I am,said Rodman,
chewing slowly. And I apologise for the lack of freshness in the bread.
I made the sandwiches myself last night and they are fifteen hours
old.You made them yourself?said Affare.I had to, since I could in no
other way be certain of introducing the proper LP.What are you talking
about?Gentlemen, you tell me it is necessary to kill some to save
others. Perhaps you are right. You have convinced me. But in order to
know exactly what it is we are doing we should perhaps experience it
ourselves. I have engaged in a little triage on my own, and the
sandwiches you have all just eaten are an experiment in that
direction.Some of the officials were rising to their feet. Were
poisoned?gasped the Secretary.Rodman said, Not very effectively.
Unfortunately, I dont know your biochemistries thoroughly, so I cant
guarantee the seventy percent death rate you would like.They were
staring at him in frozen horror, and Dr Rodmans eyelids drooped. Still,
its likely that two or three of you will die within the next week or so,
and you need only wait to see who it will be. Theres no cure or
antidote, but dont worry. Its a quite painless death, and it will be the
finger of God, as one of you told me. Its a good lesson, as another of
you said. For those of you who survive, there may be new views on
triage.Affare said, This is a bluff. Youve eaten the sandwiches
yourself.Rodman said, I know. I matched the LP to my own biochemistry,
so I will go fast.His eyes closed. Youll have to carry on without me -
those of you who survive.}  
